TOWN CODE
of
WINTER PARK, COLORADO
1985
Code current through:
Ord. 638, Series of 2025, passed 9-2-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Town of Winter Park, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 638, passed September 2, 2025. Ordinances of the
Town adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Town
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 639
SERIES OF 2025
AN ORDINANCE OF THE WINTER PARK TOWN COUNCIL REPEALING CHAPTER 2 AND 2A OF
TITLE 6 OF THE WINTER PARK TOWN CODE, REPEALING AND REENACTING ARTICLE 3.J.,
SECTION 5-E-8 AND ARTICLE 6.F. OF TITLE 7 OF THE WINTER PARK TOWN CODE,
REPEALING SECTION 5-E-9 OF TITLE 7 OF THE WINTER PARK TOWN CODE, AND AMENDING
DEFINTIONS RELATED THERETO, ALL REGARDING SIGN REGULATIONS
WHEREAS, the Town Council desires to amend the Town's sign regulations to
comply with recent United States Supreme Court decisions and to simplify the
regulations.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF WINTER PARK,
COLORADO, THAT:
Section 1.   Chapter 2 of Title 6 of the Town Code of Winter Park is hereby
repealed in its entirety.
Section 2.   Chapter 2A of Title 6 of the Town Code of Winter Park is hereby
repealed in its entirety.
Section 3.   Article 3.J. of Title 7 of the Town Code of Winter Park (the
"UDC") is hereby repealed in its entirety and reenacted as follows:
article 3.j.
signs
3-J-1: Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish reasonable, content-neutral
regulations governing the design, location, construction, installation,
operation, repair, and maintenance of signs within the Town. These regulations
are intended to:
A.   Protect constitutionally guaranteed free speech by applying all standards
in a fair, consistent, and content-neutral manner.
B.   Balance the communication needs of individuals, businesses, and
organizations with the Town's goals to:
1.   Ensure public safety by minimizing visual distractions and hazardous sign
placement that could affect motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians;
2.   Reduce sign clutter and prevent obstruction of the public right-of- way;
and
3.   Promote the free flow of traffic while preventing hazards related to poor
sign maintenance or placement.
C.   Preserve and enhance the Town's scenic beauty, community character, and
compatibility with surrounding land uses.
D.   Support economic vitality by maintaining a visually attractive environment
for residents, visitors, and businesses.
E.   Provide clear, enforceable regulations that ensure fair, timely, and
consistent permitting and enforcement processes.
3-J-2: Applicability
This Article shall apply to the display, construction, installation,
alteration, use, location, operation, and maintenance of all signs within the
Town except as stated in § 3-J-3(B) below.
3-J-3: Permit Requirements
A.   Permit Required.
1.   A sign permit shall be required for all signs installed, altered,
constructed, reconstructed, relocated, or replaced unless specifically exempted
under Subsection B below.
2.   A permit is required for any substantial improvement of a property which
will involve signage.
3.   A permit is required for sign conversions, including:
a.   Conversion of a temporary sign to a permanent sign; and
b.   Alternation of a nonconforming sign (see § 3-J-3(I)).
4.   A permit is required for any sign, temporary or permanent, that is:
a.   Greater than six (6) square feet (SF) in area; or
b.   Displayed for more than ninety (90) consecutive days.
5.   Tourist Oriented Directional Signs ("TODS") – Resolution 1306, Series
2011.
B.   Permit Not Required. The following signs are exempt from permitting
requirements, unless specifically required by another section of this Article:
1.   Government and wayfinding signs.
2.   Signs required by federal, state, or local law.
3.   Signs required by applicable building codes (e.g. address numbers).
4.   Warning signs not exceeding four (4) SF in area.
5.   Interior signs, including any sign inside a building not attached to a
window or door.
6.   Signs in display cases that do not exceed four (4) SF in area (subject to
§ 3-J-4(E)).
7.   Small signs that are less than one (1) and one-half (1.5) square feet.
8.   Temporary signs (subject to § 3-J-4(B)).
9.   Flags (subject to § 3-J-4(E)).
10.   Vehicle signage, provided:
a.   Signs are permanently or magnetically attached to motor vehicles or
trailers which are being operated or stored in the normal course of business,
such as signs on delivery trucks, provided that:
i.   The primary purpose of such vehicles is not for the display of signs; and
ii.   Vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate for their uses.
b.   Construction trailers, provided that:
i.   A valid building permit has been issued for the site where the trailer is
stored; and
ii.   The trailer is not used as static signage.
11.   Holiday decorations that are clearly incidental and customary to the
associated event.
12.   Murals.
C.   Actions Not Requiring a Sign Permit.
1.   Replacement of window signs without increasing sign area.
2.   Maintenance, such as touch-up painting, repair, or repainting of existing
sign content.
D.   Prohibited Signs. Unless explicitly allowed elsewhere in this Article, the
following signs are prohibited:
1.   Any sign installed without a valid permit, or in violation of permit
conditions.
2.   Any sign that is specifically prohibited by the provisions of this
Article.
3.   Flashing, rotating, or intermittently illuminated signs.
4.   Internally illuminated signs placed on the exterior of a building, or
within five (5) FT of a window inside a building. This excludes signs not to
exceed one (1) and one-half (1.5) SF.
5.   Unauthorized electronic message and digital displays ("EMD"). Signs using
digital displays or other means to present images or messages. These signs
typically use light emitting diode ("LED"), liquid crystal display ("LCD"),
plasma or other technology to present a series of still images, full motion
animation, or other text messages.
6.   Billboards, pennants, streamers, balloons, search lights, strobe lights,
beacons, inflatable signs, costumed characters and similar devices.
7.   Flutter flags, unless permitted by special event permit.
8.   Hazardous or distracting signs that pose a safety hazard or create a
distraction due to:
a.   Location, size, construction, or manner of illumination; or
b.   Resemblance to traffic control devices or signals.
9.   Roof-mounted signs projecting above the highest point of the roofline,
parapet, or fascia vertically aligned with the sign area.
10.   Signs that contain any obscene wording or images.
11.   Signs emitting smoke, sound, or visual effects (e.g., glare).
12.   Unsafe or structurally unsound signs.
13.   Human carried or walking signs.
14.   Vending machines visible from public rights-of-way.
15.   Snipe signs (e.g., attached to poles, trees, or fixtures).
16.   Abandoned signs remaining after thirty (30) days of business closure.
17.   Unauthorized banner signs (§ 3-J-4(C) Banners).
18.   Signs that obstruct doorways, windows, or fire escapes.
19.   Signs that resemble an official marker installed by the Town, state, or
any governmental agency.
20.   Signs by reason of positioning, shape, or color that would conflict with
the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal, or would impair or cause
confusion of vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
E.   Prohibited Locations. Signs shall not be placed:
1.   Off-site.
2.   Within sight distance triangles or in a way that obstructs visibility.
3.   In areas that block pedestrian or vehicle movement.
4.   Over ingress and egress points.
5.   Where glare or visibility obstructions pose safety risks.
6.   In unsafe or inappropriate locations, including:
a.   Public property or rights-of-way, such as streets, medians, sidewalks,
utility traffic poles;
b.   Natural features, such as landscaping, rocks, or trees; and
c.   Utility easements or public infrastructure without authorization.
F.   Prohibited Obstructions. Signs shall not obstruct:
1.   Building ingress or egress, including doors, egress windows, or fire
escapes.
2.   Operable windows (with regard to movement only; obstruction of
transparency is allowed as provided herein).
3.   Equipment, structures, or architectural elements that are related to
public safety, building operations, or utility service (e.g., standpipes,
downspouts, fire hydrants, electrical outlets, lighting, vents, valves, and
meters)
G.   Master Sign Program ("MSP").
1.   Required for any development with three (3) or more tenants or businesses
of a structure or series of structures platted within the same development.
2.   Must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of any
individual sign permits.
3.   Pre-application conference is required before submittal of an MSP plan to
review design standards, procedures, and the proposed plan.
4.   Must demonstrate a unified design theme to promote visual harmony among
all signs, buildings, and related site elements.
5.   The plan must utilize compatible colors, materials, construction methods,
scale, and backgrounds.
6.   The plan must indicate the size and location of all proposed signs, and
must coordinate a minimum of three (3) of the following elements:
a.   Color(s);
b.   Shape;
c.   Mounting;
d.   Lighting;
e.   Lettering style;
f.   Graphics; and
g.   Materials.
7.   The total sign area permitted under the MSP shall comply with the size
limitations set forth in this Code. Sign area shall not be transferred or
allocated between businesses.
8.   The MSP must provide a Sign Area allocation table.
9.   The MSP must be updated each time a new sign permit is submitted for any
tenant or building within the development.
10.   Signs governed by a Homeowners Association, Design, or Architectural
Review Board or special district shall:
a.   Provide a continuity of design to the aggregate;
b.   Be proportioned to the building space allowed;
c.   Be compatible in design with each other; and
d.   Such continuity and proportion shall be subject to review by the
appropriate administrative body.
H.   Building and Fire Codes. Signs shall comply with applicable building and
fire codes as adopted and amended.
I.   Non-Conforming Signs.
1.   Any sign installed prior to the enactment of this article and in
accordance with the Town approval process that does not conform to the
provisions set forth herein (as determined by UDC § 5-E-8), or is located in
newly annexed territory shall be designated as nonconforming.
2.   Any sign which has been determined to be nonconforming may continue in use
and operation as a nonconforming sign pending the following provisions:
a.   Nonconforming signs that are not maintained, at the discretion of the
Director, shall be removed (UDC § 3-J-3(L)).
b.   Nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformance at the time that a
represented business changes ownership, thereby requiring a new sign.
c.   Nonconforming signs shall not be relocated in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot where the sign is located.
d.   The property with a nonconforming sign is not undergoing any substantial
improvements.
e.   Nonconforming temporary signs shall be removed immediately.
3.   All nonconforming signs shall be removed by January 1, 2031.
4.   Existing nonconforming neighborhood or subdivision monuments approved by a
Sign Permit Application approval within the last ten (10) years prior to the
adoption of this article and that meet the provisions of § 3-J- 3(I.2) may
request an exemption from the Director.
J.   Obsolete or Abandoned Signs.
1.   Any sign, including those incorporated into a complex identification
monument, that advertises or identifies a business, product, service, or
activity no longer located or operating on the premises shall be deemed
obsolete and shall be removed by the property owner or responsible party within
thirty (30) days of the cessation of such business, product, service, or
activity.
2.   Nonconforming obsolete or abandoned signs shall be immediately removed.
K.   Maintenance.
1.   All signs shall be maintained in a structurally sound and safe condition,
and shall not pose a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare due to
damage, deterioration, inadequate maintenance, or exposure to electrical shock.
Sign surfaces shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free of damage, fading,
peeling, or other visible signs of neglect.
2.   The Director shall have the authority to require the repair, repainting,
maintenance, or removal of any sign determined to be unsafe, unsightly, or in
disrepair. Upon such determination, the Director shall issue written notice to
the sign owner at the address listed on the sign permit via certified mail,
return receipt requested.
3.   If corrective action is not taken within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the notice, the Director may order the sign to be removed or repaired at the
owner's expense. The costs incurred by the Town for such action may be charged
to the property owner, and may constitute a lien on the property if not paid
within the prescribed time.
3-J-4: Specific Sign Standards
A.   General. All signs for which a permit is required under this Article shall
comply with the following general design and placement standards.
1.   Architectural Integration. Signs shall be designed as subordinate
architectural elements, and shall complement the design, scale, materials, and
character of the principal structure.
2.   Façade Visibility. Freestanding signs shall not obstruct architectural
features, patterns, or design elements of building façades, and shall be
situated to maintain visibility and harmony with adjacent structures.
3.   Zoning Compatibility. All signage shall be consistent with the character
and intent of the zoning district in which it is located, and shall reflect the
development standards, land use goals, and aesthetic objectives of the Town.
B.   Temporary Sign Standards. Temporary signs are subject to the following
limitations and standards:
1.   Permit Requirement. A temporary sign does not require a permit unless
otherwise specified in this Article.
2.   Display Duration. Temporary signs shall not be displayed for more than
ninety (90) consecutive days within a calendar year.
3.   Quantity. No more than one (1) temporary sign shall be installed per
property without a permit, unless otherwise authorized by this Article.
4.   Size. The maximum allowable sign area is six (6) SF per sign face,
including not more than one (1) rider sign attached. The rider sign shall not
exceed six (6) inches in height by twenty-four (24) inches in width.
5.   Height. Temporary signs shall not exceed five (5) FT in height, as
measured from the finish grade at the base of the sign.
6.   Event-Related Signage. Temporary signs associated with a permitted public
event may be displayed for up to twenty-one (21) days prior to the event, and
must be removed no later than seven (7) days following the event.
7.   Construction Site Signage.
a.   One (1) temporary sign is allowed per approved construction site.
b.   Subdivision temporary construction signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
SF in area, unless they are integrated into construction fencing, in which case
this limitation shall not apply.
c.   Temporary single lot construction signs shall not exceed six (6) SF per
sign face.
8.   Location. Temporary signs shall be located behind the setback and outside
the public right-of-way.
9.   Illumination and Electronics. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated,
nor shall they contain electronic components, digital displays, or projected
images.
10.   Materials. All temporary signs shall be constructed of durable, weather-
resistant materials suitable for the intended duration of display.
C.   Banners. Banners may be permitted for public events or limited-duration
commercial activities upon sign permit application and written approval by the
Director. The Director may impose reasonable conditions related to:
1.   Location;
2.   Height and support;
3.   Materials and structural integrity; and
4.   Duration and timing of display.
D.   Flag Standards.
1.   A maximum of three (3) flags is permitted per property.
2.   Each flag shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area.
3.   Flags shall:
a.   Be mounted to a permanent pole or structure;
b.   Maintain a minimum of eight (8) FT of vertical clearance from the nearest
pedestrian travelway elevation; and
c.   Flags affixed to poles shall not exceed twenty (20) FT in height.
E.   Non-Residential Sign Standards.
1.   General. Unless specifically excluded by this Article, all signs displayed
shall be included in determining the total sign area for a building.
2.   Total Aggregate Square Footage.
a.   The maximum allowable tenant sign area shall be determined by the width of
the storefront façade. The sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) SF total
aggregate SF allowed (see § 3-J-4(E.3)).
b.   One (1) SF of sign area for each three (3) Lineal Feet (LF) of tenant
storefront façade.
3.   Maximum Sign Size Entitlement. Each business is entitled to one (1) sign
per street frontage not to exceed twenty-four (24) SF per face and total
aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) SF, so long as all other requirements of
this Section are met.
4.   Number of Signs. The number of signs shall not exceed a total of two (2)
signs per business per frontage, and may be a combination of the following:
a.   Freestanding Sign. One (1) per structure (see Facility Identification
Sign). Freestanding signs shall be located on private property out of the
public right-of-way and shall not exceed ten (10) FT above nearest primary
pedestrian travelway elevation. A sandwich board sign shall be allowed only if
located entirely on private property. The area greater than six (6) SF of one
side of a sandwich board (permit required) shall count towards the total
signage allowed for the business, and all other sections of this code shall
apply.
b.   Projecting Sign (Including Awnings and Canopies). Extension of projecting
signs shall be restricted by the UDC § 3-A-7(H) Setbacks from the building
wall, and be provided the setback reductions allowed by canopy or marquee
architectural element as shown in Table 3-A-7 Setback Reductions for Building
Elements, Equipment, and Structures. A minimum clearance of eight (8) FT is
required from the nearest primary pedestrian travelway elevation.
c.   Wall Sign. No area of a wall sign shall be in the same plane as a
projecting sign on any one (1) building wall.
d.   Window sign. Any window sign square footage shall be subtracted from the
total aggregate square footage permitted. Window signs are limited to a maximum
of twenty-five (25%) percent of window area with no one window being covered
more than thirty-three (33%) percent.
5.   Multiple Use Facility. All multi-use facilities of three (3) or more
tenants or businesses will require a MSP Permit.
a.   For multiplex properties where the maximum sign area entitlement may be
applicable, maximum individual sign size shall be limited to the sizes
permitted by the MSP.
b.   Each business activity or tenant shall be authorized to utilize, within
the limits established by this Article, a combination of any two (2) of the
aforementioned sign types (excluding Free Standing, see Multiple Use Facility
Sign) on each building façade served by a public entrance. The combined area of
these signs shall not exceed the allowable total aggregate sign area per MSP.
c.   Facility Identification Sign.
i.   Prohibited for individual lots containing less than three (3) non-
residential units.
ii.   Total sign area shall not exceed sixty (60) SF.
iii.   Sign area of individual tenants or businesses shall not exceed six (6)
SF per sign face. Sign area is exempt from total aggregate sign area for an
individual business tenant.
iv.   Facility identification incorporated into the sign structure shall not
exceed one-third (1/3) cumulative sign area of all tenants.
v.   Sign structure shall not exceed a height of ten (10) FT above the nearest
primary pedestrian travelway elevation.
d.   The following signs are exempt from the total aggregate sign area for an
individual business tenant, but are subject to the limitations of this Article:
i.   Primary building identification sign;
ii.   Secondary building identification sign; and
iii.   Building directory.
6.   Display Cases. Each restaurant, bar, or lounge may have one display case
designed to be viewed by occupants or users of the property, and shall not be
generally legible outside property limits. If the size of the sign box is four
(4) SF or less, the display case size shall not count as sign area. If the size
of the sign box exceeds four (4) SF, the area of the sign box more than four
(4) SF will be calculated in allowable aggregate sign area.
7.   Sandwich Board (A-Frame).
a.   One (1) sandwich board sign is permitted per business.
b.   The maximum allowable sign area is six (6) SF per sign face.
c.   Signs shall be located entirely on private property within ten (10) feet
of a primary pedestrian entrance.
d.   Signs shall be removed during non-business hours and during adverse
weather conditions.
e.   Sandwich board signs are prohibited within the public right- of-way.
F.   Residential Sign Standards.
1.   General. Permanent signs are prohibited in all Residential Zoning
Districts, unless explicitly permitted by this Article.
2.   Multi-Family Residential. Multi-Family Residential structures that have
more than four (4) units may obtain a MSP Permit (UDC § 3-J-3(I),) or adhere to
the residential sign standards (this section).
3.   Residential Identification Signs. Single-Family residential neighborhoods,
or subdivisions, or multi-family residential complexes of greater than four (4)
units shall be permitted one (1) residential complex identification sign per
primary street access.
a.   Freestanding (Monument) Signs.
i.   Monument signs are prohibited for individual lots containing a single-
family or multi-family of four (4) or fewer residential units.
ii.   Monument signs shall be limited in size to a maximum of thirty-two (32)
SF of sign area. Total area inclusive of sign area and structural supports or
uprights on which any such sign is supported shall not exceed forty-five (45)
SF. Landscape material and ornamental hardscape integral to the foundation is
excluded.
iii.   Monument signs shall be freestanding, attached to the ground without the
use of uprights, braces, poles or posts.
iv.   Freestanding identification signs shall not exceed a height of ten (10)
FT above the nearest pedestrian travelway elevation.
b.   Wall Mount Signs.
i.   Twenty-four (24) SF.
ii.   Eight (8) FT height.
Table 3-J-4-1 Permitted Residential Sign Standards
Use           Type        Quantity       Area       Height     Other
Single-Family Attached & Detached
             Temporary   1              6 SF       6 FT       UDC § 3-J- 4(B)
                                                    >8 FT      No Permit
             Flag        3              25 SF/Flag Bottom,    Required
                                                    <20 FT Top
Neighborhood/ Subdivision 1/primary      32 SF/45   <10 FT     UDC § 3-J- 4(F)
Subdivisio n  Monument    access         SF Total              (3)
Multi-Family Complexes
< 4-Plex      Same as Single-Family                             
              Temporary   1/Unit         6 SF       6 FT       Placed in Window
                                                               or on Unit
                                                    >8 FT      Flag Must be
              Flag        3/Complex      25 SF/Flag Bottom,    Affixed to Pole
                                                    <20 FT Top
>4-Plex       Wall        1              24 SF      < 8 FT
                          Identification                       Master Sign
                                                               Program Required
              Monument    1              32 SF      < 10 FT    for Additional
                          Identification                       Signs
G.   Measurement Standards.
1.   Area. Sign area is the entire surface area of a sign, including
nonstructural trim. The supports, uprights, or structures on which any sign is
mounted shall not be included in determining sign area.
a.   Standard Geometric Shapes. When the surface area of a sign consists of a
conventional geometric shape, such as a circle, an oval, a rhombus, a
trapezoid, or a triangle, the accepted mathematical formulas for calculating
area will be used to determine the surface area of a sign.
b.   Cutout Letters. Sign area for cutout letters or displays applied directly
to the building surface and lacking a defined frame or trim shall be determined
by including the total area within the periphery of the cutout letters on
display, which can be enclosed within a rectangle, series of rectangles, or the
closest geometric shape.
c.   Irregular Geometric Shapes. If a sign consists of a symbol, or an
irregular geometric shape without an accepted mathematical formula for
calculating area, the surface area of the symbol, which can be enclosed within
a rectangle, series of rectangles, or the closest geometric shape, shall be
determined as the sign area.
d.   Multiple Elements. If a sign consists of a symbol, graphic, or text with
multiple elements that are an irregular geometric shape without an accepted
multiple formula for calculating area, the entire surface area of the symbol,
graphic or text, which can be enclosed within a series of rectangles, or the
closest geometric shape, shall be determined as the sign area.
e.   Double-Faced Sign. Only one (1) side of a double-faced freestanding or
projecting sign shall count toward the aggregate size measurement provided both
sides are identical.
2.   Height. Height is the vertical distance measured from the ground level to
the top of the sign measured at its highest point above existing or finished
ground elevation, whichever is more restrictive.
3.   Clearance. Clearance is the area a sign shall be free of obstructions to
allow passage of pedestrians and vehicles.
a.   Clearance for pole and projecting signs shall be measured as the smallest
vertical distance between the sign and the finished grade directly underneath
the sign at the lowest point of the sign structure, including any framework or
other structural elements.
b.   Pedestrian Clearance. In sidewalks and other pedestrian circulation areas,
the minimum sign clearance shall be eight (8) FT.
c.   Vehicular Clearance. In streets, alleys, or other vehicular access areas,
the minimum sign clearance shall be sixteen (16) FT.
d.   Utility Line Clearance. A sign shall be located a minimum of six (6) FT
horizontally and twelve (12) FT vertically from overhead lines, or other
similar utility infrastructure, or as required by such utility agency.
4.   Frontage.
a.   Sign allowance shall be calculated on the basis of the length of the
building, or business frontage which is most nearly parallel to the street it
faces.
b.   If a building or business fronts on two (2) or more streets, the sign area
for each street shall be computed separately. The area of signage allowed for
each lot frontage shall be displayed on the frontage for which it was
calculated, and shall not be combined and placed on a single frontage unless
otherwise provided in this Section, or when the structure has multiple tenants.
c.   Signage in multi-tenant structures shall first be calculated across all
public street frontages to establish the overall permitted signage, and then
allocated to each tenant unit based on an MSP created for the site, and
submitted with each sign permit application.
d.   If a building does not have frontage on a dedicated public street, the
owner of the building may designate the one building frontage that shall be
used for the purpose of calculating the sign allowance.
5.   Projection. Sign Projection is the distance measured horizontally from the
face of a building to the outer extent of the sign structure.
a.   A sign or sign structure shall not project into a street, alley, right-of-
way, or other public access.
b.   A sign or sign structure shall be more than two (2) FT from the edge of a
street, alley, right-of-way, or other public access; setback restrictions and
reductions apply (UDC § 3-A-7(H) Setbacks.)
c.   A sign or sign structure shall not project more than six (6) FT from the
building façade.
H.   Material Standards.
1.   Carved or sandblasted wood; formed, etched, cast metal; and high density
pre-formed foam or similar materials are encouraged. Raised borders and raised
letters are encouraged. Mirrors or other reflective materials are prohibited.
2.   Signs with reflective metallic surfaces or other synthetic materials shall
be treated to reduce reflection from sunlight or artificial illumination on
properties in the vicinity and on the vision of passing motorists and
pedestrians.
3.   The supporting structure of a freestanding sign shall not include a
singular, exposed metal pole or column, but it should be entirely surrounded by
a decorative pole or column cover that is architecturally compatible with the
sign and building.
4.   Plastics, such as acrylic and PVC, and/or highly reflective materials are
not permitted.
5.   Sign materials should be compatible with the architectural design of the
building's façade, and should contribute to the legibility of the sign.
I.   Lighting Standards.
1.   Property Limits. Sign lighting shall be calculated as part of the property
limit requirements (UDC Art. 3.K.).
2.   Fully Shielded Lighting: Light emitting devices (light bulbs, LED strips
or tubes) used for illuminating a sign shall not be visible from the vehicular
travel lanes of adjacent public rights-of-way. The use of shielding, designed
so light from sign illuminating devices does not shine off-site without first
being reflected off the sign or its background, is required whenever sign
lighting is used.
3.   Color and Brightness: The correlated color temperature ("CCT") of sign
lighting shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) Kelvin per luminaire. The
intensity of a single sign fixture shall not exceed eight hundred and fifty
(850) lumens, the approximate lumen output equivalent of a sixty (60) watt
incandescent bulb.
4.   Direction of Lighting. All lighting fixtures shall be placed above the
sign, and shall shine downward toward the sign. Illumination of signs shall not
be directed off-site.
5.   Internally Lit Signs. No sign that is placed on the exterior of a
building, or on the interior of the building within five (5) FT of a window
shall be internally lit.
6.   Interior lit signs that emit light through the precast or formed letters
and graphic elements shall be permitted, provided:
a.   A background area shall not be illuminated, only the individual lettering
and graphic elements may be illuminated; and
b.   Light bulbs or lighting tubes used for illuminating a sign shall not be
visible from the vehicular travel lanes of adjacent public right- of-way.
7.   Window display lighting: Off-sight light trespass from window displays
(i.e. backlit panels and/or LED glowing edges) is not permitted.
8.   Component painting: All light fixtures, conduits, and shielding shall be
painted to match or complement either the building or the supporting structure
that serves as the background of the sign.
Section 4.   The "Sign Permit" and "Sign Permit in Village Sign District" rows
under the "Site Development and Permit Decisions" subheading of Table 5-B-3 of
the UDC is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with a "Master Sign
Program Permit" row to read as follows:
 
Table 5-B-3 Development Review Procedures Summary Table
                                                                                                                                          Cross-
Application                      Required For                                                                Timing    Issued By          Referenc
                                                                                                                                          e
Site Development and Permit Decisions
                                 Construction or modification of a sign Any sign activity with three (3) or Prior to
Sign Permit Master Sign Program more tenants or businesses of a structure or series of structures platted   sign      Director Planning Sec. 5-
Permit                           within the same development, unless that development type is exempt from    permit    Commission         E-8
                                 the MSP process under § 5-E- 8(A)(1).                                      issuance.
                                                                                                             Prior to
Sign Permit in Village Sign      Construction or modification of a sign in the Village Sign District         sign      Director           Sec. 5-
District                                                                                                     permit                       E-9
                                                                                                             issuance.
Section 5.   Section 5-E-8 of the UDC is hereby repealed in its entirety and
reenacted as follows:
Sec. 5-E-8 Sign Permit
A.   Applicability. A sign permit shall be required prior to any installation
activity in the Town unless exempted by § 5-E-8(A)(1).
1.   Exemptions. A sign permit is required unless specifically exempted by § 3-
J-3 or another section of this Article.
2.   Administrative Sign Permit. Administrative sign permit review is required
for any of the activities outlined in § 3-J-3(A), unless that activity is
exempt from the sign permit process under § 5-E-8(A)(1).
3.   Master Sign Program. A Master Sign Program review is required for any sign
activity with three (3) or more tenants or businesses of a structure or series
of structures platted within the same development, unless that development type
is exempt from the MSP process under § 5-E-8(A)(1).
B.   Eligibility to Submit Application. Unless otherwise specified, a sign
permit application may be submitted by the owner of the property that the sign
(s) is being installed on or the owner's designated representative.
C.   Submittal Requirements. See § 5-B-5, Application Requirements.
D.   Fee. See § 5-B-6, Application Fees.
E.   Administrative Sign Permit Procedure.
1.   Filing and Processing.
a.   Application Completeness. The Director shall only review the submitted
application upon a determination that the submittal requirements of § 5-B-7,
Completeness Review, have been fulfilled.
b.   Review and Action.
i.   The Director shall review the application and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application based on the criteria in § 5-E-8(G).
ii.   If the Director determines that due to the complexity of the proposed
administrative sign permit that additional review is warranted, then the
application shall be reviewed under the MSP Procedure.
F.   Master Sign Program ("MSP") Procedure.
1.   Filing and Processing.
a.   Eligibility. An MSP permit application may be submitted by the owner of
the complex or a tenant of the complex as authorized by the owner.
b.   Application Completeness. The Director shall only review the submitted
application upon a determination that the submittal requirements of § 5-B-7,
Completeness Review, have been fulfilled.
c.   Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall:
i.   Receive a written recommendation from the Director regarding the proposed
MSP; and
ii.   By majority vote, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application based on the criteria in § 5-E-8(G).
G.   Approval Criteria. The sign permit application shall be evaluated, and may
be approved in accordance with the following criteria:
1.   Comprehensive Plan. Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan;
2.   This UDC. Conformance with the standards of this UDC; and
3.   Design Guidelines. Conformance with the Design Guidelines in Appendix A.
H.   Time Limitation. See § 5-B-13, Expiration of Approvals.
Section 6.   Section 5-E-9 of the UDC is hereby repealed in its entirety.
Section 7.   Article 6.F. of the UDC is hereby repealed in its entirety and
reenacted as follows:
Article 6.F. Non-Conforming Signs
Refer to Sec. 3-J-3(I) Non-Conforming Signs
Section 8.   Article 7.C. of the UDC is hereby amended by the addition of the
following definitions to be inserted alphabetically:
Article 7.C. Definitions
*   *   *
Display Case means any case, cabinet or other device, wall mounted or
freestanding, having a window of glass, or other transparent material, or other
opening, located on private property within three (3) FT of the entrance.
Mural means any painted design which covers all or a major portion of a wall,
building façade, or other structure for the purpose of displaying an art piece,
and not meant for the purpose of advertising.
Sign Area means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed
of squares or rectangles which enclose the extreme limits of writing,
representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any
frame, background area of sign, structural trim, or other material or color
forming an integral part of the display, or used to differentiate such sign
from the background against which it is placed. The supports or uprights on
which any such sign is supported shall not be included in determining the sign
area, unless such supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form
an integral background of the display. In the case of "skeleton letters," or
other signs placed on a wall without any border, the area shall be determined
by enclosing all the letters in a common geometrical shape (e.g., square,
rectangle, circle).
INTRODUCED, APPROVED ON FIRST READING, AND ORDERED PUBLISHED IN FULL this 18th
day of November, 2025. A public hearing shall be held at the regular meeting of
the Winter Park Town Council on the 2nd day of December, 2025, at 5:30 p.m., or
as soon thereafter as possible, at the Winter Park Town Hall.
TOWN OF WINTER PARK
 
________________________________
Nick Kutrumbos, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_______________________
Danielle Jardee, Town Clerk
 
READ, ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED on second and final reading by a vote of 6
to 0 on the 2nd day of December, 2025.
TOWN OF WINTER PARK
________________________________
Nick Kutrumbos, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_________________________________
Danielle Jardee, Town Clerk
 
 
 
 
TOWN OF WINTER PARK
ORDINANCE NO. 640
SERIES OF 2025
AN ORDINANCE OF THE WINTER PARK TOWN COUNCIL AMENDING THE TOWN OF WINTER PARK
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE, TITLE 7 OF THE TOWN CODE OF WINTER PARK, REGARDING
SCHOOL LAND DEDICATION AND PAYMENT OF A FEE IN LIEU OF DEDICATION
WHEREAS, pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the Town and East
Grand School District No.2, dated December 2, 2025, the Town desires to update
its Unified Development Code, Title 7 of the Town Code of Winter Park (the
"UDC"), regarding the process in which developers in the Town dedicate land for
a school purpose or, in the alternative, pay in fee in lieu of dedication;
WHEREAS, Section 5-C-1 of the UDC requires that text amendments to the UDC
undergo properly noticed hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Town Council;
WHEREAS, at a properly noticed public hearing on November 12, 2025, the
Planning and Zoning Commission approved the Ordinance;
WHEREAS, the Town staff has reviewed the Ordinance and recommends approval to
the Town Council;
WHEREAS, at a properly noticed public hearing on December 2, 2025, the Town
Council considered the Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, after considering the recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Town staff, and any public comment, the Town Council finds and
determines as provided below.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL FOR THE TOWN OF WINTER PARK,
COLORADO, THAT:
Section 1.   Table 4-B-3 in Section 4-B-3-D-1-a of the UDC is hereby repealed
in its entirety and reenacted as follows:
 
 
Table 4-B-3
School Land Dedication Calculations
Residential Development Type           Land Calculation Rate (per acre)
Single-Family Detached Housing         0.0083
Single-Family Attached Housing         0.0025
Multi-Family Housing                   0.0025
Manufactured Homes and Modular Housing 0.0050
Section 2.   Section 4-B-3-D-1-b of the UDC is hereby amended to read as
follows:
b.   Dedication of Land Areas to the Town School District. Dedication of such
land  areas shall be made at the time of final platting in one or any
combination of the following ways:
1.   By dedicating to the Town, a Municipal corporation, School District, in
fee simple, on the final plat; or
2.   By granting the land areas in fee simple by general warranty deed to the
Town School District.
Section 3.   Section 4-B-6 of the UDC is hereby amended to read as follows:
*   *   *
B.   School Site Fee-in-Lieu Amount Calculation.
1.   When the dedication of sites and land areas for school needs are not
reasonably necessary to serve the proposed subdivision and future residents
thereof because of the size, location, proximity to existing facilities,
topography or nature of the proposed development, the Town Council, upon
recommendations from the East Grand School District and other affected
entities, shall require, in lieu of such dedication of land, the payment in
cash by the applicant of an amount not to exceed the fair market value of such
sites and land areas a School Site Fee-in-Lieu. The fair market value of an
acre of property shall be multiplied by the land calculation rates of Table 4-
B-3, School Land Dedication Calculations  The School Site Fee-in-Lieu amount
shall be calculated as stated in Table 4-B-6, School Site Fee-in-Lieu
Calculations.
 
Table 4-B-6
School Site Fee-in-Lieu Calculations
Residential Development Type           Fee-in-Lieu Calculation Rate (per unit)
Single-Family Detached Housing         $1,234.10
Single-Family Attached Housing         $369.24
Multi-Family Housing                   $369.24
Manufactured Homes and Modular Housing $738.48
*   *   *
D.   Payment of Fee-in-Lieu.
1.   School Site Fee-in-Lieu payments shall be made to the School District.
Open Space Fee-in-Lieu payments shall be made to the Town.
*   *   *
4.   Such funds shall be deposited by the Town or the School District, as
applicable, in special interest-bearing accounts. Each deposit shall be
credited to the name of the subdivision for which the payment is made.
5.   The status of this account these accounts shall be reported annually to
the Town Council.
*   *   *
E.   Fee-in-Lieu Withdrawals.
1.   Withdrawal of School Site Fee-in-Lieu Payments. Funds may be periodically
withdrawn from the special account by the Town Council upon the request of the
East Grand School District.
a.   Use of Funds. Funds shall only be used for acquisition, development, or
expansion of School Sites or for capital facilities planning, site acquisition,
or capital outlay purposes for School Facilities within the school feeder or
open enrollment attendance boundaries that include the property for which the
contribution was paid.:
1.   Acquisition of reasonably necessary sites for the construction of school
facilities;
2.   For the construction of employee housing required by the School District;
3.   For the purchase of employee housing required by the School District; or
4.   For the development or capital improvements to school sites within the
School District.
b.   If housing units are purchased, a deed restriction restricting their use
to School District employee housing shall be required and ownership shall
remain in the name of the School District.
c.   Request for Funds. The East Grand School District shall present in writing
a plan for the funds detailing the project for the funds and the estimated
budget. The request shall be presented to the Town Council for approval by
resolution.
*   *   *
Section 4.   Section 7.C of the UDC is hereby amended by the addition of the
following definitions, to be inserted alphabetically:
*   *   *
School District means the East Grand County School District No. 2.
School Facility means any building, structure or appurtenant facility, whether
combined in a single structure or separate structures, that is required in the
judgment of the School District Board of Education for the provision of K-12
educational services within the School District, including without limitation
any classroom building, administrative office building, transportation center,
athletic field and/or structure, stadium, indoor pool, maintenance building,
teacherage and other employee housing and/or training facility.
School Site means a tract or parcel of land dedicated by express language in
the final plat of a Project for the construction or expansion of School
Facilities.
*   *   *
Section 5.   Sections 1 through 4 of this ordinance shall take effect on
January 1, 2026.
INTRODUCED, APPROVED ON FIRST READING, AND ORDERED PUBLISHED IN FULL this 18th
day of November, 2025. A public hearing shall be held at the regular meeting of
the Winter Park Town Council on the 2nd day of December, 2025, at 5:30 p.m., or
as soon thereafter as possible, at the Winter Park Town Hall.
TOWN OF WINTER PARK
 
________________________________
Nick Kutrumbos, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_______________________
Danielle Jardee, Town Clerk
 
READ, ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED on second and final reading by a vote of 6
to 0 on the 2nd day of December, 2025.
TOWN OF WINTER PARK
________________________________
Nick Kutrumbos, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_________________________________
Danielle Jardee, Town Clerk
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 144
   SERIES 1986
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE OFFICIAL TOWN CODE FOR THE TOWN OF WINTER PARK,
COLORADO
WHEREAS, Section 1.6 of the Winter Park Home Rule Charter directs the Council
to codify the Town ordinances; and
WHEREAS, all general ordinances of the Town of Winter Park have been compiled
for codification into the Winter Park Town Code.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE Town Council of the Town of Winter Park,
Colorado:
Section I.    The Town Code of the Town of Winter Park, Colorado, prepared by
Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a
general nature together with amendments to said ordinances is hereby adopted as
the Official Town Code of the Town of Winter Park, Colorado, shall hereafter
constitute the Official Town Code of the Town of Winter Park, Colorado, and
shall be known and cited as the "Winter Park Town Code."
Section II.    The Winter Park Town Code as herein adopted together with
amendments thereto shall hereafter be received without further proof in all
courts and administrative tribunals as the official compilation of all
ordinances of general and permanent effect.
Section III.    The Town Clerk shall certify to the passage of this Ordinance
and shall maintain no less than three (3) copies in the office of the Town
Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection by the public
during regular business hours.
Section IV.    There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the looseleaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provision
of the Official Town Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new provision
shall become a part of the Official Code by insertion of the proper replacement
pages in the copies of the Code, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained
in the office of the Town Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for
inspection by the public during regular business hours.
Section V.    All ordinances of a general nature included in this official Town
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official Town Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, including but not limited to, matters such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the Town Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in
the Official Town Code.
Section VI.    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Winter
Park Town Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter
or tamper with the Winter Park Town Code in any manner whatsoever which will
cause the law of the Town to be misrepresented thereby.
Section VII.    Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this
Ordinance of the Winter Park Town Code, of any ordinance of the Town, of any
code adopted by reference, or of any regulation adopted pursuant to this Code
or Town ordinance, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
both, for each offense; provided, however, that no person under the age of
eighteen (18) years as of the date of the offense for which he/she is
convicted, shall be subject to a jail sentence, except in the case of a
conviction of a traffic offense or as otherwise provided by the Colorado
Children's Code.
INTRODUCED, READ ON FIRST READING, APPROVED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED IN FULL this
16th day of September, 1986. A Public Hearing on this Ordinance shall be held
at the regular meeting of the Town Council of the Town of Winter Park,
Colorado, on the 7th day of October, 1986 at 7:00 P.M. or as soon thereafter as
possible in the Municipal Building of the Town.
         TOWN OF WINTER PARK
         /s/ Mayor Harold N. Teverbaugh
(SEAL)
ATTEST:
/s/ Town Clerk, Karen S. Stewart
READ, ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED BY TITLE on second and final reading, this
7th day of October, 1986.
A copy of this Ordinance is available for inspection in the office of the Town
Clerk.
         TOWN OF WINTER PARK
         /s/ Mayor Harold N. Teverbaugh
(SEAL)
ATTEST:
/s/ Town Clerk, Janene Johnson
CHARTER
SYNOPSIS
In conformity with Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and applicable
Colorado Statutes, the Charter Commission has drafted this Home Rule Charter
for approval by the Citizens of the Town of Winter Park, Colorado.
Recognizing this Charter is the Town of Winter Park's counterpart to the
Colorado Constitution and the United States Constitution, the Commission has
chosen not to be unduly restricted in its Charter provisions, but rather, to
provide broad general powers which guarantee the rights of its citizens to
fully participate in their own municipal government without undue influence by
the state and federal governments. The underlying philosophy is one of the true
local government with full control vested in the citizens of Winter Park.
A Council-Manager form of government has been chosen by the commission with an
elected council deciding policy questions by adoption of appropriate
legislation and administration of municipal functions to be accomplished by a
professional Town Manager who is appointed by the Council and serves at their
pleasure. The Commission has allowed for continuity of government and
responsiveness to the voters by providing that a majority of the seven member
council be elected every two years. The Council shall elected from their
membership a Mayor who, during his two year term, shall preside at council
meetings and be the political leader of the Town.
The Commission has drafted a charter which is intended to provide an enduring
framework for implementation of a progressive municipal government, responsive
to the needs and desires of its citizens.
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.1 Name And Boundaries
The municipal corporation heretofore existing in the county of Grand, state of
Colorado, and known as the town of Winter Park, shall remain and continue as a
body politic and corporate under this charter with the same name and boundaries
until changed in a manner authorized by law. (4-12-1983)
Section 1.2 Rights And Liabilities
By the name of the town of Winter Park, the municipal corporation shall have
perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and
personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by said town of Winter Park and
shall assume and manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected
therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire
all benefits and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness
of said town of Winter Park; may purchase, receive, hold and enjoy or sell and
dispose of real and personal property; and may sue, defend, plead and be
impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters and proceedings; and may
have and use a common seal. (4-12-1983)
Section 1.3 Form Of Government
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be a "council-manager"
form of government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to limitations
imposed by the state constitution and by this charter, all powers of the town
shall be vested in an elective mayor and council, hereafter referred to as the
"council", which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine
policies and appoint the town manager who shall execute the laws and administer
the town government. All powers of the town shall be exercised in the manner
prescribed by this charter or by ordinance. (4-12-1983)
Section 1.4 Powers
It is the intention of this charter to confer upon the people of the town of
Winter Park the full right to self government on local and municipal matters
and to that end to confirm unto the town all governmental powers not prohibited
by constitution. The town may acquire property, including water rights within
and without its corporate limits for any purpose deemed by the council to be in
the town's best interest by purchase, gift, lease or condemnation and may sell,
lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as the council may
determine; and, except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or
restricted by this charter, the town may exercise all municipal powers,
functions, rights and privileges of every nature whatsoever, including the
establishment of or participation in trusts, funds, foundations or other
entities designed to receive and expend funds for public purposes including the
acquisition, construction, financing of or otherwise providing housing for
residents of low and moderate income. The enumeration of particular powers by
this charter shall not be deemed to deny the town any other power conferred by
article XX of the state constitution, including the power to supercede by
charter or ordinance any law of this state now or hereafter in force insofar as
it applies to local or municipal affairs. (4-12-1983)
Section 1.5 Purpose
It is the purpose of this charter to establish a basic governmental structure
that will provide for the effective and efficient conduct of the business of
the town. It is intended that the charter shall provide for the fullest
possible participation in the affairs of the town by every member of the
community. (4-12-1983)
Section 1.6 Municipal Code
The council shall adopt a municipal code containing procedures to implement
this charter. The code and revisions thereto may be adopted by reference as
provided in section
4.12 of this charter. (4-12-1983)
Section 1.7 Master Plan
The council shall adopt and maintain a comprehensive master plan of the town.
No subdivision of land, zoning change or land development significantly
affecting the town shall be approved by the council without considering the
effect of such approval on the comprehensive master plan, as amended. (4-12-
1983)
ARTICLE II - ELECTIONS
Section 2.1 Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted
Town elections shall be governed by the Colorado municipal election laws as now
existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided by this
charter, or by ordinance hereafter enacted. (4-12-1983)
Section 2.2 Nonpartisan Elections
All special and regular elections shall be nonpartisan. No candidate for any
municipal office shall run under any party label. (4-12-1983)
Section 2.3 Municipal Elections
A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in April of 1984, and biennially thereafter. Any special municipal
election may be called by resolution or ordinance of the council at least
forty-five (45) days in advance of such election. The resolution or ordinance
calling a special municipal election shall set forth the purpose or purposes of
such election. (4-12-1983)
Section 2.4 Voter Registration
In order to vote in any election, an elector must be eighteen (18) years of age
as of the day of the election, be a citizen of the United States Of America, be
legally registered to vote in the state of Colorado, not be in prison and have
legally resided for at least thirty-one (31) days preceding the election in
Colorado and in an area that is within the municipal limits of the town as of
the date of the election. (Ord. 457, Series of 2012)
Section 2.5 Election Precincts
The town shall constitute one voting precinct, provided that the council may,
for the convenience of voters, establish additional precincts forty-five (45)
days or more prior to any election, by ordinance. The precincts so established
by ordinance shall remain for subsequent elections until otherwise provided by
ordinance.
Section 2.6 Election Commission
An election commission is hereby created, consisting of the Town clerk and two
qualified and registered electors of the Town, who during their term of office,
shall not be Town officers or employees or candidates or nominees for elective
Town office. These two members shall be appointed by the council in the first
June meeting following a regular Town election, for a term of two (2) years and
shall serve without compensation.
The Town clerk shall be chairman. The election commission shall have charge of
all activities and duties required of it by statute and this Charter relating
to the conduct of elections in the Town. In any case where election procedure
is in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe the procedure to be
followed.
The commission shall provide procedures to establish proof of residency
qualification where residency is in question. Upon a showing for good cause,
the election commission may require proof of residency by any person registered
to vote or attempting to register to vote in the Town of Winter Park. Said
person shall not be qualified to vote in any municipal election until the
election commission is satisfied that he has presented sufficient proof of
residency as required by law or ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter.
The election commission shall provide for the use of paper ballots, voting
machines, electronic voting equipment or a combination thereof, a method and
procedure for determination of the winner in the event of a tie vote, for
canvass of returns and for issuance of appropriate certificates.
A member of the election commission shall not act as a judge of an election.
(4-12-83)
The Election Commission shall be the judge of elections and qualifications of
Town Council candidates. (Ord. 138, Series of 1986)
Section 2.7 Recall
Any elected officer of the Town may be recalled at any time after six (6)
months in office by the electors entitled to vote for a successor of such
incumbent as provided for in Article XXI of the State of Colorado Constitution.
Consistent with the Constitution and this Charter, the council may provide by
ordinance for further recall procedures.
ARTICLE III - COUNCIL
Section 3.1 The Council
The legislative affairs of the Town shall be vested in a council consisting of
seven (7) councilmen, all of whom shall be nominated and elected at large from
the Town.
Section 3.2 Terms of Office
The terms of office for councilmen shall be as follows: in the regular
municipal election to be held in 1984, the three (3) candidates receiving the
highest number of votes
shall be elected for four-year terms and the four (4) candidates receiving the
fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh highest number of votes shall serve for two-
year terms. In the municipal election to be held in 1986 and thereafter, the
three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for
four-year terms and the candidate receiving the fourth highest number of votes
shall be elected for a two-year term. If a vacancy exists, those candidates
receiving the fifth, sixth and seventh highest number of votes, depending upon
the number of vacancies to be filled, shall be elected for two-year terms.
Section 3.3 Mayor
The mayor shall be elected from the duly elected council by a majority vote at
its first organizational meeting to be held within fourteen (14) days from the
election, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council for a two-year term.
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall exercise such
powers and perform such other duties as are or may be conferred and imposed
upon him by this Charter or by ordinance or other applicable law. He shall have
all of the powers, rights, and privileges of a council member including the
right to vote; however, his vote shall be registered after all other votes are
cast. He shall be recognized as the head of the Town government for all
ceremonial and legal purposes and he shall execute and authenticate legal
instruments requiring his signature as such official. In the event of a vacancy
in the office of mayor, the council shall choose his successor.
Section 3.4 Mayor Pro Tem
The mayor pro tem shall be elected by a majority vote of the council at the
first organizational meeting to be held within fourteen (14) days from the
election and shall serve at the pleasure of the council for a two-year term.
In the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall perform all
duties and have all powers of the mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the
office of mayor pro tem, the council shall choose his successor.
Section 3.5 Powers of the Council
The council shall be the legislative and governing body of the Town and shall
exercise, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all powers conferred
upon or possessed by the Town and shall adopt such laws, ordinances and
resolutions as it shall deem proper. (4-12-83)
Section 3.6 Qualifications
Each councilman when nominated and elected shall be a citizen of the United
States; a qualified elector of the Town of Winter Park; and shall have resided
in the Town or any territory thereafter annexed for one (1) year immediately
preceding such election. (4-12-83; amd. Ord. 138, Series of 1986)
Section 3.7 Conflict of Interest
No member of the council during his term of office shall be a compensated
employee of the Town nor shall he have any material or significant financial
interest direct or indirect or any apparent conflict of interest with the Town.
In the event that any councilman or any member of his family has or could
potentially be construed as having such interest, said councilman shall declare
such interest. If any councilman fails to declare such interest, the remaining
members of the council shall determine by a majority vote whether said interest
does in fact constitute a conflict of interest. When such conflict of interest
is established, the remaining councilmen shall take any action they deem to be
in the best interest of the Town.
Section 3.8 Compensation
The members of the council shall receive such compensation and the mayor such
additional compensation as the council shall prescribe by ordinance, provided,
however, that they shall neither increase or decrease the compensation of any
member during his term of office. The mayor and councilmen may, upon order of
the council, be paid their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties of office. (4-12-83)
Section 3.9 Vacancies
A councilman shall continue to hold his office until his successor is duly
qualified. A Council seat shall become vacant whenever any councilman is
recalled, dies, becomes incapacitated, resigns, ceases to be a resident of the
Town or is convicted of a felony subsequent to election or appointment as a
councilman. Within thirty (30) days after a vacancy occurs, the remaining
councilmen shall choose by majority vote a duly qualified person to fill such
vacancy. He shall serve the unexpired term so vacant until the next regular
municipal election. If three or more vacancies exist simultaneously, the
remaining councilmen shall, at the next regular meeting of the council, call a
special election to fill such vacancies, provided there will not be a regular
municipal election within ninety (90) days and provided that their successors
have not previously been elected. (4-12-83; amd. Ord. 138, Series of 1986)
Section 3.10 Oath of Office
Before entering upon the duties of his office, every councilman shall take,
subscribe before, and file with the Town clerk an oath or affirmation that he
will support the Constitution of the United States, and Constitution of the
State of Colorado, this Charter and the ordinances of this Town and will
faithfully perform the duties of the office.
ARTICLE IV - COUNCIL PROCEDURE
Section 4.1 Regular Meetings
The council shall meet regularly at least monthly at a day and hour to be fixed
by the rules of the council. The council shall determine the rules of procedure
governing meetings. The first regular meeting following each general municipal
election shall be the organizational meeting of the council.
Section 4.2 Special Meetings
Special meetings shall be called by the Town clerk on the written request of
the mayor or of any two members of the council on at least 24 hours written
notice to each member of the council, served personally or left at his usual
place of residence and posted at a public place within the Town. A special
meeting, however, may be held on shorter notice if the majority of members of
the council present agree to waive such requirement, provided the purpose of
such meeting shall be limited to handle declared emergencies.
Section 4.3 Business at Special Meetings
No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the council unless it
has been stated in the notice of such meeting, except upon consent of all the
members of the council present.
Section 4.4 Quorum, Adjournment of Meeting
A majority of the members of the council in office at the time shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business at all council meetings, but in the
absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or
date, and in the absence of all members the Town clerk may adjourn any meeting
for not longer than one week.
Section 4.5 Meetings to be Public
All regular, special and emergency meetings of the council, except executive
sessions as defined by ordinance, shall be open to the public and citizens
shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and
regulations as the council may prescribe.
Section 4.6 Council Acts
The Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All legislative
enactments shall be in the form of ordinances and all other actions, subject to
the provisions of section
4.8, shall be in the form of resolutions or motions. A true copy of every
resolution and ordinance adopted shall be numbered and recorded in the official
records of the Town. Motions shall be used only as a means of calling for
action on a resolution, ordinance or matter of procedure.
Section 4.7 Voting
The passage of every ordinance shall be determined by a roll call "yes" or "no"
vote. Every ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of the
entire council for final passage, except as provided in section
4.11.
Resolutions and motions shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members present. No member of the council shall vote on a question in which
such member has a direct personal or financial interest other than the common
public interest or on any question concerning such member's own conduct, in
which case the member shall disclose such interest to the council. If two (2)
or more members of the council are disqualified from voting due to such
personal or financial interest, an ordinance, resolution or motion shall
require the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the council for final
passage. On all other questions each member who is present shall vote when that
member's name is called. Refusal to vote except when not so required by this
paragraph shall, at the discretion of a majority of the council, be considered
grounds for removal from office.
Section 4.8 Action by Ordinance Required
In addition to such acts of the council as are required by other provisions of
this Charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating an
indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any
rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing
any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance.
Provided, however, this section shall not apply to the budget adoption. All
ordinances shall be confined to one subject except repealing ordinances.
Section 4.9 Forms of Ordinance
Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The enacting
clause of all ordinances shall be: BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE
TOWN OF WINTER PARK, COLORADO. Except as otherwise provided in this article,
all ordinances shall take effect five (5) days after publication following
final passage. Every ordinance introduced shall be deemed to contain a
severability clause, whether stated therein or not.
Section 4.10 Procedure
Except for emergency ordinances, ordinances making general codification of
existing ordinances, and ordinances adopting standard codes with or without
amendment, the following procedure for enactment of ordinances shall be
followed:
   (a)   The ordinance shall be introduced at any regular meeting of the
council by any member thereof.
   (b)   The ordinance shall be read in full or, in cases where copies of the
ordinance are available to the council and are, or have been made available to
the public, said ordinance may be read by title only.
   (c)   After the first reading of the ordinance, the same shall be approved
with or without amendment or rejected by a vote of the council.
   (d)   If the ordinance is approved on first reading, it shall be published
once in full or in summary at the option of the council, unless otherwise
provided herein. The council shall set a day, hour and place at which council
shall hold a public hearing on the ordinance and notice of said day, hour and
place shall be included in the first publication.
   (e)   The ordinance shall be introduced at council a second time, at a
meeting not earlier than four (4) days after first publication, for final
approval, rejection, or other action as may be taken by vote of the council.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided herein, an ordinance, if amended
subsequent to its last publication, shall be published in full or in summary at
the option of the council after final passage; but if not amended, it shall be
published either by title or in full as the council may determine.
   (g)   Whenever an ordinance shall be published by reference or by title, the
publication shall contain a summary of the subject matter of said ordinance and
shall contain a notice to the public that copies of the proposed ordinance are
available at the office of the Town clerk. The publication of any ordinance by
reference or by title as provided herein must set forth in full any penalty
clause contained in said ordinance.
Section 4.11 Emergency Ordinances
Emergency ordinances for the preservation of public property, health, welfare,
peace or safety, shall require five (5) affirmative votes. The facts showing
such urgency and need shall be specifically stated in the measure itself. No
ordinance making a grant of any special privilege, levying taxes or fixing
rates charged by any Town-owned utility shall be passed as an emergency
measure.
An ordinance authorizing a municipal borrowing in accordance with Article X of
this Charter which merely provides for the levying of a tax or which makes
covenants with respect to the levy or imposition of a tax to secure the
repayment of such a borrowing shall not be deemed an ordinance levying taxes
within the meaning of the preceding sentence.
An emergency ordinance shall require a passage at one (1) meeting of council.
However, neither a public hearing nor a first publication as provided in
section
4.10 shall be required. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon final
adoption. One publication in full or in summary at the option of the council
shall be required within ten (10) days after adoption, or as soon thereafter as
possible.
Section 4.12 Adoption of Codes by Reference
Standard codes promulgated by the Federal government, the State of Colorado,
any municipality within the State of Colorado, recognized trade or professional
organizations, or amendments or revisions thereof, may be adopted by reference
provided the publication of the ordinance adopting any said code shall advise
that copies are available for inspection at the office of the Town clerk and
provided that any penalty clause in any code may be adopted only if set forth
in full and published in the adopting ordinance.
Section 4.13 Disposition of Ordinances
A true copy of every ordinance shall be numbered and recorded in the official
records of the Town and authenticated by the signature of the mayor or the
mayor pro tem and the Town clerk.
Section 4.14 Public Record
All records of the Town shall be open for public inspection by any person at
reasonable times except where otherwise provided by State or Federal law.
ARTICLE V - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 5.1 General Authority
   (a)   Initiative. The electors of the Town shall have the power to propose
any ordinance to the council, in accordance with the provisions of this
article, except budget, capital program, appropriation of any revenues, or levy
of taxes, or salaries of Town officers or employees. In the event council fails
to adopt the proposed ordinance without any change in substance, such ordinance
shall be submitted to the electors at a Town election for their acceptance or
rejection.
   (b)   Referendum. The electors of the Town shall have the power to require
reconsideration by the council of any ordinance and, if the council fails to
repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a Town
election, in accordance with the provisions of this article. However, this
power of referendum shall not extend to ordinances relating to budget, the
capital program, the appropriation of funds, special assessments, the payment
of an existing contractual obligation of the Town, the calling of a special
election, salaries of Town officers or employees, or the authorization of any
municipal borrowing requiring an election pursuant to Article X of this
Charter.
Section 5.2 Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioner's Committee; Affidavit
Any five (5) electors may commence initiative proceedings by filing with the
Town clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioner's
committee. Any five (5) electors may commence referendum proceedings by filing
with the Town clerk, no later than ten (10) days after final adoption of the
ordinance, an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioner's
committee. The affidavit shall provide that the committee shall be responsible
for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form. Furthermore, the
affidavit shall state the names and addresses of the committee members and
specify the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent.
Finally, the affidavit shall set out in full the proposed initiative ordinance
or cite the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioner's committee is filed, the clerk
shall issue the appropriate petitioner blanks to the petitioner's committee.
Section 5.3 Petitions
   (a)   Number of Signatures. Initiative petitions, on the date filed, must be
signed by electors of the Town in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of
the total number of electors registered to vote at the last regular municipal
election. Referendum petitions, on the date filed, must be signed by electors
of the Town equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the total
number of electors registered to vote at the last regular municipal election.
   (b)   Form and Content. All pages of a petition shall be uniform in style
and shall be filed as one instrument. Each signature shall be executed in ink
or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing.
Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation
the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered as
specified in section
4.9 of this Charter.
   (c)   Affidavit of Circulator. Each page of a petition shall have attached
to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating the
following: that he personally circulated the petition; the number of signatures
thereon; that all signatures where affixed in his presence; that he believes
them to be genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be;
and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of
the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
   (d)   No ordinance shall be subject to a referendum election more often than
once in any twelve (12) month period.
Section 5.4 Procedure After Filing
Consistent with the provisions of this Charter, the council shall prescribe by
ordinance the form of petitions and the procedures for filing such petitions.
Section 5.5 Discretionary Suspension of Ordinances
When a referendum petition is filed with the Town clerk the ordinance sought to
be reconsidered shall continue in effect unless a majority of the council votes
to suspend the ordinance pending the election.
Section 5.6 Action on Petitions
   (a)   Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the council shall promptly consider the proposed
initiative ordinance in the manner approved in Article IV or reconsider the
referred ordinance by voting its repeal. The council shall have power to change
the detailed language of any proposed initiative ordinance and to affix the
title thereto, so long as the general character of the measure will not be
substantially altered. Repeal of any referred ordinance may be effected only by
five (5) votes of the entire council.
   (b)   Submission to Voters. The vote of the electors on a proposed
initiative or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days
and not later than ninety (90) days from the date of the final council vote
thereon. If no regular Town election is to be held within the period prescribed
in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election;
otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election.
The council may at its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier
date within the above-prescribed period. Copies of the proposed initiative or
referred ordinance shall be made available to the public within a reasonable
time before the election and also at the polls at the time of the election.
   (c)   Withdrawal of Petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the thirtieth (30th) day preceding the day
scheduled for a vote of the Town. Withdrawal shall be effected by filing with
the clerk a request for withdrawal signed by a majority of the petitioner's
committee. With the consent of the majority of the council and upon the filing
of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all
proceedings thereon shall be terminated.
Section 5.7 Submission by Council
The council on its own motion shall have the power to submit at a regular or
special election any proposed ordinance or any question to a vote of the
electors.
Section 5.8 Results of Election
   (a)   Initiative. If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results. If conflicting ordinances are approved
at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative
votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
   (b)   Referendum. If a majority of the electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification
of the election results.
   (c)   An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed
for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was
adopted. An ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a
period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was
repealed; provided, however, that any ordinance may be adopted or amended or
repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiative procedure in
accordance with the provisions of this article, or, if submitted to the
electors by the Council on its own motion.
ARTICLE VI - TOWN ADMINISTRATION
Section 6.1 Town Manager
The Town manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
Town. The council, by a majority vote, shall appoint a Town manager within six
(6) months whenever a vacancy exists in such position. Such appointment shall
be without definite term and shall be at a salary to be fixed from time to time
by the council. The manager shall be appointed without regard to any
consideration other than his fitness, competency, training and experience in
professional urban administration. At the time of his appointment, he need not
be a resident of the Town or state. No member of the council shall be appointed
manager during the term for which he shall have been elected nor within one (1)
year after the expiration of his term of office.
The council, at a regular or special meeting, may, upon the vote of the
majority of the entire council, remove the Town manager from office. Upon such
termination the council may, in its discretion, provide termination pay.
Section 6.2 Acting Town Manager
To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the Town
manager, with the concurrence of council, shall designate by letter filed with
the Town clerk, a qualified administrative Town employee who shall serve as
acting manager. In the event of the failure of the manager to make such a
designation, the council may appoint a qualified Town employee to perform the
duties of the manager. Such acting Town manager shall, while he is in such
office, have all responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the Town
manager. No member of the council shall be appointed acting Town manager during
the term for which he shall have been elected.
Section 6.3 Powers and Duties of the Town Manager
The Town manager shall be responsible to the council, under the general
supervision of the mayor, for the proper administration of all affairs of the
Town placed in the manager's charge, and to that end shall have the following
powers, duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   The Town manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of the laws,
contracts and ordinances of the Town and the implementation of official
policies and directives of the council.
   (b)   The Town manager shall have the power and authority to hire, suspend,
transfer and remove Town employees except those specifically excluded by this
Charter.
   (c)   The Town manager shall exercise supervision and control over all
executive and administrative departments.
   (d)   The Town manager shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed
by this Charter, by ordinance, by other applicable laws, or as may be required
by the council, which are not inconsistent with this Charter.
Section 6.4 Relationship of Council to Administrative Service
Neither the council, its members, the mayor, nor any council committee shall
dictate the appointment to or removal of any person from office by the Town
manager except as otherwise provided in this Charter or in any way interfere
with the Town manager or other Town officer to prevent him from exercising his
judgment in the appointment, employment or discharge of officers and employees
in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council
and its members, the mayor and any council committee shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Town manager and neither the council,
its members, the mayor, nor any council committee thereof shall give orders to
any of the subordinates of the Town manager.
Section 6.5 Town Clerk
The Town manager shall appoint a Town clerk, with council approval, who shall
be custodian of the Town seal and who shall keep a journal of council
proceedings and record in full all ordinances, motions and resolutions. The
Town clerk shall have power to administer oaths and take acknowledgements under
seal of the Town, and shall perform such other duties as required by this
Charter, ordinances of the Town, or the manager.
Section 6.6 Departments Created
The administrative functions of the Town shall be performed by the departments
existing at the time this Charter is adopted and such other departments as may
be hereafter established by ordinance. The council may, by ordinance,
consolidate or abolish any of the said departments, whether set forth by this
Charter or created by ordinance.
Section 6.7 Bonding of Employees
All Town officials and employees dealing directly with municipal funds shall
post bond in an amount and under such conditions as required by council, and at
the expense of the Town.
ARTICLE VII - LEGAL AND JUDICIARY
Section 7.1 Town Attorney
The council shall appoint a Town attorney to serve at the pleasure of the
council. He shall be an attorney-at-law admitted to practice in Colorado. The
Town attorney shall be the legal representative of the Town and he shall advise
the council and Town officials in matters relating to their official powers and
duties and perform such other duties as council may prescribe by ordinance or
resolution. The council may provide the Town attorney such assistants as
council may deem necessary, and may upon its own motion or upon request of the
Town attorney in special cases employ special counsel to serve under the
direction of the Town council. Council shall establish compensation for the
Town attorney, his assistants and special counsel.
Section 7.2 Judiciary
   (a)   Presiding Municipal Judge. There shall be a municipal court vested
with exclusive original jurisdiction of all cases arising under the ordinances
of the Town and as may be conferred by law. The municipal court shall be
presided over and its functions exercised by a judge, appointed by the council
for a specified term of two (2) years. The council may, when his appointment
for term of office expires, re-appoint the municipal judge. Any vacancy in the
office of municipal judge shall be filled by appointment by the council for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
   (b)   Deputy Municipal Judges: Council may appoint one or more deputy
municipal judges as it deems necessary. All deputy municipal judges shall have
the powers of the municipal judge when called upon to act by the municipal
judge or council. The deputy municipal judges shall serve at the pleasure of
the council.
   (c)   Qualifications: All municipal judges shall be qualified according to
ordinance.
   (d)   Compensation. The municipal judge shall receive a fixed salary or
compensation set by the council, which shall not be increased nor decreased
during his term of office. The deputy municipal judges may receive such
compensation for services rendered as council may determine.
   (e)   Removal. Any municipal judge may be removed during his term of office
only for cause. A judge may be removed by a majority vote of the entire council
for cause if:
      1.   He is found guilty of a felony or any other crime involving moral
turpitude; or
      2.   He has wilfully or persistently failed to perform his duties; or
      3.   He has a disability which interferes with the performance of his
duties which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character.
ARTICLE VIII - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 8.1 Existing Boards and Commissions
All existing boards and commissions may continue as established or abolished by
ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
Section 8.2 Composition of Boards and Commissions
The following shall apply to the composition of all existing permanent boards
and commissions and these created by this Charter or subsequently by ordinance:
   (a)   Neither the mayor nor any town employees shall serve on any such board
or commission.
   (b)   No board or commission shall have more than two council members
appointed to serve on such board or commission.
   (c)   Terms and conditions of appointment to such boards and commissions
shall be determined by ordinance, except as provided in section
8.3 regarding the planning and zoning commission.
Section 8.3 Planning and Zoning Commission
There shall be established a seven (7) member planning and zoning commission
appointed by the council. At least five (5) members of the planning and zoning
commission shall be residents of the Town of Winter Park and electors. The
terms of appointment to the planning and zoning commission shall not exceed
four (4) years. Terms of office shall be on an overlapping basis.
Section 8.4 Vacancy
Whenever a vacancy occurs on any board or commission, the council shall cause
public notice of such vacancy to be made and encourage qualified volunteers to
seek appointment to such board or commission. The council shall then make the
appointment to fill such vacancy.
Section 8.5 Right to Establish
In addition to those boards and commissions heretofore created by ordinance,
council shall have the power and authority to create boards and commissions,
including advisory and appeal boards. All permanent boards and commissions,
including advisory and appeal boards, shall be created by ordinance, which
shall set forth the number and qualifications of members including residency
requirements, if any, and the powers and duties delegated to such boards and
commissions. Initial appointments by the council to any board or commission
shall specify the term of office of its members in order to achieve overlapping
tenure. All members, however, shall be subject to removal by the council. Each
board and commission shall elect its own chairman and vice-chairman from among
its members. Each board and commission shall operate in accordance with its own
rules of procedure and its meetings shall be open to the public. Any board or
commission created under this article which is not required by statute or this
Charter may be abolished by the council.
ARTICLE IX - TOWN FINANCES
Section 9.1 Fiscal Year
The fiscal year of the Town shall commence on the first day of January or on
such date each year as shall be fixed by the council.
Section 9.2 Provision for Tax System
The council may by ordinance provide a system for the assessment, levy and
collection of all Town taxes, not inconsistent with this Charter.
Section 9.3 Budget
The Town manager shall annually prepare and submit to the council a budget and
accompanying message. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all
Town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required
by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems desirable or
the council may require. In organizing the budget, the manager shall utilize
the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund,
organization unit, program, purpose or activity and object. It shall begin with
a clear, general summary of its contents and shall be so arranged as to show
comparative figures for income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year.
Section 9.4 Capital Program
   (a)   Submission. Two (2) weeks prior to the submission of his recommended
budget, the manager, with such assistance as he may desire or the council may
direct, shall prepare and submit to the council a long range capital program
for a minimum of five (5) years.
   (b)   Contents. The capital program shall include:
      1.   A clear general summary of its contents.
      2.   A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the following fiscal years, with appropriate supporting
information as to the necessity for the improvement.
      3.   Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended schedules for
each such improvement.
      4.   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
This information may be revised or extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
Section 9.5 Budget Hearing
A public hearing on the proposed budget and proposed capital program shall be
held by the council no later than forty-five (45) days prior to the close of
the fiscal year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published one (1) time at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Copies of
the proposed budget shall be made available to the electors of the Town upon
request to the Town clerk prior to the public hearing.
Section 9.6 Council Amendments
After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without
amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts
and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures
required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit. The total
proposed expenditures and provisions of contingencies in the budget shall not
exceed the total estimated revenues including surpluses from prior years.
Section 9.7 Council Adoption
The council shall adopt the budget by resolution on or before the final day of
the fiscal year. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts
appropriated for the current operation for the current fiscal year shall be
deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all
items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts the
budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
Section 9.8 Appropriations
Adoption of the budget by council shall constitute appropriations of the
amounts specified therein for expenditure from the funds indicated. The
proceeds of any municipal borrowing authorized by Article X of this Charter
shall not be subject to any requirement of prior budgeting or appropriation as
a condition to their expenditure. The amount necessary to repay any such
municipal borrowing (including interest thereon) need not be budgeted or
appropriated in full in the year in which the borrowing occurs; however,
amounts necessary to pay debt service shall (except to the extent they may be
payable from other legally available funds in the first year) be budgeted and
appropriated on an annual basis, provided that no failure to budget and
appropriate such annual debt service amounts shall affect the enforceability of
any covenant of the Town to make such payments.
Section 9.9 Property Tax Levy
Council shall cause the property tax to be certified to the county for
collection as required by law.
Section 9.10 Public Records
Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records
and shall be made available to the public in the municipal building.
Section 9.11 Contingencies
The budget may include an item for contingencies. Except in those cases where
there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged,
expenditures shall not be charged directly to contingencies; but instead, the
necessary part of the appropriation for contingencies shall be transferred to
the logical account, and the expenditure charged to such account. No such
transfer shall be made without the express approval of the council, and then
only for expenditures which could not readily be foreseen at the time the
budget was adopted.
Section 9.12 Amendments After Adoption
   (a)   Supplemental Appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, the manager
certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of
those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may make supplemental
appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
   (b)   Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency
appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in
accordance with provisions of section
4.11. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet
such appropriations, the council may by emergency ordinance authorize the
issuance of emergency notes as provided in Article X of this Charter.
   (c)   Reduction of Appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year,
it appears probable to the manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council
without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action
taken by him and his recommendation as to any other steps to be taken. The
council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or
minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by resolution reduce one or
more appropriations.
   (d)   Transfer of Appropriations. Any time during the fiscal year, the
manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance
among programs within a department, office or agency and, upon written request
of the manager, the council may by resolution transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, agency, or
object to another.
   (e)   Limitation - Effective Date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred. No appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental appropriations, emergency
appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this
section may be made effective immediately upon adoption.
Section 9.13 Independent Audit
An independent audit shall be made of all Town accounts at least annually and
more frequently if deemed necessary by the council. Such audit shall be made by
certified public accountants selected by the council who shall complete the
audit within four (4) months time of the close of the fiscal year. Copies of
such audit shall be made available for public inspection at the municipal
building.
ARTICLE X - MUNICIPAL BORROWING
Section 10.1 Forms of Borrowing
The Town may borrow money and issue the following securities to evidence such
borrowing:
   (a)   Short-Term Notes;
   (b)   Emergency Notes;
   (c)   Anticipation Warrants;
   (d)   General Obligation Bonds;
   (e)   Revenue Bonds;
   (f)   Industrial Development Revenue Bonds;
   (g)   Special Assessment Bonds;
   (h)   Refunding Bonds;
   (i)   Lease-Purchase or Installment-Purchase Agreements;
   (j)   Other obligations authorized to cities and towns by Colorado Statute.
Each type of obligation shall be issued by council in the name of the Town
pursuant to an ordinance and may be issued without an election except as
otherwise provided in this Article X. The council may in its discretion adopt
an ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article X specifying
the terms, conditions and other details upon which any such type of obligation
may be issued.
Section 10.2 Short-Term Notes
Short-term notes may be secured in any manner determined by council, including
by a pledge of the full faith and credit and the general taxing power of the
Town. Short- term notes shall mature and become payable within twelve (12)
months of their date of issue.
Section 10.3 Emergency Notes
Emergency notes may be issued upon the circumstances specified in section
9.12(b) of this Charter and may be secured in any manner determined by council,
including by a pledge of the full faith and credit and the general taxing power
of the Town. Emergency notes may be renewed from time to time as the needs of
the Town require; however, emergency notes and any renewed notes shall mature
and be paid no later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the
year in which the emergency appropriation was made.
Section 10.4 Anticipation Warrants
Anticipation warrants shall be issued in anticipation of and shall assign taxes
or revenues which have been levied or imposed by the Town. Taxes which may be
assigned to pay anticipation warrants include, but shall not be limited to, ad
valorem taxes constructively received by the Town and excise taxes.
Anticipation warrants shall mature within twelve (12) months of their date of
issue.
Section 10.5 General Obligation Bonds
Except for obligations authorized in sections
10.2,
10.3,
10.4 and
10.10 of this Charter, or as provided in this section below, no bonds or other
obligations to which the full faith and credit of the Town is pledged or which
are payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of general property taxes
shall be issued until the question of their issuance shall be submitted to a
vote of the qualified electors of the Town at a regular or special election and
approved by a majority of those voting thereon. Such election shall be called
pursuant to a resolution or ordinance.
General obligation bonds of the Town issued for the purpose of constructing,
improving or extending any municipal utility system (as defined in section
13.13 of this Charter) or for acquiring water and the rights thereto may be
issued under this section without an election.
Section 10.6 Revenue Bonds
Revenue bonds issued for the purpose of purchasing, equipping, constructing,
condemning or otherwise acquiring, extending or improving any municipal utility
system or other income-producing project may be made payable solely from the
net revenues derived from the operation of such system or project. Any two or
more of such systems or projects may be combined, operated and maintained
jointly, in which case such revenue bonds shall be made payable out of the net
revenue derived from the operation of the joint enterprise. Neither a failure
of the Town historically to have maintained a special fund for any such
existing municipal utility system or other income-producing project nor a
previous commingling of revenues derived from the operation thereof with the
general fund of the Town shall prevent a pledge of such revenues for the
payment of revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section, provided that such a
special fund is created prior to or contemporaneously with the issuance of such
revenue bonds and thereafter maintained separate and apart from the general
fund.
Revenue bonds issued for any public purpose of the Town (including those
specified in the preceding paragraph) may be made payable solely from the
proceeds of any tax, other than a general ad valorem tax, imposed by the Town
or the State of Colorado or any agency or political subdivision thereof.
Neither a failure of the Town historically to have maintained special funds
into which the proceeds of such existing taxes are deposited nor a previous
commingling of such tax proceeds with the general fund of the Town shall
prevent a pledge of such revenues for the payment of revenue bonds issued
pursuant to this section, provided that such special funds are created prior to
or contemporaneously with the issuance of such revenue bonds and thereafter
maintained separate and apart from the general fund.
Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent the issuance of revenue
bonds pursuant to this section for any of the purposes specified in the first
paragraph of this section which are payable from both system or project
revenues and the proceeds of the taxes herein specified. Revenue bonds issued
pursuant to this section may also be secured by a pledge of the full faith and
credit of the Town or of general property taxes; however, except for such bonds
issued for the purpose of constructing, extending or improving any municipal
utility system (as defined in section
13.13 of this Charter), no such bonds shall be issued until the question of
their issuance shall be approved at an election held as required by section
10.5 of this Charter. Revenue bonds issued pursuant to this section may also be
secured by a pledge of governmental grants or other revenues received or to be
received from the United States of America or any agency thereof or from the
State of Colorado or any agency thereof or by a pledge of such grant receipts
or other revenues together with any other revenues or taxes as herein provided.
Section 10.7 Industrial Development Revenue Bonds
Industrial development revenue bonds may be issued as provided by Colorado
statute or as otherwise provided by ordinance.
Section 10.8 Improvement Districts and Special Assessment Bonds
The Town shall have the power to create special or local improvement districts
within designated areas in the Town, to contract for, construct or install
special or local improvements of every character within such districts, to
assess the cost thereof, wholly or in part upon the property benefited in such
districts, and to issue special assessment bonds therefor. The council shall,
by ordinance, prescribe the method and manner of creating such improvements, or
letting contracts therefor, issuing and paying bonds for construction or
installation of such improvements, including the cost incidental thereto, for
assessing the costs thereof and for all things in relation to the authority
herein created. Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by ordinance, the
statutes of the State of Colorado shall govern the creation and organization of
special or local improvement districts, the assessment of costs, the issuance
of bonds therefor and all things in relation thereto.
Special or local improvement districts may be created by:
   (a)   Ordinance adopted by the council; provided, that if the owners of a
majority of the property in the proposed district and a majority of those
owners scheduled to bear the assessment burden under the method of apportioning
assessments proposed by the council file written objection prior to adoption of
such ordinance, the council shall not create such district.
   (b)   A petition by the owners of not less than fifty (50) percent of the
area to be assessed in the proposed district.
In either event, a public hearing shall be held at which all interested parties
may appear and be heard. Right to protest and notice of public hearing shall be
given as provided by council by ordinance. Such improvements shall confer
special benefits to the real property within said district and may confer
general benefits to the Town at large.
Where all outstanding bonds of a local improvement district have been paid and
any monies remain to the credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a
special surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever there is a deficiency in any
local improvement district fund to meet the payment of outstanding bonds and
interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and
deficiency fund. Whenever a local improvement district has paid and cancelled
three-fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments
are not paid in time to pay the remaining bonds of the district and the
interest due thereon, and there are not sufficient monies in the special
surplus and deficiency fund, then the Town shall pay said bonds when due and
the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid
assessments due said district.
In consideration of general benefits conferred on the Town at large from the
construction or installation of improvements in local improvement districts,
the council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the Town at a
rate to be determined by council, to be disbursed as determined by the council
for the purpose of paying for such benefits, for the payment of any assessment
levied against the Town itself in connection with bonds issued for local
improvement districts, or for the purpose of advancing monies to maintain
current payments of interest and principal of bonds issued for any local
improvement district hereinafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be
placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified
herein, provided that in lieu of such tax levies, the council may annually
transfer to such special fund any available monies of the Town, but in no event
shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would
result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. No assessment by the
Town of its own property pursuant to this section shall be considered or held
to create an indebtedness of the Town or to require an election; however, if
the council elects to issue limited tax bonds secured by a pledge of the tax
levy authorized in this section for the purpose of providing funds to pay any
such assessment or the costs of any improvement conferring general benefits on
the Town at large, it shall do so only after the question of the issuance of
such limited tax bonds has been approved at an election held in accordance with
section
10.5 of this Charter.
No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings
or to question the validity of, or enjoin the performance of the issue or
collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments
authorized by this section
10.8; or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings of the Town done
or under this section
10.8, shall be maintained against the Town, unless commenced within thirty (30)
days after the performance of the act or the effective date of the resolution
or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred.
Section 10.9 Refunding Bonds
General obligation refunding bonds and refunding revenue bonds may be issued as
provided by Colorado statute or by ordinance. (4-12-83)
Section 10.10 Lease-Purchase and Installment-Purchase Agreement.
The Council may enter into lease-purchase and installment-purchase agreements
as a means of acquiring any real or personal property for public purposes. The
Council may pledge the full faith and credit and the general taxing power of
the Town to the payment of its obligations under any such agreement and may
enter into such covenants regarding the rights of the lessor-vendor in the
property upon default as the Council may deem necessary or appropriate.
Provided, however, in the event the Council determines to enter into a lease-
purchase or installment purchase agreement for purchase of real property having
a purchase price in excess of five percent (5%) of the total valuation for
assessment of the taxable property within the Town as shown by the last
assessment thereof, no bonds or other obligations to which the full faith and
credit of the Town is pledged or which are payable in whole or in part from the
proceeds of general property taxes shall be issued until the question of their
issuance shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the Town at
a regular or special election and approved by a majority of those voting
thereon. This limitation shall only apply to transactions occurring after the
effective date hereof and shall not affect those agreements in effect prior to
the date hereof or the refinancing, refunding or other restructuring or
amendment to agreements in existence as of the effective date of this
ordinance. (Ord. 138, Series of 1986)
Section 10.11 Limitations; Sale and Redemption of Obligations
There shall be no limitation on the amount of bonds or other securities the
Town may issue, except as may be stated in the documents pertaining thereto,
provided that the notice of any election or any ordinance to authorize the
creation of any debt pledging Town tax revenues shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   The amount of the total valuation for assessment of the taxable
property within the Town as shown by the last assessment thereof;
   (b)   The amount of the Town's total bonds outstanding and unrefunded as of
the date of the resolution calling an election or ordinance authorizing the
bonds and the amount thereof assuming the issuance of the proposed bonds;
   (c)   With regard to the general obligation bonds, the percentage of debt to
assessed valuation, and with regard to bonds pledging tax revenues other than
from ad valorem taxes, the percentage of debt to the previous year's revenue
from the particular tax source pledged;
   (d)   Bond rating information, if any;
   (e)   A statement of purpose for incurring the particular indebtedness.
   (f)   All obligations issued pursuant to the provisions of this Charter
shall be sold at public or private sale to the best advantage of the Town at,
above or below par. Bonds may contain provisions for redemption prior to
maturity with or without the payment of a premium. The maximum premium payable
on prior redemption of any general obligation bonds may, but need not be
specified in the bond question approved by the qualified electors.
XI - PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES
Section 11.1 General Powers
The Town shall have and exercise with regard to all utilities and franchises
all municipal powers including, without limitation, all powers now existing and
which may be hereafter provided by the Constitution and statutes. The right of
the Town to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility, work or way, is
expressly reserved. Except as otherwise provided by Constitution or this
Charter, all powers concerning the granting, amending, revoking or otherwise
dealing in franchises shall be exercised by the council.
Section 11.2 Water Rights
The Town shall have the power to buy, exchange, lease, own, and control water
rights.
Section 11.3 Utility Rates and Service Areas
The council shall by ordinance establish rates for services provided by
municipality- owned utilities. All newly-annexed territory shall be served by
municipal utilities within a reasonable period of time after annexation. If the
council desires to extend the municipal utilities beyond Town boundaries, it
shall do so by ordinance.
Section 11.4 Granting of Franchise
All franchises shall be granted by ordinance which shall include provisions for
periodic review, approval of rates, and terms and conditions of service. No
franchise shall exceed twenty (20) years.
Section 11.5 Franchise Records
The council may cause to be kept in the office of the Town clerk an indexed
franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises
heretofore and hereafter granted. The index shall give the name of the grantee
and any assignees. The record, a complete history of all such franchises, shall
include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law
affecting the same and copies of all annual reports and such other matter of
information and public interest as the council may from time to time require.
Section 11.6 Existing Franchises
All franchise ordinances of the Town in effect at the time that this Charter is
adopted shall remain in full force and effect according to their provisions and
terms until the expiration date provided in such ordinance or until modified by
another franchise.
ARTICLE XII - TAXATION
Section 12.1 Authority to Levy Taxes
The council may by ordinance, levy and collect taxes for municipal purposes
which may include but shall not be limited to: general ad valorem property
taxes and excise taxes (such as sales taxes, use taxes, bed taxes, occupation
taxes and real estate transfer taxes).
No sales tax, use tax, bed tax or income tax shall be levied after the adoption
of this Charter until such tax shall have been approved by a majority of the
qualified electors voting at a regular or special election.
For purposes of this Charter, the term "sales tax" shall mean a tax on the sale
of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services.
ARTICLE XIII - MISCELLANEOUS LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 13.1 Reservation of Power
The power to supersede any law of this state now or hereafter in force, insofar
as it applies to local or municipal affairs, shall be reserved to the Town,
acting by charter or ordinance, subject only to restrictions of Article XX of
the State Constitution and subsequent amendments to the Charter by ordinance.
Section 13.2 Liability of Town
No action for recovery of compensation for personal injury, death or property
damage against the Town on account of its negligence or other tort shall be
maintained unless written notice of the alleged time, place and cause of
injury, death or property damage is given to the Town clerk by the person
injured, his agent, or attorney within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
occurrence causing the injury, death or property damage. The notice given under
the provisions of this section shall not be deemed invalid or insufficient
solely by reason of an inaccuracy in stating the time, place or cause of
injury, if it is shown that there was no intent to mislead and that the Town in
fact was not misled thereby. The provision shall not be construed as a waiver
of any governmental immunity the Town may have now or in the future.
Section 13.3 Sale or Encumbrance of Property
Council may not sell, exchange or dispose of public utilities or permanent
public buildings or real property except by ordinance or a majority vote of the
electors at the option of the council. Council may not mortgage or encumber
public utilities or permanent public buildings or real or personal property
except by ordinance or majority vote of the electors at the option of the
council.
Section 13.4 Lease on Property
The council may enter into a lease or lease-option for such time as council
shall determine, for real or personal property to or from any person, firm or
corporation, public or private, governmental or otherwise by ordinance or
resolution.
Section 13.5 Cooperative Contracts
The council may by resolution enter into contracts or agreements with other
governmental units, special districts, or persons for those purposes as
provided in Articles XI and XIV of the State Constitution.
Section 13.6 Bequests, Gifts and Donations
Council, on behalf of the Town, may receive or refuse bequests, gifts and
donations of all kinds of property in fee simple, whether encumbered or not, or
in lease hold, or in trust for public, charitable or other purposes, and do all
things and acts necessary to carry out the purpose of such gifts, bequests and
donations with power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the same in
accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest or trust.
Section 13.7 Emergency Powers
In case of riot, insurrection, or extraordinary emergency, the mayor or in his
absence, the Town manager, shall assume the authority to execute any action
necessary for the protection of life and property. Such authority may include
but not be limited to establishing regulations governing conduct and activities
related to the cause of the emergency, and if the emergency situation
continues, the mayor or in his absence, the Town manager shall convene the
council who may take such action as it deems necessary. In the event it becomes
necessary, the line of succession provided in section
13.8 shall be followed.
Section 13.8 Continuity of Government
The council shall have the power to provide for continuity of government of the
Town of Winter Park in the event of natural or enemy caused disaster. Such
power shall be employed in a manner which will preserve representative
government in the Town of Winter Park and which will provide an orderly line of
succession of officers, not withstanding the provisions of this Charter. Such
succession shall commence with the mayor and the mayor pro tem and shall then
revert to the councilmen by order of seniority, and thereafter, through an
orderly line of succession of the administrative department heads, commencing
with the Town manager.
Section 13.9 Severability of Charter Provisions
If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by a court,
such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the
Charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application,
provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the
court to be inoperable, and to this end, this charter is declared to be
severable. (4-12-1983)
Section 13.10 Charter Amendments
This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the state
constitution. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
submission to the people of more than one charter amendment at any one
election. If provisions of two or more proposed amendments adopted or approved
at the same election conflict, the amendment receiving the highest affirmative
vote shall become effective. (4-12-1983)
Section 13.11 Interpretations
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the contents hereof,
all words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be
limited to the time of the adoption of this charter but shall extend to and
include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which
provision is made herein. The singular number shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and
include the feminine gender and neuter, and the word "person" may extend and be
applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to
individuals. (4-12-1983)
Section 13.12 Eminent Domain
The town shall have the right of eminent domain as provided by the constitution
and the statutes. (4-12-1983)
Section 13.13 Definitions
As used in this charter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   (a)   Appropriation. The authorized amount of monies set aside for
expenditures during a specified time for a specific purpose.
   (b)   Constitution. The constitution of the state of Colorado.
   (c)   Council. The town council of the town of Winter Park, including the
mayor, unless provided otherwise. (4-12-1983)
   (d)   Elector-Qualified Elector. A person who is legally qualified to
register to vote in the town of Winter Park pursuant to the constitution,
Colorado statutes, the Winter Park home rule charter and ordinances of the town
of Winter Park. (Ord. 138, Series of 1986)
   (e)   Employee. A person employed by the town of Winter Park.
   (f)   Franchise. A privilege granted by the town permitting a specified use
of public property for a specified length of time.
   (g)   Manager. The town manager of the town of Winter Park appointed
pursuant to section
6.1 of this charter.
   (h)   Municipal Utility System. Any heat, power or light system;
communication system; water, sewer or scheduled transportation system, and
serving or supplying the public.
   (i)   Officer. Any person elected to office or appointed by council,
including appointees to boards and commissions.
   (j)   Ordinance. A permanent regulation adopted by legislative action of the
town council pursuant to the procedures set forth in section
4.10 of this charter.
   (k)   Permanent Board Or Commission. A board or commission intended by
council to be a part of the permanent governmental structure of the town of
Winter Park as established by ordinance.
   (l)   Post. Posting in at least two (2) public places within the town as
designated by the council. (4-12-1983)
   (m)   Publication. (Rep. by Ord. 458, Series of 2012)
   (n)   Public Utility. Any person, firm or corporation operating heat, power
or light system; communication system; water, sewer or scheduled transportation
system, and serving or supplying the public under a franchise granted by the
town.
   (o)   Regular Municipal Election. A municipal election held every two years
at which candidates for elective offices of the town are voted upon in
accordance with this charter.
   (p)   Resolution. Expression of administrative or ministerial acts of
council without any required form or procedure as distinguished from
legislative acts embodied in town ordinances.
   (q)   Statutes. The applicable laws of the state of Colorado as they now
exist or as they may be amended, changed, repealed or otherwise modified by
legislative procedure.
   (r)   Town. Town of Winter Park, Colorado, a municipal corporation. (4-12-
1983)
Section 13.14 Official Publications
Exclusive management and control of the designation of the official
publications to be used for the official advertising of the town shall be
vested in the town clerk. The manner of publication may include print,
electronic and other media as appropriate to comply with applicable law and
meet the various publication needs of the town. Such designation shall be made
annually by the town clerk and affirmed by resolution of the council. (Ord.
458, Series of 2012)
ARTICLE XIV - TRANSITION PERIOD
Section 14.1 Effective Date Of Charter
This charter shall become effective immediately upon voter approval except that
those provisions of article IX relating to the preparation and submission of
the budget and capital program shall become effective for the 1984 annual
budget, and those provisions in article III relating to the election of
councilmen shall become effective at the first regular election scheduled under
this charter to be held in April, 1984. (4-12-1983)
Section 14.2 Prior Town Legislation
All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the town which
are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect at the
effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and effect until
repealed or amended. Those provisions of any effective bylaw, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this charter are
hereby repealed. (4-12-1983)
Section 14.3 Present Elected Officials To Continue In Office
The present town council and mayor in office at the time of the adoption of
this charter shall continue at their present salaries, to serve and carry out
the functions, powers and duties of their offices until their successors assume
the duties of their offices. (4-12-1983)
Section 14.4 Continuation Of Present Boards And Commissions
All boards and commissions in existence at the time of adoption of this charter
shall continue to function under the provisions of this charter until the next
organizational meeting. (4-12-1983)
Section 14.5 Continuation Of Appointed Officers And Employees
Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter,
all appointive officers and all employees of the town shall continue in that
town office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of this
charter, as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided
in this charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of
this charter, except that any officer or employee who holds a position which
this charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or
body, shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for
which originally appointed. (4-12-1983)
Section 14.6 Saving Clause
This charter shall not affect any suit pending in any court or any document
heretofore executed in connection therewith. Nothing in this charter shall
invalidate any existing contracts between the town of Winter Park and
individuals, corporations or public agencies. (4-12-1983)
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION
We, the undersigned, present members of the town of Winter Park charter
commission, duly elected by the people of the town of Winter Park, Colorado, at
the regular election held on November 2, 1982 under authorization of article XX
of the constitution of the state of Colorado, to prepare a home rule charter
for the town of Winter Park, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the
proposed charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the
commission on the 1st day of March, 1983, for submission to the people of the
town of Winter Park at a special election to be called by the present council
of the town.
Executed at the town of Winter Park, Colorado, this 1st day of March 1983.
                           
Bill McCammon        Ronald Drake
                           
Donald Drake        Jack Mason
                           
Sandra Vernon        Brant Jackson
                           
Van Anderson        Don Sheridan
            
Jack Buchheister
Voters approved proposed charter on April 12, 1983 by a vote of 71 aye, 21 nay
   STAFF
   Patrick J. Guilfoyle, Town Manager
   John R. Mehaffy, Town Attorney
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Town Council, this Town Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official Town Code of Winter Park. This Town
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the WINTER PARK TOWN CODE, and
is hereby published by authority of the Town Council and shall be kept up to
date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Town Attorney, acting for said
Town Council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this Town Code by
title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Town Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Town of general and permanent
effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. 1
 
Notes
1 1. Charter §1.6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Town Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Town Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Town Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
this Town Code. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Town passed prior to the adoption of this Town
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Town Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
Town; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the preceeding section, excepting as
this Town Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this Town
Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to
such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the town herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
town under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1985 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The town council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the
masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or content may be repugnant thereto. (1985 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CODE: The municipal code of the town of Winter Park 1 .
COUNTY: The county of Grand, state of Colorado.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a town employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the town of
Winter Park".
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense other than a felony, as classified in Colorado Revised
Statutes section 18-1-106.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the town; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community as further defined in title 4, chapter 12 of this code.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a town officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the town of
Winter Park".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood
to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The state of Colorado.
STREET: This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
WHOLESALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale. (1985 Code; amd. Ord. 455,
Series of 2012)
 
Notes
1 1. Charter §1.6.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Violations: It shall be a violation of the town's charter, this code,
ordinances or regulations for any person to do any act which is forbidden or
declared to be unlawful, or to fail to do or perform any act required in the
town's charter, this code, ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 170, Series of
1988)
   B.   Noncriminal Violations: Any person who is convicted of a noncriminal
violation of the town's charter, this code, any ordinance of the town, any code
adopted by reference, or any regulation adopted pursuant to this code, town
charter or ordinances shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand
six hundred and fifty dollars ($2,650.00) for each separate offense. Each day
of violation shall be considered a separate offense. No defendant convicted of
a noncriminal violation shall be subject to imprisonment for any such
conviction. No defendant shall have a right to a trial by jury for any
noncriminal violation for which imprisonment is not a prescribed penalty. In
addition to the fine, the Municipal Court may order restitution, but it cannot
require community service or program participation. The maximum fine amount set
forth herein shall be adjusted for inflation on January 1, 2026, and on January
1 of each year thereafter, as provided by Colorado Revised Statute, Section 31-
16-101, as amended.
   C.   Criminal Violations: Any person who is convicted of a criminal
violation of the town's charter, this code, any ordinance of the town, any code
adopted by reference, or any regulation adopted pursuant to this code, town
charter, or ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed two thousand six hundred and fifty dollars ($2,650.00)
or imprisoned for a term not to exceed three hundred sixty-four (364) days, or
punished by both such fine and imprisonment, for each separate violation. Each
day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any restitution,
community service or program participation ordered by the Municipal Court shall
be in addition to any fine. The maximum fine amount set forth herein shall be
adjusted for inflation on January 1, 2026, and on January 1 of each year
thereafter, as provided by Colorado Revised Statute, Section 31-16-101, as
amended.
   D.   Surcharge: Every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for,
or against whom a judgment is entered for a violation of any provision of this
code or ordinances of Winter Park, shall be assessed a surcharge of twenty five
percent (25%) of the fine. The surcharge shall include any fine schedules in
use or that may be issued.
      1.   Surcharge proceeds paid to the town shall be accounted for
separately and earmarked for judicial and police education. The fund shall be
used for judicial and police educational training and travel purposes only,
including the cost of food and lodging while at training events and the paying
of overtime incurred during training functions.
   E.   Persons Under The Age Of Eighteen: No person under the age of eighteen
(18) years as of the date of the offense for which he or she is convicted shall
be subject to a jail sentence, except as otherwise provided by Colorado Revised
Statutes, section 13-10-113(5), as amended, and the Colorado children's code1.
(Ord. 170, Series of 1988; amd. Ord. 349, Series of 2005; Ord. 473, Series of
2013; Ord. 568, Series of 2021; Ord. 630, Series of 2025)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalties provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code and the ordinances of the town council subsequently
adopted the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section
thereof.
   B.   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where
any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty thereof as a separate offense for each day or portion thereof such duty
or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
   C.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, however, that the revocation of a
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
   D.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes
a breach of any section or provision of the town's charter, this code,
ordinances or regulations, and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically
declared for such breach, the provisions of subsection 1-4-1B of this chapter
shall apply.
   E.   The town council may direct the town attorney to bring an action to
enjoin any violation of the charter, this code, ordinances or regulations of
the town. In addition, the town council may take such other legal action as may
be authorized by the laws of the state of Colorado. These alternative remedies
are not exclusive and any or all of them may be sought.
   F.   Any person who knowingly takes part or assists in any violation of the
town's charter, this code or ordinances may be charged for such violation.
(Ord. 170, Series of 1988)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the town council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1985
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND TOWN COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Elected Officials' Salaries And Benefits
1-5-2: Conflict Of Interest
1-5-3: Campaign Finance Complaints
1-5-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS' SALARIES AND BENEFITS 1 :
   A.   Town council members shall be compensated monthly as follows: mayor -
$1,400.00 per month; mayor pro tem - $1,200.00 per month; council members -
$1,000.00 per month. Compensation amounts shall be reviewed and considered for
adjustment at least every 10 years.
   B.   Town council members are eligible to enroll in the Town’s employee
group health benefit plans, as may be offered from time to time, including,
without limitation medical insurance, dental insurance, and vision insurance.
Any such participation is voluntary, and the council member is responsible for
the entire cost associated with their individual coverage and the total cost of
any additional spouse or dependent coverage. (Ord. 638, 9-2-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See charter section 3.8 for compensation of council members; and articles
  III and IV of the home rule charter regarding the council.
1-5-2: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   Pursuant to, and in accordance with, the provisions of sections 3.7 and
4.7 of the home rule charter of the town of Winter Park, Colorado, the
following protocol shall be in effect as to and binding upon each member of the
town council in the event of an actual or perceived conflict of interest, as
defined in said charter sections:
      1.   Any member of the town council shall declare a conflict of interest
in the event he/she, or a member of his/her family, has a material or
significant financial interest, direct or indirect, other than the common
public interest in any matter which appears on a town council agenda for
decision by the town council.
      2.   Upon declaration of such a conflict of interest, the member of the
town council declaring such conflict of interest shall refrain from voting on
the matter upon which the conflict of interest has been declared; provided,
however, that if the provisions of section 4.7 of the home rule charter require
the council member to vote in order to attain a quorum on the matter, the
member of council shall vote on the issue notwithstanding the declared conflict
of interest.
      3.   Upon declaration of a conflict of interest by a member of the town
council as above described, the member of council may continue to take part in
the discussion of the matter under consideration and upon which a conflict of
interest has been declared unless the remaining members of the town council by
majority vote determine that the member of council who has declared the
conflict of interest has such a direct and material conflict of interest that
further participation in council deliberations by that member of council is
inappropriate. In case of such determination, the member of council with the
declared conflict of interest shall cease taking any further part in discussion
of the matter under consideration, and shall leave his/her seat and take a seat
in the audience or, at the discretion of the member of council with the
declared conflict of interest, leave the council chambers during discussion of
the matter.
   B.   Members of the town council hereby determine that appearances by them,
as elected officials of the town of Winter Park, before the appointed members
of the planning and zoning commission and the board of adjustment should be
limited so as to preserve the integrity of decisions reached by the town in the
quasi-judicial process, and so as to avoid the appearance of influence over
decisions of such bodies. However, the members of the town council also
understand and determine that they retain the rights of citizens to appear
before such bodies in their personal capacity. Therefore, the members of the
town council hereby find and determine that, when appearing before either the
town's planning and zoning commission or the town's board of adjustment, such
member of council shall declare that his/her appearance is in a personal
capacity as a private citizen, and not as a member of the town council. (Ord.
303, Series of 2000)
1-5-3: CAMPAIGN FINANCE COMPLAINTS:
   A.   In addition to the campaign finance duties outlined in C.R.S. § 1-45-
112 for a municipal clerk, the Town Clerk shall have the responsibilities set
forth in this Section related to campaign finance complaints. The Town Clerk
shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary to enforce and administer any
provision of this Section.
   B.   Any person who believes that a violation of Article XXVIII of the
Colorado Constitution, the Fair Campaign Practices Act, C.R.S. § 1-45-101, et
seq., or the Secretary of State’s rules concerning campaign and political
finance has occurred in municipal campaign finance matters may file a complaint
with the Town Clerk.
      1.   A “municipal campaign finance matter” has the meaning defined in
C.R.S. § 1-45-111.7(9)(b) and 8 C.C.R. 1505-6, both as amended. The process for
review and handling of complaints related to a municipal campaign finance
matter shall be as set forth in this Section in a manner consistent with the
Fair Campaign Practices Act, C.R.S. § 1-45-101, et seq., specifically C.R.S. §
1-45-111.7, as amended, and the rules promulgated by the Colorado Secretary of
State at 8 C.C.R. 1505-6, specifically Rule 23, as amended.
      2.   A complaint must be filed no later than one hundred eighty (180)
days after the date on which the complainant either knew or should have known,
by the exercise of reasonable diligence, of the alleged violation and must meet
the minimum requirements set forth in 8 C.C.R. 1505-6, Rule 23.1, as amended. A
complaint must be filed in writing and signed by the complainant on the form
provided by the Town. The complaint must identify one or more respondents and
include the information required to be provided on the form.
      3.   Upon receipt of a complaint, the Town Clerk shall notify the
respondent of the complaint by e-mail or by regular mail if e-mail is
unavailable.
      4.   Documents related to a complaint will be publicly available as set
forth in 8 C.C.R. 1505-6, Rule 23.2, as amended.
   C.   The Town Clerk shall conduct an initial review of a complaint to
determine whether the complaint was timely filed, specifically identifies one
or more violations of Article XXVIII of the Colorado Constitution, the Fair
Campaign Practices Act, C.R.S. § 1-45-101, et seq., or the Secretary of State’s
rules concerning campaign and political finance; and alleges sufficient facts
to support a factual and legal basis for the violations of law alleged in the
complaint. Within ten (10) business days of receiving a complaint, the Town
Clerk shall take one or more of the following actions:
      1.   If the Town Clerk determines that the complaint was not timely
filed, has not specifically identified one or more violations of Article XXVIII
of the Colorado Constitution, the Fair Campaign Practices Act, C.R.S. 1-45-101,
et seq., or the Secretary of State’s rules concerning campaign and political
finance, or does not assert facts sufficient to support a factual or legal
basis for an alleged violation, the Town Clerk shall notify the complainant and
respondent of such determination by e-mail or by regular mail if e-mail is
unavailable. The Town Clerk’s determination hereunder is a final action subject
only to judicial review pursuant to C.R.C.P. 106(a)(4).
      2.   If the Town Clerk determines that the complaint alleges one or more
curable violations, the Town Clerk shall notify the respondent and provide the
respondent an opportunity to cure the violations. The process for curing shall
be as set forth in subsection (D) below.
      3.   If the Town Clerk determines that the complaint has specifically
identified one or more violations of Article XXVIII of the Colorado
Constitution, the Fair Campaign Practices Act, C.R.S. § 1-45-101, et seq., or
the Secretary of State’s rules concerning campaign and political finance, and
has alleged facts sufficient to support a factual or legal basis for each
alleged violation, and that either a factual finding or a legal interpretation
is required, the Town Clerk shall forward the complaint to a hearing officer
appointed by the Board of Trustees.
   D.   Upon the Town Clerk’s determination that a complaint alleges a failure
to file or otherwise disclose required information, or alleges another curable
violation, the Town Clerk shall notify the respondent by e-mail or by regular
mail if e-mail is unavailable of the curable deficiencies alleged in the
complaint. The process for curing shall be as set forth in C.R.S. § 1-45-111.7
(4), as amended.
   E.   The hearing officer shall schedule a hearing on a complaint referred by
the Town Clerk within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint. The
hearing may be continued upon the motion of any party for up to thirty (30)
days or a longer extension of time upon a showing of good cause. The hearing
shall be in compliance with C.R.S. § 1-45-111.7(6), as amended.
      1.   The Town Attorney’s office shall represent the Town’s interest in
such matter and shall provide representation for the Town in all proceedings
before the hearing officer. Testimony shall be given under oath, and the
hearing officer shall have the power to issue subpoenas and compel the
attendance of witnesses.
      2.   The hearing shall be summary and not subject to delay and shall be
concluded within sixty (60) days after the complaint is filed. No later than
five (5) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
issue a written determination. The hearing officer’s written determination is a
final action subject only to judicial review pursuant to C.R.C.P. 106(a)(4).
   F.   The Town Clerk or a hearing officer, as appropriate, may impose
penalties and sanctions as set forth in C.R.S. § 1-45-111.5, and 8 C.C.R. 1505-
6, Rule 23.3.3, both as amended. Recovery of a party’s reasonable attorney fees
and costs shall be as set forth therein.
(Ord. 607, Series of 2023)
CHAPTER 6
TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Elections
1-6-2: Duties Of The Town Clerk
1-6-1: ELECTIONS 1 :
   A.   In the event in any regular Municipal election the total number of
candidates having filed nomination petitions or affidavits of intent as defined
in subsection C of this section equals or otherwise does not exceed the number
of offices being filled at such election, and if the election of such officials
is the only matter before the voters at said election, the Town Council may by
resolution cancel the election in compliance with the deadline established in
the Colorado Municipal Election Code, as amended. In the event of such
cancellation of election, those persons who have filed a valid nomination
petition or affidavit of intent shall be deemed elected as of the date of the
adoption of the resolution canceling the election.
   B.   In the event members of the Town Council are elected by virtue of the
cancellation of a regularly scheduled Municipal election, the length of terms
of office for each person so elected shall be determined by the individuals by
mutual agreement, or by lot conducted by the Town Clerk.
   C.   All persons desiring to hold a Municipal office to be filled by an
election shall, if said person has not been nominated as provided for in
section 31-10-302, Colorado Revised Statutes, file with the Town Clerk an
affidavit of intent indicating that the affiant desires to hold a certain
Municipal office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if
elected. Such affidavit shall be filed in compliance with the deadline
established in the Colorado Municipal Election Code, as amended. No write in
vote for any Municipal office shall be counted unless such an affidavit of
intent has been timely filed. (Ord. 494, Series of 2015; amd. Ord. 573, Series
of 2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See Charter, article II.
1-6-2: DUTIES OF THE TOWN CLERK:
In addition to such other duties as may be elsewhere delegated to the Town
Clerk in the Town's Home Rule Charter, this Code, or through assignment by the
Town Manager, the Town Clerk is hereby authorized to perform the following acts
relating to the administration of liquor licenses (including any and all
licenses related to the manufacture or sale of malt, vinous or spirituous
liquors as provided for in statutes) which are applied for within the
boundaries of the Town of Winter Park:
   A.   To approve applications for renewal of existing liquor licenses;
   B.   To approve applications for transfer of ownership of existing liquor
licenses;
   C.   To approve the issuance of temporary permits;
   D.   To approve applications for changes in shareholders, officers,
directors or trade names of liquor license holders;
   E.   To approve applications for change of registered managers of licensed
premises;
   F.   To establish the neighborhood boundaries for liquor licensing matters;
and
   G.   To approve applications for takeout and delivery permits. The fee for a
takeout and delivery permit shall be set by resolution and may not exceed the
state fee.
Either the Town Council or the Chief of Police shall have the right to request
a review of the decision of the Town Clerk as to approval of any application
identified above. Any applicant whose application is denied by the Town Clerk
shall likewise possess the authority to request a review by the Town Council of
such denial. Any request for review shall be made within the time periods
specified in part 1, article 3, title 44, Colorado Revised Statutes. Absent a
timely request for review, the decision of the Town Clerk shall be final. (Ord.
402, Series of 2007; amd. Ord. 513, Series of 2018; Ord. 545, Series of 2020)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-7-1: Established; Jurisdiction
1-7-2: Judge And Associates
1-7-3: Procedures
1-7-4: Court Costs
1-7-5: Restitution
1-7-6: Imprisonment For Failure To Pay Fines And Costs
1-7-1: ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION:
Pursuant to article 10 of title 13, Colorado Revised Statutes, there is hereby
established a municipal court for the town of Winter Park, Colorado, which
municipal court shall be a qualified court of record as defined in Colorado
Revised Statutes section 13-10-102(3). The municipal court shall have original
jurisdiction of all cases arising under the home rule charter and ordinances of
the town with full power to punish violators thereof by the imposition of such
fines and penalties as are prescribed by ordinance or court rule. (Ord. 390,
Series of 2007)
1-7-2: JUDGE AND ASSOCIATES 1 :
   A.   Appointment, Presiding Officer: The municipal court shall be presided
over by a presiding municipal judge appointed by the town council for an
initial term which shall expire on the date of the next municipal election for
the town. Thereafter, the municipal judge shall be appointed for a term of two
(2) years. (Ord. 31, Series of 1980)
   B.   Qualification: Any person appointed to any office of municipal judge or
associate municipal judge shall have been admitted to, and shall currently be
licensed in, the practice of law in Colorado. (Ord. 390, Series of 2007)
   C.   Oath Of Office: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the
municipal judge shall make an oath or affirmation that he will support the
constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of
Colorado, and the laws and ordinances of the town, and will faithfully perform
the duties of his office.
   D.   Compensation: The compensation to be paid to the municipal judge shall
be as provided under section 7.2(d) of the home rule charter. (Ord. 31, Series
of 1980)
 
Notes
1 1. Charter §7.2.
1-7-3: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Authority: The procedures of the court shall be in accordance with the
municipal court rules of procedure as promulgated by the Colorado supreme
court. The presiding municipal judge shall have authority to issue local rules
of procedure consistent with any rules of procedure adopted by the Colorado
supreme court.
   B.   Court Sessions:
      1.   There shall be a regular session of court for trial of cases. A
municipal judge may hold a special session of court at any time.
      2.   All sessions shall be open to the public.
      3.   Any person failing or refusing to leave the courtroom after having
been ordered by the municipal judge to do so is guilty of a violation of this
chapter, and upon conviction shall be punished as is provided for in this
chapter. (1985 Code)
   C.   Record Of Proceedings: All proceedings of the municipal court shall be
recorded by either electronic devices or stenographic means so that a verbatim
record of the proceedings of the municipal court and evidence at trials is
preserved. The cost of transcription of any such proceedings shall be borne by
the party requesting the record or transcript. Authority is hereby specifically
delegated to the municipal court clerk to establish a schedule of fees and
charges for the location, preparation and transcription of such records, which
schedule of fees and charges shall be forwarded to the town council for
adoption. (Ord. 390, Series of 2007)
   D.   Appeals: Appeals from the municipal court shall be in accordance with
the Colorado rules of procedure and the Colorado Revised Statutes.
   E.   Failure To Appear: Any person who fails to appear in the Municipal
Court as required by a summons or subpoena served upon him is guilty of a
separate violation of his failure to appear and such violation is punishable as
a separate offense, pursuant to subsection 1-4-1C of this title.
   F.   Penalty; Trial By Jury: Trial of noncriminal infractions, the penalty
of which is specified in subsection 1-4-1B of this title shall be to the
Municipal Court. A defendant charged with a misdemeanor, the penalty of which
is specified in subsection 1-4-1C of this title, shall have the right to a
trial by jury. Any defendant charged with a violation of any Charter, Code,
ordinance, code adopted by reference or regulation adopted pursuant to this
Code or Town ordinance, other than a noncriminal infraction, shall have the
right to a trial by jury if, within ten (10) days after arraignment or plea of
not guilty, such defendant files with the Municipal Court a written jury
demand, and at the same time tenders to the Municipal Court a jury fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00), unless the fee is waived by the Municipal Court
because of the indigency of the defendant.
   G.   Consolidated Charges: Any person charged with noncriminal infraction
and misdemeanor violations arising out of the same incident shall have the
right to demand a trial by jury as to all such charges, which shall be
consolidated for purposes of trial.
   H.   Complaining Witness: In any prosecution for a violation based upon the
complaint of a person other than a police officer or a Town employee, if the
complaining witness fails or refuses to testify at the time of trial, or if it
appears to the court that there was no reasonable grounds for the complaint, or
that the complaint was maliciously entered, the complaining witness shall be
assessed costs in an amount not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00).
   I.   Imprisonment: Violations of the Charter, Code, ordinances or
regulations of the Town for which imprisonment is not a possible penalty and
that are neither criminal nor punishable by imprisonment under any counterpart
State law, are civil, but the Judge shall follow the Colorado Municipal Court
rules in all such cases, except for any rules that are clearly inapplicable.
(Ord. 170, Series of 1988)
   J.   Burden Of Proof: For noncriminal infractions, the burden of proof shall
be upon the people of the Town, and the Judge shall enter judgment in favor of
defendant unless the people prove the liability of the defendant beyond a
reasonable doubt. The Municipal Judge shall be permitted to call and question
any witness and shall also act as the fact finder at trials on noncriminal
infraction matters. (Ord. 508, Series of 2017)
1-7-4: COURT COSTS:
   A.   The Municipal Court is authorized to assess court costs in cases
involving any defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere or who enters into
a plea agreement or who, after trial, is found guilty of a violation. The
Municipal Court has the discretion to set the amount of cost assessed, provided
it is reasonable, proper, and in compliance with Colorado law.
   B.   The Municipal Court is authorized to assess "cost of care" fees in
cases involving any defendant who is committed to the Grand County Jail as part
of any sentence imposed by the Municipal Court. Cost of care fees assessed
shall not exceed the amount as set by the Chief Judge of the 14th Judicial
District, and may be waived in part or in whole by the Municipal Court.
   C.   The Municipal Court is authorized to assess additional court costs in
matters requiring the employment of an interpreter to translate language for
witnesses and defendants who are appearing in court. These costs may only be
assessed against any defendant who pleads guilty or nolo contendere or who
enters into a plea agreement or who, after trial, is found guilty of an
ordinance violation. The Municipal Court has the discretion to assess this
cost, provided the amount does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per pretrial
conference, and ten dollars ($10.00) per hour during any trial. (Ord. 451,
Series of 2011)
1-7-5: RESTITUTION:
A defendant who has been adjudged guilty or against whom a judgment has been
entered for violating any ordinance of the Town may be required, upon such
reasonable terms as the Municipal Court may impose, to make restitution or
reparation to any aggrieved person for any actual damage or loss caused by the
violation. (Ord. 451, Series of 2011)
1-7-6: IMPRISONMENT FOR FAILURE TO PAY FINES AND COSTS:
   A.   Every person against whom any fine or penalty shall be assessed for a
violation of the ordinances of the Town, who refuses or neglects to pay the
same when demanded and when able to so pay, may be found in civil contempt of
court and upon execution ordered by the Municipal Court, may be committed to
the Grand County Jail or such other suitable place as shall be provided by the
Town under the direction of the proper officer until said fine or penalty is
fully paid or satisfied. Such satisfaction shall be made at the rate of sixty
dollars ($60.00) per twenty four (24) hour day.
   B.   In the discretion of the Municipal Court, a stay of execution may be
granted to enable the defendant to pay the fine or penalty at a later date or
in installment payments. If a defendant refuses or neglects to comply with the
terms of the stay of execution, then execution may issue and the defendant may
be committed to the Grand County Jail, as herein provided, until such fine,
penalty or judgment is fully paid or otherwise satisfied. (Ord. 451, Series of
2011)
CHAPTER 8
DEVELOPMENT AND ANNEXATION FEES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Permit Fees
1-8-2: Development And Land Use Application Fees
1-8-3: Records Fees
1-8-1: PERMIT FEES:
Application fees for sign permits and special use permits shall be as set forth
by resolution of Town Council. (Ord. 593, Series of 2022)
1-8-2: DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees charged for development and land use applications including,
without limitation, subdivision, zoning, variance, special permit, and
annexation applications shall be as set forth by resolution of Town Council. As
permitted by the Town of Winter Park’s Unified Development Code, if the Town
requires review of an application by a professional consultant, such costs must
be reimbursed to the Town plus up to twenty percent of the cost of the
consultant to cover the Town’s administrative and overhead costs. (Ord. 593,
Series of 2022)
1-8-3: RECORDS FEES:
Fees applicable to requests for Town records shall be as set forth by
resolution of Town Council. (Ord. 593, Series of 2022)
CHAPTER 9
PROPERTY TAX REFUNDS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Purpose and Authority
1-9-3: Qualifications
1-9-4: Application Procedure
1-9-5: Refunds
1-9-6: Rules and Regulations
1-9-7: False Statements
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT: Any personal residence, abode, mobile home or
apartment in which the applicant or his spouse primarily resides. Such terms
shall be deemed to include but not be limited to single and multi-family
houses, apartments, condominiums, rented rooms and mobile homes.
HOUSEHOLD: One or more persons who live under one roof and who pay property tax
or rent on the dwelling or dwelling unit in which the members of the household
live. Property taxes or rent paid on a dwelling unit which is not primarily
occupied by the taxpayer do not qualify for refund under this Chapter.
PROPERTY TAX: That portion of the total property tax on any particular parcel
of property attributable to the mill levy of the Town, and where applicable,
shall include the average rebate of specific ownership tax per mobile home
received by the Town.
TAX YEAR: The calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year in which
the application for a Town refund is made.
1-9-2: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to refund to qualified senior citizens of
this Town a part of the preceding year's property tax assessed and collected by
the Town.
The Town is hereby authorized, in the manner prescribed in this Chapter, to
grant a cash refund for a certain percentage of property taxes for housing paid
by qualified senior citizens of the Town upon submission of prescribed claim
forms no later than September 1 of each year for the prior taxable year.
1-9-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
In order to be a qualified senior citizen eligible to file a claim for a
refund, the following requirements must be met:
   A.   The claimant must be sixty five (65) years of age or older as of
January 1 of the year in which application is made for a refund;
   B.   During the major part or all of the tax year, the applicant must have
lived in a dwelling or dwelling unit located within the corporate limits of the
Town, and because of his ownership of all or part of such dwelling or dwelling
unit or because of an enforceable contractual obligation, the applicant must
have been obligated to pay all or part of the property taxes thereon for the
taxable year, and the applicant, in fact, must have paid all of the taxes for
which he was legally obligated to pay, including specific ownership taxes in
the case of a mobile home or a trailer; or
   C.   During all or some part of the tax year, the applicant must have lived
in a dwelling or dwelling unit located in the corporate limits of the Town, and
must have been legally obligated to pay rent with respect to such dwelling or
dwelling unit and, in fact, must have paid such rent;
   D.   The applicant must have been a resident of the Town for the major part
of the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which the application is
made. No refund shall be paid to any resident of any dwelling or dwelling unit
for any prior year if any resident of that same dwelling unit has received or
is entitled to receive an allowance for the same period of time.
1-9-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Every qualified person desiring a refund of Town property taxes must file in
the office of the Town Clerk a written application on a form to be provided by
the Town. Such application must be filed no earlier than March 1 and no later
than September 1 of the calendar year in which the taxes sought to be partially
refunded were paid. The application form may require any and all information
reasonably necessary for the administration of this Chapter and shall contain
an affidavit by the applicant certifying to the applicant's qualifications for
the refunded entitlement.
1-9-5: REFUNDS:
   A.   Verification; Computation: A qualified senior citizen of an owner
occupied dwelling unit, after filing an application in proper form showing
compliance with this Chapter, must bring his paid tax notice receipt showing
the amount of property taxes paid to the town to be checked and verified by the
town clerk. The town shall refund to the applicant the amount of taxes received
by the town from the applicant's dwelling or dwelling unit up to a maximum of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for any tax year. A qualified senior
citizen who occupies a rental unit or other dwelling unit as defined herein
shall be entitled to a refund of one percent (1%) of his annual rental located
within the town, upon the landlord's signature verifying the amount of rent
paid in the preceding year; in no event shall this refund exceed one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) for one or more rental units occupied in the preceding
year.
   B.   Administration:
      1.   The town clerk is hereby given the responsibility for the
distribution of all refund claim forms and for the receipt, checking and
verification of information submitted on the form.
      2.   The town clerk, after receipt and verification of the refund
information, shall forward the application to the town treasurer for payment
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
      3.   Town property tax refunds shall be payable by the town at any time
at the discretion of the town treasurer within thirty (30) days after
application for such refund is made.
   C.   Payable Only To Applicant Or Qualified Surviving Spouse: The town shall
make tax refunds pursuant to this chapter payable only to the applicant who
qualifies hereunder, and refunds shall not be paid to anyone other than the
applicant himself. In the event an applicant dies prior to receiving or cashing
a refund pursuant hereto, and the decedent is survived by a spouse who would
otherwise be qualified as a senior citizen applicant for such refund, the town
will honor an application for a refund by such surviving spouse, even though
the application is not timely made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 47, Series of 1980)
1-9-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Subject to the approval of the town manager, the town clerk may promulgate such
rules and regulations as he deems appropriate for the administration of this
chapter, and such rules and regulations may, among other things, impose
reasonable requirements upon applicants regarding proof of age, rental
payments, property taxes paid, place or residence or other times of
eligibility. (Ord. 47, Series of 1980)
1-9-7: FALSE STATEMENTS:
No person applying for benefits under this chapter shall make any false
statement or submit any false information either knowingly or with a careless
disregard for the truth of the statement made or information submitted. A
violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in subsection 1-4-1C
of this title. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the applicant
may also be disqualified from any future benefits under this chapter. (Ord.
473, Series of 2013)
CHAPTER 10
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
SECTION:
1-10-1: Title
1-10-2: Definitions
1-10-3: Imposition Of Tax
1-10-4: Persons Liable For Tax
1-10-5: Amount Of Tax
1-10-6: Exemptions
1-10-7: Application For Exemption
1-10-8: Lands Affected By Tax
1-10-9: Enforcement
1-10-10: Due Dates, Delinquencies, Penalties, Interest, Evasion
1-10-11: Lien
1-10-12: Review
1-10-13: Effective Date
1-10-14: Transfer Between Co-Owners
1-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WINTER PARK REAL ESTATE
TRANSFER TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord. 101, Series of 1983)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
CONSIDERATION: The gross consideration paid for the real property affected by
the "transfer" and shall include actual cash paid, the money equivalent of real
and personal property delivered or conveyed in exchange for the transfer, or
contracted to be paid or delivered or conveyed, in return for the transfer of
ownership or interests in real property, and shall include the amount of any
lien, mortgage, contract indebtedness, or other encumbrance or debt, either
given to secure the purchase price, or any part thereof, or remaining unpaid on
the property at the time of the transfer. The term does not include as an
addition to gross consideration the amount of any outstanding lien or
encumbrance in favor of the United States, the state of Colorado, or of a
municipal or quasi-municipal corporation or district for taxes, special
benefits or improvements. In the event the transaction or transfer is by lease
agreement not specifically exempted in Section
1-10-6, the consideration shall be deemed to be the capitalized value of the
average annual rental unit of the lease, computed as follows: the average
annual rental over the entire term of the lease, including any renewal term,
plus the actual consideration, other than rent, paid or to be paid shall be
computed and the average annual rental shall be ten percent (10%) of the
capitalized value. The payment of ad valorem real property taxes, insurance and
the assumption of maintenance obligations shall not be included in the annual
rent-capitalization computation; however, capital improvements required to be
made shall be part of the actual consideration. When the average annual rental
cannot be determined, or at the election of the Town Manager, the tax shall be
based upon the appraised total value of the property covered by the lease as
determined by an independent appraisal obtained by the Town Manager and paid
for by the purchaser, or the capitalized value of the consideration in terms of
the present worth of the stream of consideration under the lease and any other
economic considerations to reflect the capitalized value of the transferred or
leased property. (Ord. 101, Series of 1983)
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE: A conveyance by a property owner to a secured
party of property which is the subject of a mortgage, deed of trust or other
security instrument in consideration of the cancellation of all or part of the
indebtedness secured by such security instrument. (Ord. 171, Series of 1988)
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association or any other legal entity.
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX: The tax imposed by this Chapter on the transfer of
real property.
REAL PROPERTY: As defined by and under the laws of the State of Colorado.
TAXABLE LEASE: Any lease of real property with a term or initial term and all
renewal terms which aggregate in length of twenty nine (29) years or more;
provided lessee has possession or the right to possession on payment of rents.
"Taxable lease" also means any lease of real property for less than twenty nine
(29) years of term or initial term and all renewal terms aggregated if lessee
has a clause which would permit lessee at its discretion to extend the lease
beyond twenty nine (29) years or if lessee has an option to purchase some or
all of the real property leased. If lessee has a lease with such an option to
purchase which option may be exercised only within three (3) years after the
date of the lease and option is entered into, then the land transfer tax shall
not be due and payable unless and until the exercise and consummation of such
option. If any other lease with such an option to purchase is entered into, the
real estate transfer tax shall be due and payable at the time of such transfer
as transfer is defined herein.
TRANSFER: Transfer, whether or not the same is in writing or is recorded, means
and includes (a) any sale, grant, assignment, transfer, exchange, or conveyance
of any ownership or title to real property situated in the Town, (b) the sale,
leasing, letting, conveyance, assignment or transfer of a possessory interest
in real property, subject to the exemptions provided in this Chapter.
1-10-3: IMPOSITION OF TAX 1 :
There is hereby imposed a tax on all transfers whether by deeds, contract
instruments, writings, leases or any other documents or otherwise by which any
lands, tenements or other interests in real property located in the Town are
sold, granted, let, assigned, transferred, exchanged or otherwise conveyed to
or vested in a purchaser, or purchasers thereof, or any other person or
persons, except as may be specifically exempted by Section
1-10-6 hereof. Said tax shall be due and payable contemporaneously with the
transfer of the real property as hereinafter specified.
 
Notes
1 1. Charter §12.1.
1-10-4: PERSONS LIABLE FOR TAX:
Each purchaser and any other person or persons to whom a transfer is made,
which transfer is subject to the tax imposed under Section
1-10-3 above, shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax. The
purchaser or person to whom a transfer is made shall remit the tax to the Town.
1-10-5: AMOUNT OF TAX:
The amount of tax payable in each case shall be as follows:
   A.   Where there is no consideration or when the consideration is five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, no real estate transfer tax shall be
payable.
   B.   Where the consideration shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00),
the real estate transfer tax payable shall be one percent (1%) of the
consideration, the proceeds of which tax shall be deposited in the General Fund
or any special fund or funds of the Town the Town Council shall determine from
time to time. (Ord. 101, Series of 1983)
   C.   Where there is a taxable transfer between co-owners, the real estate
transfer tax shall be determined in accordance with Section
1-10-14. (Ord. 171, Series of 1988)
1-10-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The real estate transfer tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Any transfer wherein the United States, or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, the state of Colorado, any county, city and county,
municipality, district or other political subdivision of this state, is the
grantee. (Ord. 182, Series of 1990)
   B.   Any gift of real property, where there is no consideration other than
love and affection or charitable donation.
   C.   Any transfer by document, decree or agreement partitioning, terminating
or evidencing termination, of a joint tenancy, tenancy in common or other co-
ownership in real property; however, if additional consideration or value is
paid in connection with such partition or termination, the tax shall apply and
be based upon such consideration.
   D.   The transfer of title or change of interest in real property by reason
of death, pursuant to a will, the law of descent and distribution, or
otherwise. (Ord. 101, Series of 1983)
   E.   Transfers made pursuant to reorganization, merger or consolidation of
corporations, or by a subsidiary to a parent corporation for no consideration
other than cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's stock, or transfers
made to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
business trust or other association or organization if that association or
organization is owned by the persons by whom such transfer was made if such
owners have the same relative interests in said association or organization as
they had in the real property immediately prior to said transfer and there is
no consideration other than their respective interests in the new association
or organization or the consideration does not exceed the purchase price
originally paid by the transferor of that real property as demonstrated by
records of the Grand County assessor. In the event that a transfer which
otherwise meets the conditions set forth in this subsection E except that the
consideration for such transfer exceeds the purchase price originally paid for
the real property, the tax imposed hereby shall be imposed only as to the
amount of the subsequent purchase price that exceeds the original purchase
price. (Ord. 389, Series of 2006)
   F.   Transfers to make effective any plan confirmed or ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction under the bankruptcy code 1  or in an equity
receivership proceeding.
   G.   Any transfer made and delivered without consideration for the purpose
of confirming, correcting, modifying or supplementing a transfer previously
recorded; making minor boundary adjustment; removing clouds on titles; or
granting rights of way, easements or licenses.
   H.   Any decree or order of a court of record quieting, determining or
resting title, including a final order awarding title pursuant to a
condemnation proceeding.
   I.   Any transfer of cemetery lots.
   J.   Any lease of any real property (or assignment or transfer of any
interest in any such lease) provided the terms and conditions of such lease do
not constitute a taxable lease of the property.
   K.   Any mineral transfer or royalty transfer.
   L.   Transfers to secure a debt or other obligation, or releases of real
property which is security for a debt or other obligation.
   M.   An executory contract for the sale of real property of less than three
(3) years' duration under which the vendee is entitled to or does take
possession thereof without acquiring title thereto or any assignment or
cancellation of any such contract.
   N.   Any transfer that is made pursuant to a valid and legally enforceable
contract for sale entered into between the seller and purchaser prior to the
date of adoption of this chapter pursuant to which transaction the deed or
instrument of conveyance is executed and recorded on or before November 1,
1983.
   O.   Any transfer that is made pursuant to a valid and legally enforceable
presale contract: 1) entered into between a seller and a purchaser prior to the
date of adoption of this chapter; 2) pursuant to which transaction the deed or
instrument of conveyance is executed and recorded on or before January 1, 1984.
A "presale contract" is defined as a valid and legally enforceable contract for
the sale of real property which has been signed prior to the commencement of
construction of improvements thereon, to be closed following completion of the
improvements and pursuant to which contract seller is obligated to construct
the improvements to the property after the contract is signed and prior to the
closing date of the contract.
   P.   Any sale or conveyance of real property or improvements for the purpose
of constructing, or providing low or moderate priced housing units for sale or
lease to low or moderate income persons; provided, that the parties to the
transaction shall apply to the town manager for the exemption prior to its
being allowed, and the parties shall agree to appropriately restrict the future
use of the property to low and moderate priced housing units by recorded
agreement, deed, restrictions, covenants, declarations, or similar instrument
as may be required by the town council.
   Q.   Simultaneous interim transfers to accommodate "like kind" exchanges
pursuant to section 1031(a) IRC, provided the end transferees in such
transactions shall be subject to the transfer tax on real property ultimately
received by them in such transaction. (Ord. 101, Series of 1983)
   R.   Any transfer by deed in lieu of foreclosure, on the condition that:
      1.   Such transfer shall be exempt only if the grantee in such deed is
the same person or entity which is the holder, payee, or beneficiary (as
determined at the time of the transfer by deed) of the debt or instrument which
is being canceled, in whole or in part, in exchange for the transfer; and
      2.   Such transfer shall be exempt only to the extent of the current
amount of the debt which is being canceled in exchange for the transfer.
   S.   Any transfer by sheriff's deed, trustee's deed or other conveyance of
real property in connection with an execution sale, foreclosure sale by the
public trustee under a power of sale, court decree foreclosing a mortgage, deed
of trust or other security instrument, or court decree of lien foreclosure, on
the condition that:
      1.   Such transfer shall be exempt only if the grantee in such deed is
the same person or entity which is the holder, payee, or beneficiary (as
determined at the time of the commencement of foreclosure or execution) of the
debt or instrument which is the basis of the proceeding, or such person or
entity is a junior lienor exercising redemption rights pursuant to a lien that
was recorded prior to commencement of the foreclosure or execution; and
      2.   Such transfer shall be exempt only to the extent of the current
amount of the obligation satisfied at the execution or foreclosure sale, plus
any obligations to prior lienholders paid from the sale; and
      3.   The certificate of purchase or other evidence of purchase issued by
the person or entity conducting the sale shall, if the above described
conditions are met, be exempt from the within transfer tax. If the conditions
are not so satisfied, there shall be a tax imposed as provided herein, at the
time of the issuance of the certificate of purchase or other evidence of
purchase issued by the person or entity conducting the sale, which payment
shall be made to the town in escrow. If no redemption is made by the owner, the
tax shall become absolute to the town upon expiration of owner's redemption
periods. If redemption is made by owner, the tax shall be refunded to the
person who paid it to the town. A transfer of the certificate of purchase or
other evidence of purchase issued by the person or entity conducting the sale
shall be subject to a transfer tax. The deed issued by the person or entity
conducting the sale is not a transfer subject to the transfer tax. (Ord. 171,
Series of 1988)
   T.   Simultaneous interim transfers of an individual parcel within a twenty
four (24) hour period provided the end transferees in such transactions shall
be subject to the transfer tax on real property received by them in such
transaction. (Ord. 436, Series of 2010)
 
Notes
1 1. CRS §6-10-101 et seq.
1-10-7: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
   A.   In the event of any transfer claimed to be exempt from the real estate
transfer tax herein imposed, the grantor or purchaser shall apply for and
obtain from the town manager a certificate of exemption, which may be affixed
to the deed or instrument of transfer. The burden of proving any exemptions
shall in all cases be upon the one claiming it. Provided, further, that the
exemptions provided in section
1-10-6 of this chapter shall be allowed only with a certificate of exemption
issued by the town manager. The certificate of exemption may be issued by the
town manager either before or after the execution of the instruments effecting
the transfer at the convenience of the party applying for the exemption. The
certificate of exemption shall be in a current form as prepared by the town
manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 436, Series of 2010)
   B.   Any person whose claim of exemption duly applied for under the
provisions of this section is denied by the town manager may immediately appeal
to the town council for a determination of such exemption and such appeal shall
be considered by the town council within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
same. In the event of a determination by the town council favorable to the
appellant, any amount previously deposited, or so much thereof as may be
allowed by the town manager, shall be promptly refunded to the person paying or
depositing the same. If a decision is not made by the town council within
thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal, the decision will be deemed
favorable to the appellant, unless appellant has obtained a continuance of the
matter, in which case the town council shall make its decision within six (6)
months after receipt of the appeal.
   C.   In case of an application for an exemption which is not granted before
the transfer takes place, the tax shall be paid as required by this chapter.
Thereafter if the exemption shall be allowed, upon application to the town
manager, the person who has paid said tax shall qualify for refunding pursuant
to the exemption granted. (Ord. 101, Series of 1988)
1-10-8: LANDS AFFECTED BY TAX:
When a transfer subject to this chapter includes real property located within
the town of Winter Park and real property located elsewhere, the tax imposed
under the authority of this chapter shall be computed only with respect to real
property located within the town and the tax shall be assessed based on that
part of the consideration fairly attributable to such real property located
within the town. (Ord. 101, Series of 1988)
1-10-9: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The town manager is charged with the provisions of this chapter and is
hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce
rules and regulations pertaining thereto.
   B.   At the time of any transfer upon which a tax is imposed or which is
claimed to be exempt under this chapter, there shall be made a report to the
town manager on forms prescribed by him, setting forth the true, complete and
actual consideration for the transfer, the name of the parties thereto, the
location of the real property transferred, the basis of the claimed exemption,
and such other information as he may require.
   C.   For the purpose of collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter, all
banks, title companies, escrow companies, building and loan institutions,
attorneys, real estate agencies, or other closing agents or agencies, permitted
as such to do business under the laws of the state of Colorado may collect the
real estate transfer tax (holding said funds in trust for the town) and remit
the same to the town for and on behalf of the purchaser, forthwith. Said funds
shall not be commingled with other funds of the collector.
   D.   The town manager is hereby authorized to negotiate and enter into an
intergovernmental contract with appropriate officers of Grand County for the
collection of this tax, including the payment of a fee to the county officers
for said collection.
   E.   In the event purchaser fails or refuses to provide full and complete
information regarding the consideration paid for transfer of real property
subject to the transfer tax, the town manager may obtain an independent
appraisal at purchaser's cost and the transfer tax will be computed on the
appraised value as determined by said appraiser. (Ord. 101, Series of 1988)
1-10-10: DUE DATES, DELINQUENCIES, PENALTIES, INTEREST, EVASION:
   A.   The tax imposed under this chapter is due and payable at the time of
the transfer, and is delinquent if it remains unpaid for thirty (30) days
thereafter. In the event that the tax is not paid prior to becoming delinquent,
a delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of tax due shall
accrue. In the event a portion of the tax is paid prior to becoming delinquent,
the penalty shall only accrue as to the portion which is delinquent. Interest
shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month, or
fraction thereof, compounded annually, on the amount of tax, exclusive of
penalties, from the date the tax becomes delinquent to the date of payment.
Town shall also be entitled to recover the reasonable expenses of collection,
including reasonable attorney fees and court costs. Such costs of collection,
interest and penalties shall become part of the tax. (Ord. 171, Series of 1988)
   B.   Any person liable for a real estate transfer tax upon a transfer who
shall cause the deed, instrument of conveyance or document evidencing said
transfer to be filed of record in the office of the Grand County clerk and
recorder or attempt to so record the document until and unless the real estate
transfer tax and all penalties and interest thereon have been paid in full,
shall be in violation of this chapter.
   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
1-10-6 of this chapter, if an artifice or device is employed in connection with
the transfer of real property, which term "artifice or device" means a
transaction or transactions a substantial purpose of which was to evade the
provisions of this chapter and the imposition of the tax hereunder, then such
transfer will nevertheless be subject to the real estate transfer tax.
"Artifice or device" includes, but is not limited to: 1) a transfer to a
corporation, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, business trust,
or other association or organization followed within three (3) years by an
assignment of the controlling interest in such association or organization, 2)
such a transfer plus the intent to ultimately assign the controlling interest
in such association or organization. (Ord. 101, Series of 1983)
1-10-11: LIEN:
   A.   The tax imposed by this chapter, and any penalty and interest due
thereon, if not paid when due, and all costs of collection of said tax, penalty
and interest, shall constitute a perpetual lien on the real property
transferred in the amount applicable to each lot or parcel of real property
transferred and shall have priority over all other liens except general tax
liens and special improvement district assessment liens. Except as aforesaid,
the lien for said tax shall be and until paid shall remain a first and prior
lien superior to all other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. Said
lien shall continue until the amount thereof is paid or until its discharge of
record by foreclosure or otherwise.
   B.   The recording of this chapter in the office of the clerk and recorder
of the county of Grand, state of Colorado, shall constitute notice to all
persons interested in the transfer of real property of the existence of and the
lien imposed by the real estate transfer tax.
   C.   If the tax is unpaid and delinquent, the town manager shall give
written notification to the purchaser or person to whom the transfer is made at
the address shown on any deed or instrument evidencing the transfer, or his
last known address, of said delinquency. Said notification shall be mailed
certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and
shall be effective on the date of mailing. If the tax, penalty and interest are
not paid within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the notification, the
town manager shall commence foreclosure of the lien for said tax in the same
manner as the foreclosure of a mortgage in accordance with Colorado law 1 .
   D.   The amount of the tax, penalty and interest imposed under the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the town. Any person owing
money to the town under the provision of this chapter shall be liable to an
action brought in the name of the town for the recovery of such amount. (Ord.
101, Series of 1983)
   E.   Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay any tax due hereunder may be
punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this title. (Ord. 473, Series of
2013)
   F.   Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 101,
Series of 1983)
 
Notes
1 1. CRS §38-39-101 et seq.
1-10-12: REVIEW:
The town manager shall prepare a report of the receipts from the real estate
transfer tax expenditures made in the preceding fiscal year, funds into which
the proceeds have been deposited, the disposition of those funds, and the
projected revenue and expenditures for the next fiscal year. (Ord. 101, Series
of 1983)
1-10-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The effective date of this chapter shall be August 1, 1983. (Ord. 101, Series
of 1983)
1-10-14: TRANSFER BETWEEN CO-OWNERS:
   A.   A nonexempt transfer from one or more co-owners to another co-owner or
co-owners is taxable in accordance with this section. The real estate transfer
tax payable with respect to such transfer shall be one percent (1%) of the
gross consideration paid by the grantee to the grantor for the transfer.
Notwithstanding the definition of "consideration" contained in section
1-10-2 of this chapter, for the purpose of this section, "gross consideration"
shall mean and include:
      1.   Actual cash paid, the money equivalent of real and personal property
delivered or conveyed in exchange for the transfer, or contracted to be paid or
delivered or conveyed in return for the transfer; plus
      2.   The amount of any lien, mortgage, contract, indebtedness or other
encumbrance or debt given to secure the purchase price, or any part thereof;
plus
      3.   The grantor's proportionate share of the unpaid balance of any debt
which is owed against the property at the time of the transfer and not
satisfied in connection with such transfer. For purposes of this subsection A3,
the "grantor's proportionate share of any unpaid debt which is owed against the
property at the time of the transfer" shall be determined by multiplying the
grantor's fractional or percentage ownership interest in the property prior to
the transfer, times the unpaid balance of such debt existing as of the time of
the transfer.
   B.   The term "gross consideration" does not include as an addition thereto
the amount of any outstanding lien or encumbrance in favor of any government or
quasi-government corporation or district for taxes, special benefits or
improvements.
   C.   The real estate transfer tax on any transfer between co- owners by
lease agreement shall be determined in accordance with the definition of
"consideration" contained in section
1-10-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 171, Series of 1988)
CHAPTER 11
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
SECTION:
1-11-1: Definitions
1-11-2: Fees Established
1-11-3: Payment And Disposition Of Fees
1-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section shall govern the construction of this chapter.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy.
CONSTRUCT: The putting together, assembling, erecting or altering of
construction materials, components or modulars into a structure, or a portion
of a structure.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or a portion of a building, designed for use as a
residence of one family, living independently of other families or persons, and
having its own bathroom, sleeping, and cooking facilities included within said
unit.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage
or a group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants) who need not
be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit. (Ord. 208,
Series of 1993)
1-11-2: FEES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Building valuation schedule: For any building permit fee based on
building valuation imposed by ordinance or code adopted by the town, the
building valuation shall be determined by multiplying the construction values,
as set by resolution of Town Council, by the gross square footage of the
proposed construction.
   B.   Permit fees: All building permit fees charged under any ordinance or
code adopted by the town shall be set by resolution of Town Council.
   C.   Other inspections and fees: A plan review fee of 65 percent of the
building permit fee shall apply and is separate from and in addition to the
building permit fee. Other building plan review or building inspection fees may
be set by resolution of Town Council. (Ord. 593, Series of 2022)
1-11-3: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES:
   A.   The fees imposed under this chapter shall be due and payable as
follows: Fees shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of a building
permit.
   B.   The fees imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the building
official of the town at the offices of the municipality. (Ord. 208, Series of
1993)
   C.   All applicants for a building permit shall submit an affidavit
demonstrating that the property owner understands the risk of employing an
uninsured contractor and is satisfied with the insurance provided by the
contractor(s) for that project. This affidavit shall be executed by the
property owner and witnessed by a notary public. To assure paperwork is kept to
a minimum the town manager shall prepare a single page insurance affidavit for
this purpose. (Ord. 392, Series of 2007)
CHAPTER 12
WATER AND SEWER FACILITY CONSTRUCTION FEE
SECTION:
1-12-1: Water and Sewer Facility Construction Fee
1-12-2: Amount of Fee
1-12-3: Notice of Intent to Impose Fee
1-12-4: Payment of Fee
1-12-1: WATER AND SEWER FACILITY CONSTRUCTION FEE:
There is hereby imposed a water and sewer facility construction fee which shall
be calculated in the manner specified in Section
1-12-2 below, and which shall be imposed on all properties which do not already
have active connections to water and/or wastewater mains and which adjoin
streets or roads paved by the Town from and after the effective date of this
Chapter, and in which the Town constructs or installs, at the time of paving,
water and/or sewer facilities including, but not limited to, lines and in-
street service laterals, designed to serve such adjoining properties. (Ord.
214, Series of 1993)
1-12-2: AMOUNT OF FEE:
The amount of the water and sewer facilities construction fee applicable to
each adjoining property shall be determined by the Town Manager and shall be
calculated by dividing the actual cost to the Town of installing and
constructing the in- street water and/or sewer facilities, divided pro rata
among the adjoining properties on either a per lot or square footage basis
whichever, in the discretion of the Town Manager, most fairly allocates the
cost of the water and/or sewer facilities among the adjoining properties. (Ord.
214, Series of 1993)
1-12-3: NOTICE OF INTENT TO IMPOSE FEE:
Prior to commencement of construction of any water and sewer facilities in
relation to which the Town will impose a water and sewer facility construction
fee, the Town shall give written notice to the owners of all adjoining
properties, as shown in the Town's records, of the Town's intent to commence
such construction and to impose the fee which notice shall state the estimated
amount of the fee and the available methods for payment thereof. (Ord. 214,
Series of 1993)
1-12-4: PAYMENT OF FEE:
   A.   Upon completion of the construction of the water and/or sewer
facilities, the Town Manager shall calculate the final water and sewer facility
construction fee for such adjoining property in the manner prescribed by
Section
1-12-2, and shall send to each owner of adjoining property, by registered mail,
an invoice for the water and sewer facility construction fee.
   B.   The water and sewer facility construction fee shall be due and payable
thirty (30) days after the mailing of the invoice; provided, however, that the
owner of any adjoining property may delay payment of the water and sewer
construction fee until such time as a building permit is requested for the
construction of a structure on such owner's adjoining property at which time
the owner or person requesting such building permit shall pay the full amount
of the water and sewer construction fee, plus interest thereon at the rate of
eight percent (8%), compounded annually, as a prerequisite to the issuance of
any building permit for any construction on such adjoining property. The Town
may, but is under no obligation to, record notice of the pendency of the water
and sewer facility construction fee in the records of the Grand County Clerk
and Recorder so as to provide notice to subsequent purchasers of such adjoining
properties of the requirements that the water and sewer facility construction
fee be paid before any building permit will issue. (Ord. 214, Series of 1993)
CHAPTER 13
CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Design/Build Contracts
1-13-1: DESIGN/BUILD CONTRACTS:
   A.   Authority is hereby granted to the town council to enter into design/
build contracts without the necessity of public bidding for projects that are
undertaken and paid for, in whole or in part, by the town within the boundaries
of the town. The determination as to whether or not to enter into such design/
build contracts shall be made by the town council on a case by case basis, and
shall be made only after a reasonable inquiry by the town council. A design/
build contract shall either be pursued by the town when specialization is
required or when significant time and/or money savings will be realized by the
town.
   B.   Nothing contained here shall require the town council to enter into
design/build contracts.
   C.   The town council specifically finds and determines that the
determination to enter into a design/build contract on a case by case basis is
a matter of purely local concern, and consequently the town council has
determined that adoption and implementation of this section is a matter
governed by the home rule charter of the town of Winter Park rather than the
general statutes of the state of Colorado. (Ord. 355, Series of 2005)
CHAPTER 14
PROPERTY, ABANDONED AND UNCLAIMED
SECTION:
1-14-1: Purpose
1-14-2: Definitions
1-14-3: Procedure For Disposition Of Sums Payable By Check
1-14-4: Procedure For The Disposition Of Unclaimed Property
1-14-5: Withholding Costs
1-14-6: Destruction Of Unclaimed Property Having Insubstantial Commercial
Value; Immunity From Liability
1-14-7: Administrative Procedures
1-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration and
disposition of unclaimed property which unless otherwise provided herein is
presumed abandoned. (Ord. 422, Series of 2009)
1-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms used in this
chapter shall be defined as follows:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The town chief of police or his designee.
CLERK: The town clerk or designee thereof.
OWNER: A person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, a
governmental entity other than this municipality, or a duly authorized legal
representative or successor in interest of the same, that owns unclaimed
property or who the town believes is the owner of unclaimed property.
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY: Any tangible or intangible property, including any income
or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges that is held by or
under the control of the town and that has not been claimed by its owner for a
period of more than sixty (60) days after it became payable or distributable.
The term "unclaimed property" shall not include abandoned motor vehicles as
defined in title 4, chapter 4 of this code, found or confiscated firearms,
items of evidence acquired by the town related to its law enforcement
activities, any item which the possession of is prohibited by law, or any
property acquired in accordance with any federal or state contraband forfeiture
laws, or unclaimed bond payments. (Ord. 422, Series of 2009)
1-14-3: PROCEDURE FOR DISPOSITION OF SUMS PAYABLE BY CHECK:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any sum
payable on a check of which the town is liable, that has been outstanding for a
period of at least six (6) months after it was payable or after its issuance if
payable on demand, is deemed abandoned and without providing notice, the town
finance director may write off the amount of such check. (Ord. 422, Series of
2009)
1-14-4: PROCEDURE FOR THE DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
   A.   Notice; Value Fifty Dollars Or More And Owner Known Or Suspected: Prior
to the disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more and for which the identity of the owner is known or
suspected, the chief of police shall provide the clerk with an identification
of such property, and the clerk shall send a written notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any known or
suspected owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner
shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the town
department or agency holding the property. The notice shall include a
description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property, and
when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise
held. The notice shall also state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim
the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide
the clerk with a written claim for the return of the property within thirty
(30) days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole
property of the town, and any claim of the owner to such property shall be
deemed forfeited.
   B.   Notice; Value Less Than Fifty Dollars Or No Known Or Suspected Identity
Of The Owner Or No Last Known Address: Prior to the disposition of any
unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than fifty dollars
($50.00), or for which there is no known or suspected identity of the owner, or
for which there is no last known address of the owner, the chief of police
shall provide the clerk with an identification of such property, and the clerk
shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the town. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of
the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when
available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held.
The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the
property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the
clerk with a written claim for the return of the property within thirty (30)
days of the date of the publication of the notice, the unclaimed property shall
become the sole property of the town and any claim of the owner to such
property shall be deemed forfeited.
   C.   Forfeiture: If the clerk receives no written claim within the above
thirty (30) day claim period, the unclaimed property shall become the sole
property of the town, and any claim of the owner to such property shall be
deemed forfeited.
   D.   Written Claims: If the clerk receives a written claim within the above
thirty (30) day claim period, the chief of police shall evaluate the claim and
give written notice to the claimant within ninety (90) days thereof that the
claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The chief of police may
investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting
documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the
unclaimed property.
   E.   Multiple Claimants: In the event that there is more than one claimant
for the same unclaimed property, the chief of police may, in the chief of
police's sole discretion, resolve any claim as the chief of police sees fit, or
may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed unclaimed property with the
registry of the court having jurisdiction over such claims in an interpleaded
action.
   F.   Denial Of Claims: In the event that all claims filed are denied, the
unclaimed property shall become the sole property of the town, and any claim of
the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited.
   G.   Appeal: Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the chief of
police shall be filed pursuant to rule 106 of the Colorado rules of civil
procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred.
If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the
chief of police pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over
such claim.
   H.   Disposal At Chief Of Police's Discretion: At any time after any deemed
forfeiture under subsection C of this section, and not less than thirty (30)
days after the chief of police's final decision determining the town's sole
ownership to any unclaimed property described in this chapter, the chief of
police in his discretion is hereby authorized to dispose of the unclaimed
property in any manner in which the chief of police determines, including,
without limitation, retaining the property for use by the town, selling the
property as provided for herein, giving the property to the finder thereof, or
donating the property to any person or organization, except as outlined in
subsection K of this section.
   I.   Sale Of Unclaimed Property: If the chief of police determines that any
unclaimed property should be sold, then at any time after any deemed forfeiture
under subsection C of this section and not less than thirty (30) days after the
chief of police's final decision determining the town's sole ownership to any
unclaimed property described in this chapter, the chief of police shall
publicly sell or arrange for the public sale of all such unclaimed property for
the highest and best price the same will bring in cash or other verified form
of payment, which sale may be accomplished through any reasonable means,
including, but not limited to, contracting with a third party for live or
online auction services.
   J.   Sale Of Perishable, Bulky, Etc., Property: Notwithstanding any other
provision in this chapter, if any unclaimed property is of a perishable nature
or so bulky or of such a nature as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to
retain possession thereof for the length of time specified in this chapter, the
chief of police, upon setting forth reasons why such property should not be
retained for the fixed period before selling or disposing of the same, may
cause the unclaimed property to be advertised forthwith in a newspaper legally
qualified for municipal publications and sell or dispose of such property at a
public sale at any time after three (3) days have elapsed from the time the
town acquires the unclaimed property.
   K.   Personal Ownership Prohibited By Town Employees: No unclaimed property
shall be given to any current town employee or a member of that employee's
family unless that employee or family member rightfully purchases same in
accordance with subsection I of this section. This section shall not apply to
those items converted to town ownership and issued to a specific department or
employee for use in that employee's duties with the town. (Ord. 422, Series of
2009)
1-14-5: WITHHOLDING COSTS:
Prior to the return of any unclaimed property, the town may assess carrying
costs against the owner thereof or pass on any costs incurred by the town as a
result of holding the unclaimed property to the recipient of any unclaimed
property, if the chief of police determines that the assessment of such costs
is warranted. Any amount assessed under this chapter shall be paid to the town
prior to release of the unclaimed property. (Ord. 422, Series of 2009)
1-14-6: DESTRUCTION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY HAVING INSUBSTANTIAL COMMERCIAL
VALUE; IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, if the
chief of police determines after investigation that any unclaimed property has
insubstantial commercial value, the chief of police may direct the destruction
or disposal of such property at any time and without notice. No action or
proceeding may be maintained against the town or any officer or employee for or
on account of any action taken under this section. (Ord. 422, Series of 2009)
1-14-7: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
The chief of police and/or the clerk are authorized to establish and administer
procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property
consistent with this chapter, including compliance requirements for other town
officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property.
(Ord. 422, Series of 2009)
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Administrative Fee Schedule
1-15-1: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE:
Fees for specified administrative services shall be as set forth by resolution
of Town Council. (Ord. 593, Series of 2022)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created
2-1-2: Organization And Meetings Of The Commission
2-1-3: Expenditures
2-1-4: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is created by the town council a planning and zoning commission composed
of seven (7) members who shall act in an advisory capacity to the town council
on matters set forth in this chapter, and shall be appointed and serve as
provided in section 8.3 of the home rule charter. Each appointed planning and
zoning commission member shall receive for each regular or special meeting for
which a quorum is present and pursuant to the attendance policy adopted by the
commission compensation in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(Ord. 365, Series of 2005; amd. Ord. 594, Series of 2023)
2-1-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS OF THE COMMISSION:
The commission shall elect its chairman from among its members and create and
fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman
shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold at
least one regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, which record shall be a public record kept in the office of the
town clerk. (Ord. 7, Series of 1978)
2-1-3: EXPENDITURES:
All expenditures of the commission shall be determined and appropriated by the
town council. The council shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations
necessary for the commission's work. The expenditures of the commission shall
not exceed that amount determined and appropriated for its use by the town
council. After obtaining the approval of a majority of the town council, the
commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work,
whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same
provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the town.
2-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES 1 :
   A.   Master Plan: It shall be the function and duty of the commission to
make and adopt a master plan, for approval by the town council, for the
physical development of the town, including any areas outside of its
boundaries, subject to the approval of the legislative or governing body having
jurisdiction thereof, which in the commission's judgment bear relation to the
planning of the town. This plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and
descriptive matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the
development of the territory. The adoption, enforcement and status of the
master plan shall be in compliance with state law.
   B.   Zoning Ordinance 2 : The commission shall prepare for the approval of
the town council, a zoning ordinance, with appropriate land use regulations. An
official zoning map recommending the boundaries of the various zoning districts
shall be prepared and updated as needed by the commission for approval by the
town council by resolution of both bodies. The adoption, enforcement, status
and alteration of the zoning ordinance shall be in compliance with the law as
set forth in the state statutes and town's home rule charter.
   C.   Subdivision Regulations 3 : The planning commission shall adopt for
approval by the town council such subdivision regulations as the commission
deems proper according to law.
   D.   Design Review: The commission shall review matters regarding building
configurations, colors, materials and general compatibility of proposed
structures and outdoor advertising within the community of Winter Park.
   E.   Additional Functions: The commission shall consider any other matters
pertaining to the commission as provided by law, shall act in an advisory
capacity to the town council when so requested, and shall have all powers and
perform all functions which it is authorized to have and perform by ordinance
and state law.
(Ord. 7, Series of 1978; amd. Ord. 398, Series of 2007; Ord. 594, Series of
2023)
 
Notes
1 1. CRS §31-23-206 et seq.
2 2. CRS §31-23-301 et seq.
3 3. CRS §31-23-214 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
2-2-1: Establishment Of Board; Composition And Terms
2-2-2: Officers Of The Board
2-2-3: Powers And Duties
2-2-4: Procedures
2-2-5: Disposition Of Cases
2-2-6: Application For Variance
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD; COMPOSITION AND TERMS:
A board of adjustment is hereby established, the members of which shall be
members of the town planning commission. The word “board” when used in this
chapter shall be construed to mean the board of adjustment. The board shall
consist of five (5) regular members, plus two (2) additional members designated
as alternates who shall attend for any reason; members of the town planning
commission shall serve as the five (5) regular members and the two (2)
alternates. Each board of adjustment member shall receive for each regular or
special meeting for which a quorum is present compensation in the amount of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). When a board of adjustment meeting and
planning and zoning commission meeting coincides, each member shall be paid for
only one meeting.
(Ord. 485, Series of 2014; amd. Ord. 594, Series of 2022)
2-2-2: OFFICERS OF THE BOARD:
At its first regular meeting of each year, the board shall select a chairman, a
vice chairman and a secretary. The secretary may or may not be a member of such
board. The chairman shall preside at meetings and shall perform all duties as
usual and ordinary for the presiding officer of any board or group. The vice
chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman in the absence of the
chairman. The secretary shall keep full and complete minutes and records of all
meetings and shall have the custody of all the records and shall generally
supervise all of the clerical work of the board and perform the duties usually
performed by the secretary of a board or group. (Ord. 485, Series of 2014)
2-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have all powers granted to it by section 31-23-201 et seq., of
the Colorado Revised Statutes, and as more particularly described in title 7,
chapter 8 of this code. (Ord. 485, Series of 2014)
2-2-4: PROCEDURES:
The board of adjustment shall adopt bylaws and rules of procedure that shall be
approved by the town council and shall hold a public hearing on all
applications and appeals with the following special conditions required:
   A.   A notice of the hearing shall be given to the persons in the area
affected in the manner prescribed by the board of adjustment.
   B.   For applications for variances relating to the use requirements of this
chapter, the applicant shall be responsible for posting of signs, prepared by
the planning department. Such sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the subject premises no less than fifteen (15) days before such public hearing.
   C.   Any final determination of the board of adjustment shall be reported in
writing over the signature of the chairman of such board, and a copy of such
report shall be furnished the applicant, the planning department and the town
clerk. The board of adjustment shall authorize issuance of any permits,
licenses or other instruments necessary to implement or enforce such
determination. (Ord. 485, Series of 2014)
2-2-5: DISPOSITION OF CASES:
   A.   Every decision of the board on any case shall be by record resolution
indicating the reasons of the board therefor.
   B.   The final disposition of any appeal from the chief building inspector
or the town planner before the board of adjustment shall be in the form of a
resolution either affirming, reversing or modifying the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from. If a resolution fails to receive four
(4) votes in favor of the appellant upon appeal or of the applicant for a
variation from the zoning regulations the action will be deemed equivalent to a
denial, and a resolution denying such application or appeal shall be formally
entered upon the record unless there be a member absent at the roll call and
unless the vote of each absent member added to those voting for an applicant or
appellant would equal four (4), in which case the matter will be laid over for
hearing before the full board.
   C.   No request to grant a rehearing will be entertained unless new evidence
is submitted which could not have been, with due diligence, presented at the
previous hearing or at least one year has passed since the previous application
for appeal. (Ord. 485, Series of 2014)
2-2-6: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
   A.   No application for a variance from the course prescribed by the master
plan shall be heard by the board of adjustment except in a specific case, and
from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by the chief
building inspector or the town planner upon the grounds that the proposed plan
or use is contrary to the provisions of the master plan.
   B.   No such application shall be entertained unless the application is
filed within fifteen (15) days after the date of the action of the chief
building inspector or the town planner.
   C.   As soon as any application is completed by the filing of the necessary
data, the board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing,
which hearing shall be no sooner than fifteen (15) days after the initial
posting, and require the posting of a sign, by the applicant, in a conspicuous
place on such premises no less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing.
(Ord. 485, Series of 2014)
CHAPTER 3
TRANSIT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Committee Created
2-3-2: Organization And Meetings Of The Committee
2-3-3: Expenditures
2-3-4: Powers And Duties
2-3-1: COMMITTEE CREATED:
There is created by the Town Council a Transit Advisory Committee composed of
one member appointed by each of the following entities: the town, Winter Park
Resort, Town of Fraser, and Grand County, who shall act in an advisory capacity
to the town council on matters set forth in this chapter. Members shall be
residents of Grand County and appointments shall be for a one-year term or
until a successor takes office. Members appointed may be removed by their
appointing entity. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a
term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the appointing
entity. To achieve overlapping terms, the town member and Town of Fraser
committee member shall initially serve a two-year term. Pursuant to
section 8.2 of the town's charter, neither the mayor nor any town employees may
serve on the committee, and no more than two council members may serve on the
committee. (Ord. 549, Series of 2021)
2-3-2: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE:
The committee shall elect its chairman from among its members and create and
fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be
one year with eligibility for reelection. The committee shall hold at least one
regular meeting each month. Meetings shall be open to the public,
electronically recorded, and shall otherwise comply with the Colorado Open
Meetings Law, C.R.S. § 24-6-401, et seq., as amended. The committee shall adopt
rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be public
records kept in the Office of the Town Clerk. (Ord. 549, Series of 2021)
2-3-3: EXPENDITURES:
All expenditures of the Board shall be determined and appropriated by the Town
Council. The Council shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations
necessary for the committee's work. The expenditures of the board shall not
exceed that amount determined and appropriated for its use by the Town Council.
(Ord. 549, Series of 2021)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council on matters
pertaining to the public transit system such as by making recommendations
related to the annual transit budget, levels of transit service, and the
possible expansion of transit services. (Ord. 549, Series of 2021)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Title
3-1-2: Purpose
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: License Required
3-1-5: License Fee, Payment Amount
3-1-6: Establishment To Obtain License For Each Business
3-1-7: Denial Of License
3-1-8: Revenue Disposition
3-1-9: Requirements Of Licensee
3-1-10: Administration
3-1-11: Conditions Of License
3-1-12: Exemptions
3-1-13: Enforcement
3-1-14: Violation, Penalty
3-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ANNUAL BUSINESS LICENSE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
198, Series of 1991)
3-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to require the annual licensing and limited
regulation of all business conducted within the town and to provide the town
with necessary information concerning the activities of businesses in order to
protect the property, health, welfare, peace or safety of its citizens,
inhabitants and visitors. (Ord. 198, Series of 1991)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BUSINESS: Any business (including sales of tangible personal property and
furnishing of services), profession, occupation, or activity engaged in by a
person for profit, gain, benefit or advantage which is conducted within the
town.
LICENSE YEAR: The license year for business license shall be one year from the
date of issuance.
LICENSEE: Any person required to obtain an annual business license.
MINOR-OPERATED BUSINESS: A business solely operated by persons under the age of
eighteen (18) for not more than eighty-four (84) days in any calendar year.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, estate, trust,
association, joint venture or other entity.
TOWN: The town of Winter Park, Colorado.
(Ord. 198, Series of 1991; amd. Ord. 414, Series of 2008; Ord. 604, Series of
2023)
3-1-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business within the town
without first having obtained an annual business license from the town. (Ord.
198, Series of 1991)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEE, PAYMENT AMOUNT:
   A.   License Fee: The license fee for the annual business license shall be
set by Council resolution. No refunds shall be considered by the town.
   B.   Payment, Term Of License: Every business shall obtain an annual
business license prior to the commencement of business, and shall pay the
license fee specified in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Annual Renewal: It shall be the duty of each licensee to obtain an
annual renewal of such license by payment of the annual license fee to the town
clerk on or before the day of its expiration as provided in subsection B of
this section.
   D.   If a license fee is paid by credit card, the Town may impose a
convenience fee for the use of this alternative form of payment in an amount
not to exceed the actual additional cost incurred by the Town to process the
transaction. Any such convenience fee shall be imposed in accordance with the
rules of the credit card provider. In the event of declined payment or
insufficient funds, the Town may assess a penalty in an amount set by
resolution. After a second declined payment or second instance of insufficient
funds, the Town may require all payments from that business to be by certified
funds, cashier’s check or cash. (Ord. 198, Series of 1991; amd. Ord. 401,
Series of 2008; Ord. 572, Series of 2022)
3-1-6: ESTABLISHMENT TO OBTAIN LICENSE FOR EACH BUSINESS:
An annual business license shall be obtained for each place of business within
the town regardless of whether the business conducted therein is a separate
business or a branch, division or agency of a licensed business situated at
another location in town. (Ord. 198, Series of 1991)
3-1-7: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   An application for an annual business license will be denied by the
town clerk in the event the business sought to be licensed is an unlawful
business or the person applying for the license is not qualified or licensed to
engage in such business under applicable federal or Colorado law.
   B.   In the event an application is denied, the town clerk shall deliver to
the applicant a written order of denial which states the reasons therefor,
together with a refund of the license fee submitted with the application. (Ord.
198, Series of 1991)
3-1-8: REVENUE DISPOSITION:
The license fees collected by the town clerk under this chapter shall be
general revenues which shall be credited to the town's general fund. (Ord. 198,
Series of 1991)
3-1-9: REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEE:
Every licensee under this chapter shall do the following:
   A.   Comply With Laws: Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and
regulations applicable to a licensed business;
   B.   Avoidance Of Illegal Practices: Avoid any illegal, dangerous or harmful
practices or conditions which are detrimental to the public property, health,
welfare, peace or safety;
   C.   Refrain From Business: Refrain from engaging in business on the
licensed premises during the period his license is revoked or suspended;
   D.   Posting: The licensee shall post his current business license in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises at all times. (Ord. 198, Series of
1991)
3-1-10: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of the annual business licenses required by this chapter
shall be vested in the town clerk who is authorized to do the following:
   A.   Collect license fees and issue receipts therefor;
   B.   Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given therein;
   C.   Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary
to the operation and enforcement of this chapter;
   D.   Investigate and determine the eligibility of each applicant for an
annual business license;
   E.   Investigate, determine and order the revocation or suspension of an
annual business license for violation by the licensee of a provision of this
title. (Ord. 198, Series of 1991)
3-1-11: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Public Streets And Rights Of Way: It shall be unlawful to conduct any
business on the public streets or rights of way in the town.
   B.   License Nontransferable: No license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be transferable. (Ord. 198, Series of 1991)
3-1-12: EXEMPTIONS:
The following entities and events shall be exempt from the provisions of this
Chapter:
   A.   Churches or established religious organizations;
   B.   Charitable organizations;
   C.   Hospitals;
   D.   Schools;
   E.   Governments;
   F.   Persons exempt under federal or Colorado law;
   G.   Special events as licensed by the Town of Winter Park;
   H.   Wholesale businesses that are not required to obtain a Colorado retail
sales license;
   I.   Businesses that have a state standard retail license without a physical
presence in the Town, as defined by C.R.S. § 39-26-802.9(2)(e), as amended;
   J.   Businesses that have a state standard retail license with only an
incidental physical presence in the Town, as defined by C.R.S. § 39-26-802.9(2)
(c), as amended;
   K.   Minor-operated businesses;
   L.   Entertainment for which no fee is charged, and which is not subject to
regulation under Chapter 4 of this Title;
   M.   Free distribution of information, flyers, pamphlets, brochures or
petitions; and
   N.   Yard sales.
(Ord. 198, Series of 1991; amd. Ord. 592, Series of 2022; 604, Series of 2023)
3-1-13: ENFORCEMENT:
The town may seek an injunction to restrain a person from engaging in business
within the town who does not obtain an annual business license under this
chapter or whose license is revoked or suspended, and this remedy shall be in
addition to all other remedies prescribed in this chapter or by law. (Ord. 198,
Series of 1991)
3-1-14: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of business without a current business license
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 198, Series of 1991)
CHAPTER 2
TAX ADMINISTRATION CODE
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Legislative Intent
3-2-3: Imposition Of Taxes And Taxation Rates
3-2-4: Application; Construction
3-2-5: Definitions
3-2-6: Taxable Transactions, Commodities And Services
3-2-7: Exempt Transactions, Commodities And "Persons"
3-2-8: Taxpayer (Vendor And Consumer) Liability
3-2-9: Licensing
3-2-10: Reporting
3-2-11: Special Accounting
3-2-12: Administration
3-2-13: Addition To Tax; Penalties And Interest
3-2-14: Overpayments And Refunds
3-2-15: Hearings
3-2-16: Appeals
3-2-17: Assessments; Liens; Distraints; Seizure And Sale; Compromise; Closing
Agreements
3-2-18: Violations; Evasion; Penalty
3-2-19: Limitations
3-2-20: Coordinated Audit Procedure
3-2-21: Intertown Claims For Recovery
3-2-22: Notice Of Sales Tax Ordinance Amendment
3-2-23: Miscellaneous Regulations
3-2-24: Enhanced Sales Tax Incentive Program
3-2-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be known and cited as the TAX
ADMINISTRATION CODE. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-2: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   Regarding The Sale Of Personal Property And Taxable Services: It is
hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the town of Winter Park that,
for the purposes of this chapter, every person who is engaged in "business" in
the town, as herein defined, and who shall deliver or cause to be delivered to
the purchaser in the town, any property or services taxable herein is
exercising a taxable privilege and shall collect the tax imposed by this
chapter on the total purchase price of such article or articles of tangible
personal property or taxable services that are purchased, sold, leased or
rented at any time by or to every customer or buyer, in the manner hereinafter
set forth.
   B.   Constitutional Preclusion From Winter Park Sales Tax: All the sales,
uses and other transactions which the town is prohibited from taxing under the
constitution and laws of the United States, or under the constitution of the
state of Colorado are exempt hereunder. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-3: IMPOSITION OF TAXES AND TAXATION RATES:
   A.   Imposition Of Tax: There is hereby levied and there shall be collected
and paid a tax on the purchase price paid or charged for tangible personal
property and taxable services when purchased or sold at retail, by every person
exercising the taxable privilege as defined in section
3-2-2 of this chapter, by the sale, lease, rental, purchase, use, storage,
distribution or consumption of tangible personal property and taxable services.
   B.   Sales Tax: There is hereby imposed on all sales of tangible personal
property at retail and the furnishing of services, a tax equal to five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts, provided however, that the tax on sales of rooms or
accommodations shall be four percent (4%).
   C.   Lodging Tax: There is hereby imposed a lodging tax in the amount of
three percent (3%) on the purchase price paid or charged to persons for rooms
or accommodations. Leasing or rental of any hotel room, motel room, or other
public accommodation in any hotel, apartment-hotel, motel or trailer court or
park or any similar place to any person, who, for a consideration, uses,
possesses or has the right to use or possess such room or other accommodation
for a total continuous duration of less than thirty (30) days. The revenue
generated by the lodging tax shall be allocated and used as follows:
      1.   One half of one percent (0.5%) for marketing the Winter Park region;
      2.   One half of one percent (0.5%) for capital improvement projects; and
      3.   Two percent (2%) for community housing, childcare and other
community needs.
   D.   Transit Sales Tax: In addition to the taxes set forth in subsections B
and C of this section, there is hereby imposed on all sales of tangible
personal property at retail and the furnishing of services, a tax equal to two
percent (2%) of the gross receipts. Expenditures of the revenue received from
the two percent (2%) transit sales tax shall be used only for the acquisition,
construction, operation, and maintenance of public transit, public multimodal
transportation improvements, and public trails within and near the town.
   E.   Marijuana Sales Tax: In addition to the taxes set forth in subsections
B and D hereof, there is hereby imposed on all sales of regulated marijuana and
regulated marijuana products a tax equal to five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts. One-half of the revenues derived from such tax shall be used
exclusively to promote mental health efforts in the Town. The other one-half of
the revenues derived from such tax shall be used for general municipal
purposes. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994; amd. Ord. 492, Series of 2015; Ord. 559,
Series of 2021; Ord. 617, Series of 2024)
3-2-4: APPLICATION; CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Preamble: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
administration, enforcement and collection of sales and lodging taxes by the
town of Winter Park, including taxes levied and imposed by this title and any
tax provided by ordinance to be administered, enforced or collected pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Uniformity: The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to effect
uniformity of administration, enforcement and collection of taxes, and to
establish uniform procedures, but shall not be construed to extend or increase
the application, rate or amount of any tax levied or imposed by ordinance;
provided, however, that the imposition of a penalty, interest, or both penalty
and interest shall be lawful and shall not be construed as an extension or
increase of the application, rate or amount of tax.
   C.   Home Rule: The purpose of this chapter is to provide the power
necessary to exercise effectively the right to raise revenue that is essential
to home rule and self-government. Any similarities to state law herein are
adopted for the purpose of promoting efficiency in the collection of revenue.
Regardless of any such similarities, the provisions contained herein are matter
of solely local concern. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-5: DEFINITIONS:
When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms,
words, and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACCESS SERVICES: The services furnished by a local exchange company to its
customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide
such telecommunications services.
ACCOMMODATIONS: The transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations by any
person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee,
assignee, lessee, or person acting in a representative capacity or any other
combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who for a
consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a
hotel, inn, bed and breakfast residence, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor
hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, or
trailer court and park, or similar establishment, under any concession, permit,
right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise.
ADJUSTED GROSS SALES AND SERVICES: Gross sales and services with the addition
of:
   A.   Cost of goods purchased tax free by taxpayer and taken from his stock
and used or consumed by him personally or used by him in the rendering of a
service.
   B.   Collection, during the current taxable period, of bad debts that had,
during a previous taxable period, been deducted from adjusted gross sales and
service.
AUCTION SALE: Any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an
auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact
the owner thereof.
AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE: Any vehicle, including every device in, upon, or by which
any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive
vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, or semi-
trailers, and mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. See also
definition of Mobile Machinery And Self-Propelled Construction Equipment.
BUSINESS: All activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object
of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE: An expenditure made by the town of Winter Park for the
purpose of providing a permanent addition or improvement to property of the
town made with the expectation of existence for an indefinite period. The term
furthermore includes those expenditures for that category of items which, when
privately owned, are treated as depreciable by the United States internal
revenue service for income tax purposes, including, but not limited to, the
purchase of major equipment and motor vehicles.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Any entity organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or
educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports
competition (but only if no part of its activities involve the provision of
athletic facilities or equipment), or for the prevention of cruelty to children
or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the activities of
which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting, to influence
legislation, and which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the
publishing or distribution of statements), any political campaign on behalf of
any candidate for public office.
CODE: The tax administration code of the town of Winter Park or any of the
adopted codes of the town of Winter Park as the context indicates.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS: See subsection 3-2-7K5 of this chapter for definition.
CONSUMER: a) Any individual person or b) person engaged in business in the town
who uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes in the town tangible
personal property or taxable services purchased from sources inside or outside
the town.
CONSUMPTION: The act or process of consuming. It includes waste, destruction,
or use. Consumption is the normal use of property for the purpose for which it
was intended.
DISTRIBUTION: The act of distributing any article of tangible personal property
purchased at retail for use or consumption, which may include, but not be
limited to, the distribution of advertising gifts, shoppers' guides,
catalogues, directories, or other property given as prizes, premiums, or for
goodwill or in conjunction with the sales of other commodities or services.
DRUGS DISPENSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH A PRESCRIPTION: Drugs dispensed in
accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed
practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner, and
immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or
pharmacy intern, specifying the name and address of the person for whom the
medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the
label.
ECONOMIC NEXUS: The connection between the town and a person not having a
physical nexus in the State of Colorado, which connection is established when
the person or marketplace facilitator makes retail sales into the town, and:
   A.   In the previous calendar year, the person, which includes a marketplace
facilitator, has made retail sales into the state exceeding the amount
specified in Section 39-26-102(3)(c), C.R.S., as amended; or
   B.   In the current calendar year, 90 days has passed following the month in
which the person, which includes a marketplace facilitator, has made retail
sales into the state exceeding the amount specified in Section 39-26-102(3)(c),
C.R.S., as amended.
   This definition does not apply to any person who is doing business in this
state but otherwise applies to any other person.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS IN THE TOWN: Performing or providing services selling,
leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for
storage, use or consumption within the town. Engaged in business in town
includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a
person:
   A.   Directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store,
office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing
jurisdiction;
   B.   Sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned salespersons into
the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair,
service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other
reasons;
   C.   Maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned salespersons on
duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction;
   D.   Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or
personal property within the taxing jurisdiction;
   E.   Retailer or vendor in the state of Colorado that makes more than one
delivery into the town within a 12-month period; or
   F.   Makes retail sales sufficient to meet the definitional requirements of
economic nexus as set forth herein.
EXCESS TAX: That amount of tax collected during a reporting period that is in
excess of five percent (5%) of town net taxable sales and services, and which
excessive collection must be remitted to the town using the method prescribed
herein.
EXEMPT COMMERCIAL PACKAGING MATERIALS: Containers, labels and shipping cases
sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing,
retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use that
meets all of the following conditions: a) is used by the manufacturer,
compounder, jobber, retailer, packager, distributor, or bottler to contain or
label the finished product; b) is transferred by said person along with and as
a part of the finished product to the purchaser; and c) is not returnable to
said person for reuse.
EXEMPTIONS: Those deductions from adjusted gross sales and services in order to
arrive at a taxable base, which exemptions may include exempt transactions (in
whole or in part), sale or purchase of exempt commodities, articles or
services, or sale to exempt "persons" who may either be exempt on their direct
purchase or exempt on the type of commodity, articles or services purchased,
all as set forth in section
3-2-7 of this chapter.
FARM CLOSEOUT SALE: Full and final disposition of all tangible personal
property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching
operations which are being abandoned.
FOOD: Food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 USC section 2012(g) as
amended, for purposes of the federal food stamp program as defined in 7 USC
section 2012(h), as amended, except that "food" does not include carbonated
water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow food;
prepared salads and salad bars; cold sandwiches; deli trays; and food or drink
vended by or through machines or noncoin operated coin collecting food and
snack devices on behalf of a vendor.
GROSS SALES AND SERVICE OR GROSS TAXABLE SALES: The total amount received in
money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales,
leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services.
HOME FURNISHINGS: Appliances, furniture, carpet, draperies, etc., which are not
considered construction materials.
LICENSE: A town of Winter Park business license.
LINEN SERVICES: Services involving provision and cleaning of linens, including,
but not limited to, rags, uniforms, coveralls and diapers.
LODGING SERVICES: See definition of Accommodations.
MANUFACTURING: The application of manual labor or machinery time to materials
to produce a usable item of tangible personal property or to provide a service.
   Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in
the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use, any
article, substance, or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into
the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or
service which is manufactured, compounded, or furnished, and the container,
label, or the furnished shipping case thereof, shall be deemed to be wholesale
sales and shall be exempt from sales tax.
MARKETPLACE: A physical or electronic forum, including, but not limited to, a
store, a booth, an internet website, a catalog, or a dedicated sales software
application, where tangible personal property, taxable products, or taxable
services are offered for sale.
MARKETPLACE FACILITATOR: A person who:
   A.   Contracts with a marketplace seller or multichannel seller to
facilitate for consideration, regardless of whether or not the consideration is
deducted as fees from the transaction, the sale of the marketplace seller’s
tangible personal property, products, or services through the person’s
marketplace;
   B.   Engages directly or indirectly, through one or more affiliated persons,
in transmitting or otherwise communicating the offer or acceptance between a
purchaser and the marketplace seller or multichannel seller; and
   C.   Either directly or indirectly, through agreements or arrangements with
third parties, collects payment from the purchaser on behalf of the seller.
   This definition does not include a person that exclusively provides internet
advertising services or lists products for sale, and that does not otherwise
meet this definition.
MARKETPLACE SELLER: A person, regardless of whether or not the person is
engaged in business in the town, which has an agreement with a marketplace
facilitator and offers for sale tangible personal property, products, or
services through a marketplace owned, operated, or controlled by a marketplace
facilitator.
MEDICAL SUPPLIES: Drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription; insulin in
all its forms dispensed pursuant to the direction of a licensed physician;
glucose usable for treatment of insulin reactions; urine and blood testing kits
and materials; insulin measuring and injecting devices, including hypodermic
syringes and needles; prosthetic devices; wheelchairs and hospital beds; drugs
or materials when furnished by a doctor as part of professional services
provided to a patient; and corrective eyeglasses, contact lenses, or hearing
aids.
MOBILE MACHINERY AND SELF-PROPELLED CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT: Those vehicles,
self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the
transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor
vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of
persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may
have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo but
which have been redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special
equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally operated or moved
over the public highways.
   This definition includes, but is not limited to, wheeled vehicles commonly
used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of
wells, and the digging of ditches.
MULTICHANNEL SELLER: A retailer that offers for sale tangible personal
property, commodities, or services through a marketplace owned, operated, or
controlled by a marketplace facilitator, and through other means.
NET TAXABLE SALES AND SERVICES: Adjusted gross sales and services less
authorized "exemptions" therefrom.
NEWSPAPER: A publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general
circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information
and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term
newspaper does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit
bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs,
reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications
that include an updating or revision service, or book or pocket editions of
books.
NOTICE: All notices required to be given under the provisions of this chapter
shall be in writing and given personally or by postpaid first class mail to the
addressee's last known address, in which event notice shall be sufficient for
the purpose of this chapter unless context indicates otherwise.
PAY TELEVISION: Shall include, but not be limited to, cable, microwave or other
television service for which a charge is imposed.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate
or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a
fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise,
or any group or combination acting as a unit.
PREPRINTED NEWSPAPER SUPPLEMENTS: Inserts, attachments or supplements
circulated in newspaper that: a) are primarily devoted to advertising; and b)
the distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the
advertiser.
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FOR ANIMALS: Drugs dispensed in accordance with any order in
writing, dated and signed by a practitioner, or given orally by a practitioner,
specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions,
if any, to be placed on the label.
PRICE OR PURCHASE PRICE:
   A.   The price to the consumer, exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the
federal government of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the
property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if:
      1.   Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course
of the retailer's business, or
      2.   Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another
vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registrations, or
certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to,
vehicles operating upon public highways, off highway recreation vehicles,
watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above
the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax.
   B.   Price or purchase price includes:
      1.   The amount of money received or due in cash or credits.
      2.   Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale
in the usual course of the retailer's business.
      3.   Any consideration valued in money, such as trading stamps or coupons
whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of
the purchase price and other media of exchange.
      4.   The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges
which are not separately stated. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid
balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the
amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a
promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from
the unpaid balance of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on
the property sold and separately stated is not part of the purchase price.
      5.   Installation, delivery and wheeling in charges included in the
purchase price and not separately stated.
      6.   Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible
personal property to the purchaser.
      7.   Indirect federal manufacturer's excise taxes, such as taxes on
automobiles, tires and floor stock.
      8.   The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or
after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials
used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon.
      9.   Any consideration valued in money, such as trading stamps, coupons,
and other media of exchange, and any labor and services rendered in exchange
for any tangible personal property and taxable services, as defined herein.
   C.   Price or purchase price shall not include:
      1.   Any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Colorado or by any
political subdivision thereof.
      2.   The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to
be sold thereafter in the retailer's usual course of business. This is not
limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade in's are allowable
adjustment to the purchase price.
      3.   Discounts from the original price if such discount and the
corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser.
An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is
not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATION: Telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber,
which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication
channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any
interstate intercommunications systems for the subscriber's stations.
PROSTHETIC DEVICES: Any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human
use which aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured,
altered or adjusted to fit a particular individual; and is prescribed by a
licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are
not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or
orthopedic devices or appliances, oxygen concentrators and oxygen with related
accessories.
PURCHASE OR SALE:
   A.   The acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible
personal property or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold,
used, stored, distributed, or consumed, but excludes bona fide gift of property
or services. These terms include capital leases, installments and credit sales,
and property and services acquired by:
      1.   Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession
or both to tangible personal property;
      2.   A lease, lease purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license,
including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property or taxable
services; the utilization of coin operated devices, except coin operated
telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property shall be
considered short term rentals of tangible personal property;
      3.   Performance of taxable services;
      4.   Barter or exchange for other property or services including coupons;
or
      5.   The right to continuous possession or use of tangible personal
property is granted under a lease or contract.
   B.   The terms "purchase and sale" do not include:
      1.   A division of partnership assets among the partners according to
their interests in the partnership;
      2.   The formation of a corporation by the owners of a business and the
transfer of their business assets to the corporation in exchange for all the
corporation's outstanding stock, except qualifying shares, in proportion to the
assets contributed;
      3.   The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or
dissolution of professional corporations;
      4.   The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's
assets to its stockholders;
      5.   A transfer of a partnership interest;
      6.   The transfer in a reorganization qualifying under section 368;
      7.   The formation of a partnership by the transfer of assets to the
partnership or transfers to a partnership in exchange for proportionate
interest in the partnership;
      8.   The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder
or foreclosure by a lienholder;
      9.   The transfer of assets from a parent corporation to a subsidiary
corporation or corporations which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by
the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or
securities of the subsidiary corporation;
      10.   The transfer of assets from a subsidiary corporation or
corporations which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent
corporation to a parent corporation or to another subsidiary which is owned at
least eighty percent (80%) by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely
in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation of the subsidiary
which received the assets;
      11.   The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary
corporations, or between subsidiary corporations closely held by the same
parent corporation, or between corporations which are owned by the same
shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a
share by share basis, when a tax imposed by this chapter was paid by the
transferor corporation increase in the fair market value of such assets
resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the
assets by the transferor corporation. To such an extent any transfer referred
to in this subsection C11 shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this
subsection C11, a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the
parent corporation owns stock possessing at least eighty percent (80%) of the
total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns
at least eighty percent (80%) of the total number of shares of all other
classes of stock.
PURCHASER OR CONSUMER: Any person to whom taxable service has been rendered or
who shall have leased, rented, or purchased at retail, taxable services or
tangible personal property which is purchased, delivered, used, stored,
distributed or consumed in the town upon which a tax is imposed hereby.
RECREATION SERVICES: All services relating to athletic or entertainment
participation events including, but not limited to, pool, golf, billiards,
skiing, skating, tennis, bowling, health/athletic club memberships, coin
operated amusement devices, video games and video club membership.
REGULATED MARIJUANA: Medical marijuana and retail marijuana.
REGULATED MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Medical marijuana products and retail marijuana
products, including without limitation marijuana concentrate.
RESIDENT: For the purposes of the taxation provisions herein, a person who
resides or maintains his domicile within the town of Winter Park or who
maintains one or more places of business within the town at the time of a
taxable transaction as defined herein.
   A person may have dual residency, or other places of residence or domicile,
or place of business outside the town prior to, during or after the occurrence
of the taxable transaction and be a "resident" according to the terms of this
definition.
RETAIL SALE OR PURCHASED AT RETAIL: All sales except wholesale sales.
RETAILER OR VENDOR: Any person selling, leasing or renting tangible personal
property or services at retail. Retailer shall include any:
   A.   Auctioneer;
   B.   Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a
direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a
dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer;
   C.   Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of
tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the
merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the
proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes;
   D.   Marketplace facilitator, marketplace seller, or multichannel seller.
   E.   All retailers or vendors shall obtain a business license pursuant to
chapter 1 of this title, whether or not they operate on or from a premises in
the town.
RETURN: The sales and lodging tax reporting form used to report sales and
lodging tax to the town of Winter Park.
SALES TAX: The Winter Park sales tax is levied on all sales, leases and rentals
at retail on the basis of the purchase or sale price on purchases of tangible
personal property and specific services taxable hereunder. All sales and
purchases of tangible personal property, as specifically set forth in section
3-2-6 of this chapter, are subject to the tax, except as specifically exempted.
The tax is in reality imposed on the purchaser. The duty is imposed on the
seller to collect and remit the tax to the town under the penalties for failure
to do so as prescribed herein.
SCHOOL: An educational institution having a curriculum comparable to grade,
grammar, junior high, high school or college, or any combination thereof,
requiring daily attendance, having an enrollment of at least forty (40)
students, and charging a tuition fee.
SECURITY SYSTEM SERVICES: Electronic security system services. Such term does
not include nonelectronic security services such as consulting or human or
guard dog patrol services.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY OR PERSONAL PROPERTY: Corporeal personal property,
including, but not limited to, automotive vehicles as herein defined, which may
be seen, weighed, measured, or felt or touched, or is in any manner perceptible
to the senses and for the purposes of the sales tax and where referred to
throughout this chapter, shall also mean and does include the specific services
set out as taxable in section
3-2-6 of this chapter.
TAX: The sales tax due from a retailer.
TAX DEFICIENCY: Any amount of tax that is not reported or not paid on or before
the due date.
TAXABLE SALES: Gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this
chapter.
TAXABLE SERVICES: Services subject to tax pursuant to this chapter.
TAXPAYER: Any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of
this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES: The transmission of any two-way interactive
electromagnetic communications including, but not limited to, voice, image,
data and any other information, by the use of any means, but not limited to,
wire, cable, fiber optic cable, microwave, radio wave or any combinations of
such media. "Telecommunications service" includes, but is not limited to, basic
local exchange telephone service, toll telephone service and teletypewriter
service, including, but not limited to, residential and business service,
directory assistance, cellular mobile telephone or telecommunication service,
including any form of mobile two-way radio communication. "Telecommunication
service" does not include separately stated nontransmission services which
constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to
be transmitted.
TOTAL TAX LIABILITY: The total of all tax, penalties or interest owed by a
taxpayer and shall include sales and lodging tax collected in excess of such
tax computed on total sales.
TOWN: The town of Winter Park or its jurisdictional limits, as the case may be.
TOWN CLERK: The town clerk of the town of Winter Park or such other person
designated by the municipality.
TOWN COUNCIL: The elected legislative body of the town of Winter Park.
TOWN MANAGER OR MANAGER: The town manager of the town of Winter Park or any
duly authorized agent or representative acting in his/her stead or behalf.
USE: The exercise, for any length of time, by any person within the town of any
right, power or dominion over tangible personal property when rented, leased or
purchased at retail from sources either within or without the town, from any
person or vendor.
WATS/800 SERVICE: Any outbound or inbound interstate wide area
telecommunications service or other similar service which entitles the
subscriber, upon payment of a periodic charge, based upon a flat amount and/or
usage, to make or receive a large volume of telephonic communications to or
from persons having a telephone or radio telephone stations in specified areas
which are outside the telephone system area in which the subscriber's station
is located.
WHOLESALE SALE OR WHOLESALE PURCHASE OR SALES FOR TAXABLE RESALE: Sales to
licensed retailers, jobbers, dealers or wholesalers for resale. Sales by
wholesalers to consumers are not wholesale sales. Sales by wholesalers to
nonlicensed retailers are not wholesale sales.
WHOLESALER: Any person selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other
wholesalers, for resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or
distribution. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994; amd. Ord. 540, Series of 2020; Ord.
559, Series of 2021)
3-2-6: TAXABLE TRANSACTIONS, COMMODITIES AND SERVICES:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any seller to fail to collect or
any purchaser to fail to pay a tax levied by this chapter, and on sales on
which exemption is disputed.
Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not
any such sale is exempt from taxation hereunder, nevertheless, the seller shall
collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax; the purchaser thereafter may
apply to the town clerk for a refund of such taxes paid as provided herein.
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid, a tax as stated
in section
3-2-3 of this chapter, by every person exercising the taxable privilege defined
in section
3-2-2 of this chapter as follows:
   A.   Tangible Personal Property: On the purchase price paid or charged upon
the sale, purchase, lease, rental, or grant of license to use, or on the use,
storage, distribution or consumption of "tangible personal property" purchased
at retail as herein defined, and on the subsequent lease, rental or sale of
tangible personal property by any person to every consumer or purchaser
regardless that the person so purchasing and subsequently leasing, renting or
selling that personal property paid the tax imposed herein on his initial
purchase and use of the said property so acquired which is subsequently leased,
rented or sold.
   B.   Telecommunication, Telephone And Telegraph Service:
      1.   Upon telecommunication services, including access services sold by
local telephone exchange companies to providers of telecommunication services
for use in providing such services, whether furnished by public or private
corporations or enterprises, for all intrastate telecommunication services
originating from or received on the telecommunication equipment in the town if
the charge for the service is billed to person(s) in the town or billed to an
affiliate or division of such person(s) in the town on behalf of a person in
the town.
      2.   Upon access services sold by local telephone exchange companies to
providers of telecommunication services for use in providing such services,
whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises for all
interstate telecommunication services originating from or received on
telecommunication equipment in the town if the charge for the service is billed
to a person in the town, or billed to an affiliate or division of such person
in the town on behalf of a person in the town.
   C.   Gas, Electric, And Heating Services: On the purchase price paid or
charged for steam or other heat, for gas and electric services, for steam,
heat, gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic or commercial
consumption and not for taxable resale.
   D.   Pay, Cable And Subscription Television Service: On the purchase price
paid or charged for pay, cable, or subscription (including microwave)
television services sold, purchased, leased, rented, furnished or used.
   E.   Accommodations Service: On the purchase price paid or charged on the
lease, rental or on the transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations.
(Subject to subsection 3-2-7K1 of this chapter.)
   F.   Meal Service, Cover, Door And Other Related Charges: On all cover
charges, door or other similarly termed and related charges, and on the
purchase price paid for or charged for all meals furnished in or by the
restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, hotels, drugstores, social
clubs, nightclubs, cabarets, resorts, snack bars, caterers, carryout shops, and
other like places of business at which prepared food or drink is regularly
sold, including sales from pushcarts, motor vehicles, and other mobile
facilities. However, meals provided to employees of the places mentioned in
this subsection at no charge or at a reduced charge and which are considered as
part of their salary, wages or income shall be exempt from taxation.
   G.   Personal Property Rentals: On the purchase price paid or charged or for
consideration given for the furnishing of tangible personal property when the
right to possession or use of any tangible personal property is granted under a
written or verbal lease or contract, and such transfer of possession would be
taxable under this chapter if an outright sale were made, then such lease or
contract shall be considered the sale of such article, and the tax shall be
computed and imposed on each individual lease or contract payment as they occur
as though an outright sale taxable under this chapter were occurring upon each
payment. The payment of the sales tax shall be made by the lessee or
contracting party to the lessor or other contracting party. The lessor, as
trustee, shall make payment of any sales tax obligation to the town in the
manner provided by this chapter. Refer to subsection 3-2-7K9 of this chapter
for exempt transactions.
   H.   Bad Debts Collection: On the amount of collection, during the current
taxable period, of bad debts that had, during a previous taxable period, been
deducted.
   I.   Point Of Delivery: Every retailer located within or without the town
shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter notwithstanding that the purchase
order or sale is delivered to the retailer outside the town as a result of
solicitation by the retailer, the purchase order or sale is made outside the
town before the tangible personal property enters the town, the property is
procured or manufactured outside the town and shipped directly to the
purchaser, said property is mailed to the purchaser in the town from a point
outside the town, or said property is delivered directly to the purchaser at a
point outside the town, provided however that the property is intended to be
brought into the town for use, storage or consumption.
   J.   Marketplace Sales:
      1.   A marketplace facilitator engaged in business in the town is
required to collect and remit sales tax on all taxable sales made by the
marketplace facilitator, or facilitated by it for marketplace sellers or
multichannel sellers to customers in the town, whether or not the marketplace
seller for whom sales are facilitated would have been required to collect sales
tax had the sale not been facilitated by the marketplace facilitator.
      2.   A marketplace facilitator shall assume all the duties,
responsibilities, and liabilities of a vendor under this chapter. Marketplace
facilitators shall be liable for the taxes collected from marketplace sellers
or multichannel sellers. The Town may recover any unpaid taxes, penalties, and
interest from the marketplace facilitator that is responsible for collecting on
behalf of marketplace sellers or multichannel sellers.
      3.   The liabilities, obligations, and rights set forth under this
subsection J are in addition to any duties and responsibilities of the
marketplace facilitator has under this chapter if it also offers for sale
tangible personal property, products, or services through other means.
      4.   A marketplace seller, with respect to sales of tangible personal
property, products, or services made in or through a marketplace facilitator’s
marketplace, does not have the liabilities, obligations, or rights of a
retailer under this chapter if the marketplace seller can show that such sale
was facilitated by a marketplace facilitator:
         a.   With whom the marketplace seller has a contract that explicitly
provides that the marketplace facilitator will collect and remit sales tax on
all sales subject to tax under this article; or
         b.   From whom the marketplace seller requested and received in good
faith a certification that the marketplace facilitator is registered to collect
sales tax and will collect sales tax on all sales subject to tax under this
article made in or through the marketplace facilitator’s marketplace.
      5.   If a marketplace seller makes a sale that is not facilitated by a
licensed marketplace facilitator in a marketplace, the marketplace seller is
subject to all of the same licensing, collection, remittance, filing and
recordkeeping requirements as any other retailer.
      6.   With respect to any marketplace sale, the town shall solely audit
the marketplace facilitator for sales made by marketplace sellers or
multichannel sellers but facilitated by the marketplace. The town will not
audit or otherwise assess tax against marketplace sellers or multichannel
sellers for sales facilitated by a marketplace facilitator. (Ord. 225, Series
of 1994; amd. Ord. 540, Series of 2020)
3-2-7: EXEMPT TRANSACTIONS, COMMODITIES AND "PERSONS":
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any seller to fail to collect, or
any purchaser to fail to pay a tax levied by this chapter, and on sales on
which exemption is disputed.
Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not
any such sale is exempt from taxation hereunder, nevertheless, the seller shall
collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax; the purchaser thereafter may
apply to the town clerk for a refund of such taxes paid as provided herein.
The purchase and sale of articles of tangible personal property not otherwise
exempt are subject to the sales tax imposed herein as well as those specific
services cited as taxable in section
3-2-6 of this chapter, the list of exempt commodities or articles cannot be
increased by implication or similarity. In all cases, the burden of proof is
upon the taxpayer to establish that a sale is tax exempt.
   A.   Nontaxable Service Sales: The amount equal to the consideration
received for labor or services sold, if the consideration for such services are
separately stated from the consideration received for the tangible personal
property in the retail sale, or that proportionate percentage approved by the
town manager of the town on combined sales of services and tangible personal
property, that is deductible as the service or labor portion of that total
sale, or the total amount paid on the sale or purchase of exclusively
nontaxable services.
   B.   Sales For Taxable Resale (Wholesale):
      1.   Component Parts: The purchase price paid or charged on the sales to
and purchase of tangible personal property by a person engaged in manufacturing
or compounding for use, profit or sale, shall be deemed a wholesale sale when
it meets all of the following conditions:
         a.   Is actually and factually transformed by the process of
manufacture;
         b.   Becomes by the manufacturing processes a necessary and
recognizable ingredient, component and constituent part of the finished
product; and
         c.   Its physical presence in the finished product is essential to the
use thereof in the hands of the ultimate consumer.
      2.   Exempt Commercial Packaging Materials: The sales to and purchases of
tangible personal property for use as commercial packaging materials by a
person engaged in manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use, shall
be deemed a wholesale sale. See section
3-2-5 of this chapter for definition of "exempt commercial packaging
materials".
      3.   Newsprint, Printer's Ink: The sales to and purchases of newsprint
and printer's ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers
shall be deemed to be wholesale sales.
      4.   Other Licensed Retailers: The sale by wholesalers or retailers to a
licensed retailer, jobber, dealer or other wholesaler for purposes of taxable
resale, and not for the retailer's, jobber's, dealer's or wholesaler's own
consumption, use, storage or distribution, shall be deemed to be wholesale
sales.
   C.   Interstate And Intrastate Sales:
      1.   Interstate Commerce Sales; Shipments Out Of State: The sales of
tangible personal property shall be exempted from the operation of this chapter
if both the following conditions exist:
         a.   The sales are to those who reside or do business outside the
state; and
         b.   The articles purchased are to be delivered to the purchaser
outside the state by common, contract, or commercial carrier, who is employed
to effect delivery by the seller, or by the conveyance of the seller, or by
mail, provided, however, that the article so purchased and so delivered is to
be used, stored, distributed or consumed outside the state.
      2.   Intrastate Sales; Deliveries To Nonresident Outside Town: The sales
of tangible personal property shall be exempted from the operation of this
chapter if both the following conditions exist:
         a.   The sales are to those who reside or do business outside the
town; and
         b.   The articles purchased are to be delivered to the purchaser
outside the town by common, contract, or commercial carrier who is employed to
effect delivery by the seller, or by the conveyance of the seller, or by mail
provided however, that the article so purchased and so delivered is to be used,
stored, distributed or consumed outside the town.
   D.   Bad Debts Charged Off: The amount of gross sales which are represented
by accounts not secured by conditional sale contract or chattel mortgage and
which are found to be worthless and are actually and properly charged off as
bad debts for the purpose of the income tax imposed by the laws of the state of
Colorado may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax herein. However,
if any such accounts are hereafter collected by the taxpayer, the tax shall be
paid upon the amount so collected. Provided, such credit shall not be allowed
with respect to any account or item therein arising from the sale of any
article under a conditional sale contract, other title retention agreements for
all or part of the purchase price or from the sale of any article when the
seller takes a chattel mortgage on the tangible personal property to secure all
or part of the purchase price.
   E.   Trade Ins For Taxable Resale: The amount equal to the fair market value
of any exchanged or traded in property which is to be resold thereafter in the
usual course of the retailer's business, if included in the full price of an
article sold.
   F.   Gasoline And Cigarettes:
      1.   Sales Of Gasoline: The purchase price paid or charged on commodities
or motor fuel which has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed
by the Colorado motor fuel tax law of 1933, article 27 of title 39, Colorado
Revised Statutes 1973.
      2.   Sales Of Cigarettes: The sale or purchase of cigarettes.
   G.   Government, Religious And Charitable Organizations:
      1.   Sales To The Federal Government, The State, And Its Subdivisions:
The purchase price paid or charged on direct sales to, and direct purchases by
the United States government; to the state of Colorado, its departments or
institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof, including Winter Park in
their governmental function and activities only.
      2.   Sales To Religious, Charitable, And Quasi-Governmental
Organizations: The purchase price paid or charged on direct sales to, and
direct purchases by religious, charitable, and quasi- governmental
corporations, in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable, and quasi-
governmental capacities only, provided that the said organizations and
corporations have applied for, been assigned, and do furnish to the vendor
their state of Colorado exempt institution license number. In the event no such
exempt number is furnished, the vendor is to charge the tax. All sales shall be
reported to the town by affidavit of nontaxable sale.
   H.   Returns; Discounts:
      1.   Returned Goods: The amount equal to the sale price of property
returned by the purchaser when the full sale price including tax levied is
refunded, either in cash or by credit.
      2.   Discounts And Allowances: The amount of discount from the original
selling price if such discount or decrease in purchase price and the
corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the consumer.
An anticipated cash discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given
date is not an allowable adjustment to the selling price in determining gross
taxable sales on any vendor's return prior to the date when the customer
actually receives the discount. Any adjustments in sale price such as allowable
discount, rebates, and credits cannot be anticipated and the tax must be based
upon the original price unless such adjustments have actually been made prior
to the filing of the return wherein such sale is reported. Provided, if the
price upon which the tax was computed and paid to the town by the vendor is
subsequently readjusted, prior to the payment of the tax by the purchaser, a
proper credit may be taken against the tax due on the next subsequent return.
   I.   Prescription Drugs, Prosthetic Devices And Medical Supplies: The sale
or purchase of medical supplies for human consumption and prescription drugs
for animals.
   J.   Food Stamp Or Federal Special Supplement Program Sales: The sales and
purchases of food, as specified in 7 USC section 2012(g), as such section
exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended, which is purchased with
food stamps pursuant to the federal food stamp program; and
The sales and purchases of food, as specified in 42 USC section 1786, as such
section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended, which is purchased
with WIC vouchers or checks pursuant to the federal special supplemental
program for woman, infants, and children are exempt from the Winter Park sales
tax.
   K.   Other Deductions:
      1.   Monthly Rentals Of Rooms: The sales and purchases of commodities and
services under the provisions of subsection 3-2-6E of this chapter to any
occupant who is a permanent resident of any hotel, apartment-hotel, lodging
house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer
court or park, or any other place and who enters into or has entered into a
written agreement for occupancy of a room or rooms or accommodations for a
period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the calendar year or
preceding year. This exemption shall not apply to the sale or sales of any
goods, services or commodities other than the furnishing of rooms and
accommodations, unless such goods, services or commodities are otherwise exempt
from the tax as provided herein.
      2.   Finance Charges: The amount paid by any purchaser as, or in the
nature of, interest or finance charges on account of credit extended in
connection with the sale of any tangible personal property if the interest or
finance charges are separately stated from the consideration received for the
tangible personal property transferred in the retail sale, and if included in
report of gross sales and services are deductible therefrom.
      3.   Newspapers: The amount paid or charged for newspapers as legally
defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, section 24-70-102.
      4.   Cattle, Sheep, And Other Animals: The sale or purchase of cattle,
sheep, lambs, swine and goats and purchases of mares and stallions for breeding
purposes; and all farm close out sales.
      5.   Construction Materials: The sale of tangible personal property
which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity
to become an integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project
including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but
are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware,
caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections,
fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass,
gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil,
paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures,
putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet
metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other
landscaping materials, wallboard, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping,
wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above
materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an
integral or inseparable part of a completed structure or project are not
construction materials.
Construction materials do not include carpet, draperies and appliances, etc.,
when these products are sold or delivered within the town limits. These
products when sold or delivered are taxable prior to installation in a building
by a contractor and/or property owner. However, these products are not taxable
after installation in a building when they are sold as a part of the resale of
real estate.
      6.   Vending Machines: The sale of personal property through coin
operated vending machines with an individual selling price of fifteen cents
($0.15) or less are exempt from the tax of this section.
      7.   Consumable Items For Food Vendors: Any sale of any article,
container or bag to a retailer or vendor of food, meals, or beverages, which is
to be furnished to a consumer or user for use with other articles of tangible
personal property which have been purchased at retail; such articles,
containers or bags are exempt if:
         a.   A separate charge is not made for the article, container or bag
to the consumer or user, together with the food, meals or beverages purchased;
and
         b.   Sales tax is paid on the retail purchase.
      8.   Commercial Linen Services: The lease or rental by commercial linen
services of linen are exempt from the tax of this section.
      9.   Nonvending Coin Operated Devices: The gross sales from the use of
nonvending, coin operated devices are exempt from the tax of this section.
      10.   Minor-Operated Businesses: Sales made by minor-operated businesses,
as defined in Section 3-1-3, are exempt from the tax of this section.
(Ord. 225, Series of 1994; amd. Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-2-8: TAXPAYER (VENDOR AND CONSUMER) LIABILITY:
   A.   Exemption; Burden Of Proof: The burden of proving that any vendor,
retailer, consumer or purchaser is exempt from collecting or paying the tax
upon any goods sold or purchased, paying the same to the town manager, or from
making such returns, shall be on the vendor, retailer, consumer, or purchaser
under such reasonable requirements of proof as the town manager may prescribe.
   B.   Town Manager Powers: The town manager, may require any person by
regulation or notice served on such person, to make such return, render such
statement or keep and furnish such records, or make such information reports as
the town manager may deem sufficient to show whether or not such person is
liable under this chapter for payment or collection of the tax imposed herein.
In addition, when in the opinion of the manager if it is necessary for the
efficient administration of this section to treat any salesman, representative,
peddler, or canvasser as the agent of the vendor, distributor, supervisor, or
employer under whom he operates or from whom he obtains tangible personal
property sold by him or for whom he solicits business, the manager may treat
such agent as the vendor jointly responsible with his principal, distributor,
supervisor, or employer for the collection and payment of the tax.
   C.   Vendor Responsibility For Collection Of Tax: Every retailer or vendor
engaged in business and selling at retail as the same are defined in this
chapter shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent
to five percent (5%) of all sales made by him of commodities or services as
specified in section
3-2-6 of this chapter. (See also section
3-2-3 of this chapter, concerning the imposition of taxes.)
   D.   Vendor Responsibility For Remittance Of Tax: Every retailer or vendor
engaged in business and selling at retail as the same are defined in this
chapter shall file a return as prescribed herein with the town manager on or
before the twentieth day of the month for the preceding month or months under
report and remit an amount equivalent to such sales and lodging tax, also any
excessive tax collections over such sales and lodging tax. The retailer shall
add the tax as a separate and distinct item and such tax shall be a debt from
the consumer to the retailer and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner
as other debts.
   E.   New Business Purchases; Sellers And Purchasers:
      1.   Acquisition Of Business: The Winter Park tax shall be remitted on
the price paid for tangible personal property which is acquired with the
purchase of a business, and for use in the operation of such business. The tax
shall be based on the price paid for such chattels as recorded in the bill of
sale or agreement and constituting a part of the total transaction at the time
of the sale or transfer, provided the valuation is as great or greater than the
fair market value of such merchandise or chattels. Where the transfer of
ownership is a package deal made by a lump sum transaction, the tax shall be
paid on the book value set up by the purchaser for income tax depreciation
purposes, or fair market value if no determination has been made. When a
business is taken over in return for the assumption of outstanding indebtedness
owed by former owners, the tax shall be paid on the fair market value of all
taxable tangible personal property acquired by the purchaser. (See also
subsection 3-2-17B, sale of business, of this chapter.)
      2.   Purchasers Liable For Prior Owner's Unpaid Tax: Purchasers of a
business are liable for any unpaid tax of a predecessor. Vendors having
outstanding accounts on which sales tax has not been remitted must compute and
pay the tax at the time of the sale.
      3.   Agent Of Seller And Seller Liable For Tax: The taxpayer shall report
such tax on the Winter Park sales tax return as prescribed. The seller or his
agent will be held liable for sales tax remittance on the sale of a business in
the event the purchaser fails to remit the tax due on the purchase.
   F.   Tax On Credit Sales, Etc.: Whenever tangible personal property is sold,
including that sold in conjunction with the sale of a business, which is
taxable hereunder, under a conditional sales contract or purchase contract
whereby the seller retains title as security for all or part of the purchase
price, or whenever the seller takes a chattel mortgage on such tangible
personal property to secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax
based on the total selling price shall become immediately due and payable. The
tax shall be charged, or collected and remitted by the vendor. No refund or
credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of
repossession.
   G.   Excess Collections; Failure To Remit Collections: If any vendor shall,
during any reporting period, collect as a tax an amount in excess of five
percent (5%) of his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the town the full
net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. If record of town
and state sales tax collections are kept separately, the vendor will remit
excess of town tax collected over and above five percent (5%) town net taxable
sales and service; if there is no separate record kept of town and state tax
collections and it is not possible to determine the excess to be remitted to
each, the vendor shall remit fifty seven percent (57%) of such excess to the
town of Winter Park. The retention by the vendor of any excess of tax
collections over five percent (5%) of the total taxable sales of such vendor,
or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the town the full amount
required to be remitted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared
to be a violation of this chapter.
   H.   Unlawful To Advertise Absorption Of Tax: It shall be unlawful for any
taxpayer or vendor to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any
customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by
this chapter will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor or taxpayer or that it
will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or, if added, that
it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating this provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. (Ord. 225,
Series of 1994)
3-2-9: LICENSING:
   A.   Business Licenses For Vendors 1 : It shall be unlawful for any person
to engage in the business of selling at retail or purchasing at retail, as the
same is defined in this chapter, tangible personal property and services
subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, without first having obtained a
Winter Park business license, which license shall be granted and issued by the
town clerk.
   B.   Exempt Institutions: No exempt institution, including quasi-
governmental, religious, charitable, or other type institutions may purchase
tax free in Winter Park, or use in Winter Park, tangible personal property or
taxable property or taxable services tax free unless a tax exempt affidavit is
filed with the town and approved by the town manager.
   C.   Sale At Retail Without License: Any person engaged in business in town
as defined in this chapter, without having secured a business license therefor,
except as specifically provided herein, shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
   D.   Revocation Of License By Town Clerk: The town clerk may on a reasonable
notice and after full hearing, revoke the business license of any person found
by the town clerk to have violated any provision of this chapter. After
revocation of the license, no further business, as defined herein, may be
conducted within the town, and the town attorney shall institute such legal
action as may be necessary to preclude such conduct of a business.
   E.   Appeal From Town Clerk Order: Any finding and order of the town clerk
revoking the license of any person shall be subject to judicial review in
accordance with rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado rules of civil procedure. (Ord.
225, Series of 1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 1, "Business Licenses", of this title.
3-2-10: REPORTING:
   A.   Tax Returns:
      1.   Content, Form, Etc.: The returns to be filed by the taxpayer, or his
duly authorized agent, shall be the standard municipal sales tax reporting form
as adopted by the town manager and shall contain such information and be
completed in such manner as the town manager may prescribe.
      2.   Consolidation Of Returns: A vendor doing business in two (2) or more
places or locations, whether in or without the town, and collecting taxes
hereunder, may file one return covering all such places and locations, when
accompanied by a supplemental report showing the gross sales and service and
net taxable sales and service and taxes collected thereon for each such place
or location. Under collections and over collections may not be offset between
locations.
      3.   Reporting Periods: If the accounting methods regularly employed by
the vendor or licensed consumer in the transaction of his business, or other
conditions, are such that the returns aforesaid made on a calendar month basis,
will impose unnecessary hardship, the town manager may, upon request of the
vendor, or licensed consumer, accept returns at such intervals as will, in his
opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer and will not jeopardize
the collection of the tax.
   B.   Timely Payment; Computation Of Dates:
      1.   Date Received: Timely payment shall be evidenced by the postmark
date if mailed; otherwise timely payment shall be evidenced by the town's
validation date.
      2.   Due Date Exceptions: Any due date; payment date; or deadline for
paying tax due, providing information or taking other action; which falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday recognized by either the federal government
or state of Colorado shall be extended to the first business day following such
weekend or holiday. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-11: SPECIAL ACCOUNTING:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverage Sales By The Drink: Any retailer selling malt,
vinous, or spirituous liquors by the drink may include in his sales price the
tax levied under this chapter; provided, that no such retailer shall advertise
or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that such tax
is not included as a part of the sales price to the consumer.
   B.   Vending Machine Sales: Any vending machine operator may include in his
sales price the tax levied under this chapter, provided that no such retailer
shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that such tax is not included as a part of the sales price to the
consumer.
   C.   Combined Sales Of Services And Personal Property: Every retailer or
vendor conducting a business in which the transaction between the vendor and
the consumer or purchaser consists of the supply of tangible personal property
and services in connection with the maintenance or servicing of same, shall be
required to pay the tax levied under this chapter upon the full contract price,
unless application is made to the town manager for permission to use a
percentage basis or reporting the tangible personal property sold and the
services supplied under such contract. The town manager is hereby authorized to
determine the percentage based upon the ratio of the tangible personal property
included in the consideration as it bears to the total of the consideration
paid under said combination contract or sale which shall be subject to the tax
levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. This section shall not be
construed to include terms upon which the tax is imposed on the full purchase
price as defined in section
3-2-5 of this chapter, nor shall it be construed as an allowance for the vendor
to fail to itemize to the customer the taxable, and nontaxable portions of the
bill.
   D.   Method Of Payment Determined By The Town Manager: The town manager
shall have the discretion to enter into an agreement with taxpayers to allow
for payment of required taxes on an installment basis when such a method would
be equitable for the taxpayer and the town.
   E.   Sales By Qualified Nonprofit Organizations: Nonprofit organizations
selling taxable tangible personal property or services as defined by this
chapter must collect sales tax and purchasers must pay sales tax on such sales,
subject to the conditions set forth below. It is the desire of the town council
of Winter Park that the taxes collected by qualified nonprofit organizations be
retained by the organization as a contribution of additional funds to be used
in the course of that organization's charitable service to the community.
Therefore, organizations are not required to remit or report sales tax
collections to the town provided that the organization meets the following
criteria:
      1.   The organization has been authorized in writing by the internal
revenue service as a section 501(c)(3) organization or has been approved in
writing by the manager as being a voluntary, not for profit organization whose
fundraising activities are primarily for the providing of services; and
      2.   The town sales tax shall be included in the stated selling price and
the total proceeds of the sale of taxable tangible personal property or
services shall be retained and expended by the qualifying organization to
provide charitable services; and
      3.   The activity at which taxable tangible property or service is being
sold is an occasional business activity specifically held for fundraising; and
      4.   The organization applies to the town manager on an annual basis for
a special license to be conspicuously displayed at all eligible fundraising
events and provides access to any financial records or documents necessary to
determine compliance with this subsection E. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-12: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Town Manager To Adopt Rules And Regulations: The town manager shall
adopt rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter.
   B.   Duties And Powers Of Town Manager:
      1.   Administration Of Chapter: In order to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter, the town manager shall prescribe necessary forms for the making
of returns (see subsection 3-2-10A1 of this chapter), for the ascertainment,
assessment, and collection of the taxes imposed and for the proper
administration and enforcement thereof, and to permit uniform methods of adding
the tax, or the average equivalent thereof, to the purchase price.
The town manager shall have power and authority to amend, or rescind such rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to subsection A of this section not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, for the purposes of
ascertaining the correctness of any return or for the purpose of making an
estimate of the tax due from any taxpayer, the town manager shall have the
power to examine or cause to be examined by any employee, agent or
representative designated by him for the purpose, any book, papers, records or
memoranda bearing upon the matters required to be included in the return.
      2.   Town Manager To Appoint Employees And Examine Returns: The town
manager shall appoint such persons to make such expenditures, require such
reports, make such investigations, and take such other action as he deems
necessary or suitable to that end. The town manager shall determine his own
organization and methods of procedure in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the town manager is
authorized to appoint and prescribe the duties and powers of such officers,
accountants, experts, and other persons as may be necessary in the performance
of his duty. The town manager may delegate to any such person so appointed,
such power and authority as he deems reasonable and proper for the effective
administration of this chapter, and in his discretion shall bond, in a
sufficient amount, any person handling money under this chapter.
   C.   Taxpayer Must Maintain Books And Records:
      1.   Taxpayer's Retention Of Records: It shall be the duty of every
person, firm or corporation liable to the town of Winter Park for any tax
imposed on sales or lodging, to keep and preserve for a period of three (3)
years such books, accounts, and records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax liability.
      2.   Records To Be Made Available To The Town Manager: All such books,
accounts, and records shall be open for examination at any time by the town
manager or his duly authorized agents. If such person keeps or maintains his
books, accounts and other records, or any thereof, outside of the state of
Colorado, upon demand by the town manager he shall make the same available at a
suitable place within the state of Colorado, to be designated by the town
manager for examination, inspection, or audit of books, accounts and other
records so kept or maintained by such person outside of the state of Colorado
at the place where the same will be made available, provided such person shall
have entered into a binding agreement with the town of Winter Park to reimburse
it for all costs and expenses incurred by it in order to have such examination
inspection, or audit made in such place.
      3.   Subpoena To Secure Records: If any taxpayer shall refuse voluntarily
to furnish any of the foregoing information when requested by the town manager
or his employee, agent, or representative, the town manager by subpoena issued
under his hand, may require the attendance of the taxpayer and the production
by him of any of the foregoing information in his possession, and may
administer an oath to him and take his testimony. If the taxpayer fails or
refuses to respond to said subpoena and give testimony, the town manager may
apply to any judge of the district court of the state of Colorado for a
citation against such taxpayer as for contempt, and said judge may cause arrest
of such person, and upon hearing, said judge shall have, for the purpose of
enforcing obedience to the requirements of said subpoena, power to make such
order as, in his discretion, he deems consistent with the law for punishment of
contempt.
      4.   Subpoena To Secure Evidences: If the town manager is unable to
secure from the taxpayer information relating to the correctness of the
taxpayer's return or the amount of the income of the taxpayer, the town manager
may apply to any judge of the district of the state of Colorado for the
issuance of subpoenas to such other persons as the town manager believes may
have knowledge in the premises, and upon making a showing satisfactory to the
court, that the taxpayer cannot be found, or evades service of subpoena, or
fails or refuses to produce his records or give testimony, or is unable to
furnish such records or testimony, the judge shall have power, to cause the
issuance of subpoenas under the seal of the court to the persons sought to be
so summoned requiring them or any of them to appear before said town manager
and give testimony relating to said taxpayer's return or income; and in case
any of said persons so served with subpoena shall fail to respond thereto, the
judge may proceed against such persons as in cases of contempt.
   D.   Tax Reports And Returns; Preservation:
      1.   Town's Preservation Of Records: All reports and returns of taxes
received by the town covered by this chapter shall be preserved for three (3)
years and thereafter until the town clerk orders them to be destroyed.
      2.   Confidential Nature Of Returns: Except in accordance with judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law, the town manager, his agents, clerks and
employees shall not divulge, or make known in any way any information disclosed
in any document, report, or return filed in connection with any of the taxes
covered by this chapter. The official charged with the custody of such
documents, reports, and returns shall not be required to produce any of them or
evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any
court, except on behalf of the town manager in any action or proceeding under
the provisions of any such taxing statutes when the report of facts shown
thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which
events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so
much of said reports, or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the
action or proceeding, and no more.
      3.   Taxpayer Records: Nothing in this section contained shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his
tax, and such copies may be certified by the town manager or his agent or
representative and when so certified shall be evidence equally with and in like
manner as the originals and may be received by the courts of this state as
evidence of the contents.
      4.   Publication Of Statistics; Return Available To Town Attorney:
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of
statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports
or returns and the items thereof, or the inspection of returns by the town
attorney or other legal representative of the town.
      5.   Records Available To Authorized Parties: Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section the town manager in his discretion may furnish to
the taxing officials of the state of Colorado, any other state, or its
political subdivisions, and to the United States any information contained in
tax returns and related schedules and documents filed pursuant to this chapter,
or in the report of an audit or investigation made with respect thereto
provided that said jurisdiction enters into an agreement with the town manager
to grant similar privileges to the town and, provided further, that such
information is to be used only for tax purposes.
   E.   Employees' Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any officer or
employee of the town engaged in any administration which is governed by this
chapter, to engage in the business or profession of tax accounting or to accept
employment, with or without consideration, from any person, firm or corporation
for the purpose, directly or indirectly, of preparing tax returns or reports
required by the laws of the town of Winter Park, by the state of Colorado, by
any other state, or by the United States government, or to accept any
employment for the purpose of advising, preparing materials or data, or the
auditing of books or records to be used in an effort to defeat or cancel any
tax, or part thereof, that has been assessed by any municipality of the state
of Colorado, any other state, or its political subdivisions, or by the United
States government. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-13: ADDITION TO TAX; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   Assessment To Recover Unpaid Penalties And Interest: If any person or
taxpayer or vendor fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax or to make a
return and pay the tax as required by this chapter or should fail to remit the
proper amount of tax or underpays the tax because of negligence, fraud, or on a
regular basis, penalties and interests plus any costs of collection shall be
added and imposed in accordance with the following provisions and in the event
the person, taxpayer, or vendor fails to pay the additions to tax penalties and
interest as required by this chapter then the town manager on such information
as is available, shall make an estimate of the tax and additions thereto and
shall give to the delinquent taxpayer, person or vendor written notice of final
determination assessment and demand for payment, which assessment of deficiency
amount will be due and payable ten (10) days after such notice.
   B.   Failure To File Tax Return; Failure To Pay Tax Deficiency Due To
Negligence: If any taxpayer or vendor fails to file a return or pay the tax on
any return required under this chapter on the date prescribed therefor,
determined with regard to any extension of time for filing, unless it is shown
that such failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to negligence or
intentional disregard of authorized rules and regulations but without intent to
defraud, there shall be added thereto a penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for
such failure or ten percent (10%) of the deficiency whichever is greater; the
interest in such case shall be collected at a rate of one and one-half percent
(11/2%) per month on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was
due.
   C.   Mathematical Error On Tax Returns: In the event that the amount of tax
is understated on the taxpayer's return due to a mathematical error, the town
shall notify the taxpayer by written notice of final determination assessment
and demand for payment of the amount of tax in excess of that shown in the
return which is due and has been assessed. The taxpayer shall have no right of
protest or appeal as in the matter of other assessments but shall pay the tax
due and assessed or file an amended return to show the true amount of tax due
within ten (10) days from such assessment.
   D.   Interest On Extensions Of Time For Payment Or On Mathematical Errors
Resulting In Underpayment Of Tax: If any amount of sales or lodging tax is not
paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment without regard to
extensions in time for payment of the tax, interest on such amount at the rate
of eighteen percent (18%) per annum shall be paid for the period from such last
date to the date paid. In the case of taxes in which the last date for payment
is not otherwise prescribed, the last date of payment shall be deemed to be the
date the liability for tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the
date notice and demand for the tax is made by the town manager or his
representative.
   E.   Failure To File Tax Return; Failure To Pay Tax Deficiency Due To Fraud:
If any taxpayer or vendor fails to file a return or pay the tax on any return
required under this chapter on the date prescribed therefor, determined with
regard to any extension of time for filing, and any part of the deficiency is
due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added fifty
percent (50%) of the total amount of the deficiency and in such case, the whole
amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable
ten (10) days after written notice of final determination assessment and demand
for payment by the town manager and an additional one and one-half percent (11/
2%) per month on said amount shall be added from the date the return was due
until paid.
   F.   Filing Fees; Special Penalty; Returned Checks:
      1.   All returns required by this Code shall be submitted electronically
over the internet or transmitted by such other similar electronic means as may
be specified by the town manager. Any taxpayer electing to submit a return on
paper shall be assessed an administrative fee in an amount to be set by
resolution to defray the cost to the Town of the additional handling and
processing time required for paper filings.
      2.   If a taxpayer pays for a tax imposed pursuant to this chapter by
credit card, the Town may impose a convenience fee for the use of this
alternative form of payment in an amount not to exceed the actual additional
cost incurred by the Town to process the transaction. Any convenience fee on a
transaction involving a credit card shall be imposed in accordance with the
rules of the credit card provider.
      3.   If a taxpayer pays for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter by
check for which there are insufficient funds to cover such check, then the Town
may assess a penalty against such taxpayer in an amount to be set by
resolution. After a second payment by check for which there are insufficient
funds, the town clerk may require such taxpayer to pay all tax payments,
whether due or to be due in the future, by certified funds, cashier’s check or
cash. The penalties imposed by this subsection are in addition to all other
fees and penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   G.   Special Penalty; Recurring Distraint Warrants: If any person, taxpayer
or vendor liable for the payment of a tax imposed by this chapter has
repeatedly failed, neglected, or refused to pay the same within the time
specified for such payment, and the town manager has been required to exercise
his/her enforcement proceedings three (3) or more times through the issuance of
a distraint warrant to enforce collection of any such taxes due, the town
manager is hereby authorized to assess and collect the amount of such taxes due
together with all the interest and penalties thereon provided by law and also
an additional amount for recurring warrants to compensate the town for
administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent
taxes as follows:
      1.   Two (2) or three (3) distraint warrants issued: Fifteen percent
(15%) of the delinquent taxes, interest and penalties due or the sum of twenty
five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater;
      2.   Four (4) or more distraint warrants: Thirty percent (30%) of the
delinquent taxes, interest, and penalties due or the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00), whichever amount is greater.
   H.   Special Penalty; Court Summons: If any person, taxpayer or vendor
liable for the payment of a tax imposed by this chapter has failed, neglected,
or refused to pay the same within the time specified for such payment, and the
town manager has been required to issue a court summons for the violation of
this chapter, the town manager is hereby authorized to assess and collect the
amount of such taxes due together with all the interest and penalties thereon
provided by law and an additional amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the
delinquent taxes, accumulated penalties and interest or the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00), whichever amount is greater, to compensate the town for
administrative and collection costs.
   I.   Town Manager May Waive Penalty: The town manager is hereby authorized
to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as in this chapter
provided.
      1.   Interest Assessment: Interest prescribed under this section be paid
upon notice and demand, and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same
manner as the tax to which is applicable.
      2.   No Interest Assessed On Credit: If any portion of a tax is satisfied
by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this
section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if
the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to
such overpayment.
      3.   Interest Assessment Period: Interest prescribed under this section
on any tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within
which the tax to which such interest related may be assessed and collected.
(Ord. 225, Series of 1994; amd. Ord. 571, Series of 2021)
3-2-14: OVERPAYMENTS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Refunds Not Assignable: The right of any person to a refund under this
chapter shall not be assignable and such application for refund must be made by
the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in
the invoice of the sale thereof except in subsection H of this section.
   B.   Burden Of Proof Of Exemption: The burden of proving that sales,
services and commodities, on which tax refunds are claimed, are exempt from
taxation under section
3-2-7 of this chapter or were not at retail, shall be on the one making such
claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the town manager may
prescribe.
   C.   Disputed Tax: Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller
as to whether or not any sale, service, or commodity is exempt from taxation
under this chapter, nevertheless, the seller shall collect and the purchaser
shall pay the tax and the seller shall issue to the purchaser a receipt of
certificate, on forms prescribed by the town manager showing the names of the
seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid,
and a brief statement of the claim of exemption.
   D.   Refund To Be Allowed If Exempt: A refund shall be made, or a credit
allowed, for the tax so paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an
exemption as in this chapter provided. Such refund shall be made by the town
manager after compliance with the following conditions precedent: Applications
for refund must be made within sixty (60) days after the purchase of the goods
whereon an exemption is claimed; and must be supported by the affidavit of the
purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and
certificate issued by the seller; and be made upon such forms as shall be
prescribed and furnished by the town manager which forms shall contain such
information as said town manager shall prescribe.
   E.   Refund Disallowed: Upon receipt of such application, the town manager
shall examine same with all due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by
order in writing of his decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within twenty
(20) days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the town manager
for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in section
3-2-15 of this chapter and may appeal to the district courts in the manner
provided herein.
   F.   Refund Payment: If the town manager discovers from the examination of a
return within the time periods provided for the filing of refunds, or upon
claim duly filed by the taxpayer, or upon final judgment of a court, that the
tax, penalty, or interest paid by any taxpayer is in excess of the amount due
or has been illegally or erroneously collected, then the town manager shall
rule in favor of the taxpayer for refund of such illegally collected tax,
penalty, or interest, regardless of whether or not such sum was paid under
protest. The town manager shall issue a warrant for the payment to the
taxpayer, out of the appropriate town fund; provided therefor; that the town
manager shall keep in his files a duplicate of said voucher and also a
statement which shall set forth the reason why such refund shall have been
ordered.
   G.   Refund To Offset Previous Tax Due: Whenever it is established that any
taxpayer has, for any period open under the statutes overpaid a tax imposed by
this chapter, and that there is an unpaid balance of tax and interest accrued
according to the records of the town manager, owing by the taxpayer for any
other period, so much of the overpayment of tax plus interest allowable thereon
as does not exceed amount of such unpaid balance, shall be credited thereto and
any excess of the overpayment shall be refunded.
   H.   Special Refund: The foregoing notwithstanding, however, applications
for refunds submitted by the United States government, the state of Colorado,
its departments or institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof,
including the town of Winter Park shall be submitted within eighteen (18)
months after purchase of the tangible personal property purchased by any
person, firm or corporation furnishing work and materials under contract, with
the above governmental units on any of their properties located within the
corporate limits of the town of Winter Park provided, however, that the refund
to the said above governmental units of all sales and lodging taxes received by
the town of Winter Park in the manner aforesaid shall not exceed ninety six
percent (96%) of said receipts.
   I.   False Or Fraudulent Refund Claim: Any applicant for refund under the
provisions of this section, or any other person who shall make any false
statement in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable
as provided herein.
   J.   Action To Recover Fraudulent Claims: If any person be convicted under
the provisions of this section, such convictions shall be "prima facie"
evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were
obtained unlawfully and the town manager is hereby empowered and directed to
bring appropriate action for recovery of such refunds.
   K.   Credit For Sales Or Lodging Tax Previously Paid To Another
Municipality: The sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal
property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was
previously subjected to a sales or lodging tax lawfully imposed on the
purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in
excess of five percent (5%). A credit shall be granted against the town's sales
tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed
local sales or lodging tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the
previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of credit shall not
exceed five percent (5%).
   L.   Refunds; Limitations Of Actions: An application for refund of a sales
or lodging tax paid under dispute by a purchaser or user who claims an
exemption under this chapter shall be made within sixty (60) days after the
purchase, storage, use or consumption of the goods or services for which the
exemption is claimed. An application for refund of tax monies paid in error or
by mistake shall be made within three (3) years. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-15: HEARINGS:
   A.   Request For Hearing: Any taxpayer may request a hearing on any proposed
tax by reason of notice of final determination assessment and demand for
payment or by reason of denial of his claim for refund by application to the
town manager within twenty (20) days of the mailing of a notice of deficiency,
assessment or denial of refund. The request for hearing shall set forth the
taxpayer's reasons for, and the amount of, the requested changes in the
deficiency, assessment or denial of refund.
   B.   Hearing Time And Place: The town manager shall notify the taxpayer of
the time and place for such hearing fifteen (15) days prior thereto. In all
cases, the hearing shall be held at the town offices in Winter Park, Colorado.
   C.   No Second Hearing: After a hearing under this section, the taxpayer
shall not be entitled to a second hearing before the town manager on the
matters set forth in his previous request for hearing.
   D.   Town Manager To Conduct Hearing: The hearing shall be held before the
town manager or a hearing officer designated by the town manager. The town
manager is hereby authorized to administer oaths and take testimony. At the
hearing, the taxpayer may assert any facts, make any arguments and file any
briefs and affidavits he believes pertinent to his cause.
   E.   Request For Extension Of Time For Hearing: In lieu of the request for
hearing within the time provided by this section the taxpayer may, at his
election, request an extension of time for hearing. The written request for
such extension to be filed within said ten (10) days from notice of final
determination assessment and demand for payment or final denial of refund, or
file a written brief and such other written materials or documents as he shall
deem appropriate and request that the town manager reconsider the deficiency
without a hearing. The town manager shall proceed to reconsider the deficiency
in the same manner as if the written material submitted had been presented at a
hearing pursuant to this section. The submission of written material shall be
considered for all purposes the same as a request for and submission of the
material at a hearing.
   F.   Request For Hearing; Time Limitation: After the expiration of ten (10)
days from the mailing of the notice of final determination assessment and
demand for payment or denial of refund, if the tax has not been paid or if no
request for hearing, or extension for hearing has been requested, or no written
brief has been filed by the taxpayer, then the notice of final determination
assessment and demand for payment previously mailed, shall constitute a final
assessment of the amount of the tax specified, together with interest,
additions to tax penalties or shall constitute a final denial of refund, as the
case may be except only for such amounts as to which the taxpayer has filed a
protest with the town manager.
   G.   Town Manager May Adjust Tax Under Question: Based on the evidence
presented at any hearing or filed in support of the taxpayer's contentions at
any hearing, the town manager may modify and abate in full the tax, penalty and
interest questions at the hearing or may approve a refund.
   H.   Hearing Determination Notices: Upon rejection, in whole or in part, of
the claim for refund or upon the finding by the town manager that, on hearing
the evidence, an assessment in whole or in part has been made against taxpayer
validly, the town manager shall send a hearing determination notice to the
taxpayer setting forth the amount of claim for refund denied or the amount of
deficiency assessment of taxes found due, stating therein the grounds for
allowance or rejection in whole or in part.
Unless an appeal be taken as provided in section
3-2-16 of this chapter, the tax, together with interest thereon and penalties,
if any, shall be paid within thirty (30) days after mailing of the hearing
determination notice to taxpayer.
This section shall not prevent a taxpayer from suing for a refund or a taxpayer
appealing the town manager determination as provided for in section
3-2-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-16: APPEALS:
   A.   Taxpayer May Appeal: The taxpayer may appeal the hearing determination
notice of the town manager issued pursuant to section
3-2-15 of this chapter provided such appeal is taken within thirty (30) days of
the mailing of notice of the hearing determination. The taxpayer may request a
hearing before the executive director of the state department of revenue or the
delegate thereof as provided in Colorado Revised Statutes 29-2-106.1 or may
file such appeal with the district court of Grand County.
   B.   Venue: Venue and jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals is hereby
conferred on the Grand County district court.
   C.   Taxpayer And Town's Proof Requirements: The district court of Grand
County shall have original jurisdiction to review the proceedings, such review
being conducted in accordance with rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado rules of
civil procedure.
   D.   Filing Of Bond: Within fifteen (15) days after filing of the notice of
appeal, the taxpayer shall file with the district court a bond in twice the
amount of the taxes, interest, and other charges stated in the final
determination by the town manager which are contested on appeal; provided, that
the taxpayer may at his option deposit the disputed amount with the town
manager in lieu of posting bond.
If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the
deficiency contested during the pendency of the action.
At the conclusion of the action or the time for such appeal has expired, the
funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either retained by the
town manager and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part
to the taxpayer. No claim for refund or amount so deposited with the town
manager need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in
accordance with the direction of the court.
   E.   Judgment On Appeal: The final decisions made in such appeal shall be
entered as a judgment as in other civil cases against the taxpayer or against
the town as the case may be. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-17: ASSESSMENTS; LIENS; DISTRAINTS; SEIZURE AND SALE; COMPROMISE; CLOSING
AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Sales Tax Constitutes Lien: Sales and lodging tax plus penalties,
interest and costs of collection shall be a first and prior lien on the
tangible personal property sold, purchased, stored, used, distributed, or
consumed, and when such tax is collected by retailers or agents, then, the
sales and lodging tax imposed by sections hereunder shall be a first and prior
lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under
lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, and shall take
precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind
or nature.
   B.   Sale Of Business; Purchases Subject To Lien:
      1.   Sale Of Business: Any person who shall sell out his business or
stock of goods, or shall quit business, shall be required to make out the
return as provided in this chapter, within ten (10) days after the date he sold
his business or stock of goods, or quit business, and his successor in business
shall be required to withhold sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover
the amount of said taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner
shall produce a receipt from the town manager showing that the taxes have been
paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. (See also subsection 3-2-8E, new
business purchases, of this chapter.)
      2.   Purchases Subject To Lien: If the purchaser of a business or stock
of goods shall fail to withhold the purchase money as above provided and the
taxes shall be due and unpaid after ten (10) day period allowed, he, as well as
the seller, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by
the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business
fixtures of or used by any person under lease, title retaining contract or
other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale, or otherwise, takes
same subject to the lien for any delinquent sales taxes owed by such person,
and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior
owner, not, however, exceeding the value of the property so taken or acquired.
      3.   No Final Inspection Or Certificate Of Occupancy Unless Tax Paid: No
final inspection shall be made by the town building inspector, and no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless an audit has either been
completed by the manager and all sales taxes due have been paid or arrangements
therefor made with the town manager, or the town manager has specifically
waived such audit.
   C.   Status Of Unpaid Tax In Bankruptcy And Receivership: Whenever the
business or property of any taxpayer subject to this chapter shall be placed in
receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized
under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed
by this chapter and for which said retailer is in any way liable under the
terms of this chapter, shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the
property of said taxpayer, and no sheriff, receiver, assignee, or other officer
shall sell the property of any person subject to this chapter under process or
order of any court, without first ascertaining from the town manager the amount
of any taxes due and payable under this chapter, and if there be any such taxes
due, owing or unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the
amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of said sale before making payment of
any monies to judgment creditor or other claims of any nature whatsoever.
   D.   Refusal To Make Returns; Estimate Of Taxes; Notice Of Final
Determination Assessment; Demand For Payment:
      1.   Assessment Of Taxes: If any person or taxpayer or vendor fails,
neglects, or refuses to collect the tax or make a return and pay the tax as
required by this chapter or should fail to remit the proper amount of tax or
underpays the tax because of negligence, fraud or on a regular basis, the town
manager shall make an estimate based upon such information as may be available
and shall add thereto the additions to tax, penalty and interest as set forth
in section
3-2-13 of this chapter and promptly thereafter give to the delinquent taxpayer
written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest which notice of
assessment shall be served personally or by certified or registered mail and
which notice of final determination assessment and demand for payment shall be
due and payable ten (10) days from such service.
      2.   Hearing And Appeals Provisions: The provisions as to hearings and
appeals as set forth in sections
3-2-15 and
3-2-16 of this chapter shall apply to such notice of final determination
assessment and demand for payment.
   E.   Notice Of Tax Lien: If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by this
chapter and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or as shown by
assessments duly made as provided herein, are not paid within ten (10) days
after the same are due, the town shall issue a notice to the taxpayer by
certified mail, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax,
penalties and interest, the date of the accrual thereof, and tangible personal
property of the taxpayer.
   F.   Issuance Of Distraint Warrant; Filing Of Lien: Said notice shall be on
forms prescribed by the town manager and shall be verified by him or his duly
qualified representative whose duties are the collection of such tax, and may
be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the state in
which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property, and the filing of
such notice shall create such lien on such property in the county and
constitute notice thereof. After said notice has been filed, or concurrently
therewith, or at any time when taxes due are unpaid, whether such notice be
filed or not, the town manager may issue a distraint warrant as provided in
subsection H of this section.
   G.   Jeopardy Assessment And Distraint:
      1.   Jeopardy Enforcement: If the town manager finds that collection of
the tax will be jeopardized by delay in his discretion, he may declare the
taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax, and issue notice and
demand for payment thereof, and having done so, that tax shall be due and
payable forthwith, and the town manager may proceed immediately to collect such
tax as provided in subsection F of this section.
      2.   Immediate Enforcement Action: In any other case wherein it appears
that the revenue is in jeopardy, the town manager may immediately issue demand
for payment; and, regardless of the provisions of sections
3-2-15 and
3-2-16 of this chapter, the tax shall be due and payable forthwith and, in his
discretion, the town manager may proceed immediately to collect said tax as
provided in subsection H of this section.
      3.   Security For Payment: Collection under either subsection G1 or G2 of
this section may be stayed if the taxpayer gives such security for payment as
shall be satisfactory to the town manager.
   H.   Methods Of Enforcing Collection:
      1.   When Distraint Issued: The town manager may issue a warrant under
his own hand directed to any "sheriff" of any county of the state, commanding
him to distrain, seize, and sell the personal property of the taxpayer, except
such personal property as is exempt from execution and sale by any statute of
this state, for the payment of the tax due together with penalties and interest
accrued thereon and cost of execution.
         a.   When any deficiency in tax is not paid within ten (10) days from
the mailing of notice of final determination assessment and demand for payment
therefor and no hearing has been requested and no appeal from such deficiency
assessment has been docketed with any district court of this state within said
period; or
         b.   When any other amount of tax, penalty, or interest is not paid
within ten (10) days from the mailing of assessment and demand for payment
thereof; or
         c.   Immediately upon making of a jeopardy assessment or of the
issuance of a demand for payment, as provided in subsection G of this section.
      2.   Distraint Seizure; Advertisement Of Sale; Owner Recovers Seized
Property By Purchase: The agent charged with the collection shall make or cause
to be made an account of the goods or effects distrained, a copy of which
signed by the agent making such distraint, shall be left with the owner or
possessor, or at his usual place of abode with some member of his family over
the age of eighteen (18) years, or at his usual place of business with his
stenographer, bookkeeper, or chief clerk, or if the taxpayer is a corporation,
shall be left with any officer, manager, general agent, or agent for process,
with a note of the sum demanded and the time and place of sale; and shall
forthwith cause to be published a notice of the time and place of sale,
together with a description of the property to be sold in a legal newspaper
within the county wherein distraint is made, or, in lieu thereof and in the
discretion of the town manager the agent or sheriff shall cause such notice to
be publicly posted at the courthouse of the county wherein such distraint is
made, and copies thereof to be posted in at least two (2) other public places
within said county. The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10)
days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of such notification to the
owner or possessor of the property and the publication or posting of such
notices. Said sale may be adjourned from time to time by said agent or sheriff
if he deems it advisable, but not for a time to exceed in all ninety (90) days
from the date first fixed for the sale. When any personal property is
advertised for sale under distraint as aforesaid, the agent or sheriff making
the seizure shall proceed to sell such property at public auction, offering the
same at not less than a fair minimum price, including the expenses of making
the seizure and advertising the sale, and if the amount bid for the property at
the sale is not equal to the fair minimum price so fixed, the agent or sheriff
conducting the sale may declare the same to be purchased by him for the town.
The property so purchased may be sold by the agent or sheriff under such
regulations as may be prescribed by the town manager. In any case of distraint
for the payment of taxes, the goods, chattels, or effects so distrained shall
be restored to the owner or possessor, if prior to the sale, the amount due is
paid, together with the fees and other charges or may be redeemed by any person
holding a chattel mortgage or other evidence of right of possession.
      3.   Certificate Of Sale; Evidence Of Purchase: In all cases of sale, the
agent or sheriff making the sale shall issue a certificate of sale to each
purchaser, and such certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the right of
the agent or sheriff to make such sale, and the conclusive evidence of the
regularity of his proceedings in making the sale; and shall transfer to the
purchaser all right, title, and interest of such delinquency in and to the
property sold; and where such property consists of certificates of stock in the
possession of the agent or sheriff, the certificate of sale shall be notice,
when received, to any corporation, company, or association of said transfer,
and said certificate of such sale shall be authority for such corporation,
company, or association to record the transfer on its books and records; and
where the subject of sale is securities or other evidences of debt, in the
possession of the agent or sheriff, the certificate of sale shall be good and
valid evidence of title in the person holding the same, as against any other
person. Any surplus remaining above the taxes, penalties, interest, costs, and
expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale, shall be returned
to the owner, or such other person having a legal right thereto, and on demand,
the town manager shall render an account in writing of the sale.
      4.   Filing And Release Of Lien: Any employee, agent, or representative
of the town manager to whom a warrant has been issued may file a notice of lien
in such forms as the town manager may prescribe with the person in possession
of any personal property or right to property belonging to the taxpayer, and if
not previously recorded, the filing of such notice of lien shall operate from
the date of such filing. The town manager may release said lien as to any part
or all of the property or rights to property covered by any such lien upon such
terms as he may deem proper.
      5.   Lien Released: Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the
county clerk and recorder as herein provided, upon payment of all taxes,
penalties, and interest covered thereby, shall be released by the town manager
in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released.
   I.   Recovery Of Unpaid Tax By Action At Law:
      1.   Action At Law: The town manager may also treat any such taxes,
penalties, interest, or collection costs due and unpaid as a debt due the town
from the taxpayer. In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof,
or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the town manager may receive at
law the amount of such taxes, penalties, interest, and collection costs in such
county or district court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has his
principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be
collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the town
manager as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due.
      2.   Writs Of Attachment: Such actions may be actions in attachment, and
writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff, and in any such proceedings,
no bond shall be required of the town manager nor shall any sheriff require of
the town manager an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment, or
writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings; and the town
manager may prosecute appeals or writs of error, in such cases without the
necessity of providing bond therefor. It shall be the duty of the town
attorney, when requested by the town manager to commence action for the
recovery of taxes due under this chapter, and this remedy shall be in addition
to all other existing remedies or remedies provided in this chapter.
      3.   Civil Action To Enforce Lien: In any case where there has been a
refusal or neglect to pay any tax due the town of Winter Park and statement or
notice shall have been filed, which under law, creates a lien upon any real
property for such tax, the town manager may cause a civil action to be filed in
the district court of the county in which is situated any real property which
is subject to said lien, to enforce the lien of the town of Winter Park for
such tax upon the real property situated in the county or in any other county
in the state which may be subject to such lien or to subject any real property
or any right, title, or interest in real property to the payment of such tax.
The court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds
of such sale, according to the findings of such court in respect to the
interest of the parties and of the town of Winter Park the proceedings in such
action and the manner of sale, the period for and manner of redemption from
such sale and the execution of deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with
the law and practice relating to foreclosures of mortgages upon real property.
In any such action, the court may appoint a receiver of the real property
involved in such action if equity so requires.
   J.   Party Defendant: In any action affecting the title to real estate or
the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the town of Winter
Park may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining an adjudication
of determination of its lien upon the property involved therein, and in any
such action service of summons upon the town manager or any other person
permitted by law, shall be sufficient service and binding upon the town of
Winter Park.
   K.   Certificate Of Discharge; Partial; Values Determined:
      1.   Certificate Of Discharge Subject To Lien: If any property, real or
personal, under the law, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of any tax
due the town of Winter Park, the town manager may issue a certificate of
discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if he finds that the
taxes have been paid in relationship to the fair market value of such property.
      2.   Certificate Of Discharge At Part Of Property: If any property, real
or personal, under the law, shall be subject to a lien for the payment of any
tax due to the town of Winter Park the town manager may issue certificate of
discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if there be paid over
to the town manager, in part, satisfaction of the liability in respect to such
tax an amount determined by the town manager which shall not be less than the
value, as determined by him, of the interest of the town of Winter Park, in the
part to be so discharged.
      3.   How Values Determined: In determining such values, the town manager
shall give consideration to the fair market value of the part to be so
discharged and to such lien thereon as have priority to the lien of the town of
Winter Park.
      4.   Certificate Of Release Conclusive: A certificate of release or of
partial discharge issued under subsection K1 of this section shall be held
conclusive in order that the lien of the town of Winter Park upon the property
release therein is extinguished, but shall not extinguish, nor release, any
portion of the lien nor property not specified in the release.
   L.   Summons To Court For Violation Of Code: The town manager or his duly
authorized agent may, at the discretion of the town manager summons to Winter
Park municipal court any person who may be in violation of this chapter as set
forth in section
3-2-18 of this chapter and elsewhere herein. (See subsection 3-2-13H of this
chapter for special penalty.)
   M.   Closing Agreements:
      1.   Satisfaction Of Liability: For the purpose of facilitating the
settlement and distribution of estates, trusts, receiverships, other fiduciary
relationships, and corporations in the process of dissolution or which have
been dissolved, the town manager may agree with the fiduciary or director upon
the amount of taxes due from the decedent, or from the decedent's estate, the
trust, receivership, or other fiduciary relationship, or corporation, for any
of his or its taxable periods, under the provisions of the taxes covered by
this chapter and except upon a showing of fraud, malfeasance or
misrepresentation of a material fact, payment in accordance with such agreement
shall be full satisfaction of the taxes for the taxable periods to which the
agreement related.
      2.   Personal Liability: Except as provided in subsection M4 of this
section, any personal representative of a decedent, or of the estate of a
decedent, or any trustee, receiver, or other person acting in a fiduciary
capacity, or any director of a corporation in the process of dissolution or
which has been dissolved, who distributes the estate or fund in his control
without having first paid any taxes covered by this chapter due from such
decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership, or corporation,
covered by this chapter and which may be assessed within the time limited by
this chapter.
      3.   Notification Of Liability: The distributee of a decedent's estate,
or a trust estate or fund or the stockholder of any dissolved corporation who
receives any of the property of such decedent's estate, trust estate, fund, or
corporation, shall be liable to the extent of the decedent, trust estate, fund,
or corporation, covered by this chapter and which may be assessed within the
time limited by this chapter. Notice to such distributee or stockholder shall
be given in the same manner and within the time limit which would have been
applicable had there been no distribution.
      4.   Limitation Of Liability:
         a.   In case the tax imposed by this chapter is due from a decedent,
or his estate, or by a corporation, in order for personal liability under
subsection M2 of this section to remain in effect, determination of the tax due
shall be made and notice and demand therefor shall issue within eighteen (18)
months after written request for such determination, filed after the filing of
the decedent's final return or filed after the filing of the return of the
decedent's estate with respect to which such request is applicable, by any
personal representative of such decedent, or by the corporation, filed after
the filing of its return; but a request under this provision shall not extend
the period of limitation otherwise applicable.
         b.   This subsection M4 will not apply in the case of a corporation
unless:
            (1)   Such request notifies the town manager that the corporation
contemplates dissolution at or before the expiration of such eighteen (18)
month period;
            (2)   The dissolution is begun in good faith before the expiration
of such eighteen (18) month period; and
            (3)   The dissolution is completed.
         c.   Upon the expiration of said eighteen (18) month period, without
determination being made and notice and demand being issued, the personal
representative or representatives of the decedent, and the directors of the
corporation no longer will be liable under the provisions of subsection M2 of
this section. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-18: VIOLATIONS; EVASION; PENALTY:
   A.   Evasion And Avoidance Of Tax: It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any retailer, vendor, consumer, purchaser, or any other person subject to
the tax levied by the town of Winter Park sales and lodging tax code to refuse
to make any return provided to be made by this chapter, or to make any false or
fraudulent return, or any false statements in any return, or to fail or refuse
to make payment to the town manager of any taxes collected or due the town, or
in any manner to evade the collection and payment of the tax, or fail or refuse
to pay such tax or evade the collection and payment of the tax, or any part
thereof, imposed by this chapter, or for any person or purchaser to fail or
refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another
in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter. Any
corporation, partnership, association or person making a false return or a
return containing a false statement shall have violated this chapter and shall
be subject to prosecution and the imposition of penalties as provided by law.
Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to these same
penalties.
   B.   Fine And Imprisonment: Any person, corporation, partnership, or
association who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of any violation thereof and shall be punished by fine and/or
imprisonment in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of this code, and if any
such person is an employee or officer of the town, such violation shall be
grounds for dismissal from his office or employment.
   C.   Separate Violations: Each and every twenty four (24) hours'
continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-19: LIMITATIONS:
   A.   General Limitations:
      1.   Statutory Limitations: Except as provided in this section, the taxes
for any period, together with the interest thereon and penalties with respect
thereto, imposed by this chapter shall not be assessed, nor credit taken, nor
shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant be issued, or suit for
collection be instituted, or any other action to collect the same be commenced,
more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable;
nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before
the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been
filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such lien shall
continue only for one year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of
false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax together with
interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the
collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of
such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the manager may agree in writing to
an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent
agreements in writing. In the case of failure to file a return, the sales tax
or lodging tax may be assessed and collected at any time.
      2.   Date Fixed: For purposes of this section a tax return filed before
the last day prescribed by law or by regulation promulgated pursuant to law for
the filing thereof, shall be considered as filed on such last day.
      3.   Extension Of Period: Where, before the expiration of the time
prescribed in this section for the assessment of tax, both the town manager and
the taxpayer have consented in writing to any assessment after such time, the
tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed
upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in
writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
      4.   Revision Qualification; Periods Covered: Nothing in this section
shall be construed to limit any right accrued or to revive any liability barred
by any statute at the effective date hereof.
   B.   Trust Status Of Tax In Possession Of Retailer: All sums of money paid
by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this chapter shall be and
remain public money, the property of Winter Park in the hands of such retailer
and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the town of
Winter Park until paid to the town, and for failure to so pay to the town such
retailer shall be punished as provided by the law. Thus, the statute of
limitation provided herein does not apply to collections of public money in the
possession of the retailer and such monies are collectable at any time after
their due date upon demand of the town manager. (Ord. 225, Series of 1994)
3-2-20: COORDINATED AUDIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Eligibility: Any taxpayer licensed in this town pursuant to section
3-2-9 of this chapter, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four
(4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax
collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein.
   B.   Request: Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended
audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the
taxpayer may provide to the finance director of this town, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating
the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the
name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list
of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax
in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that
the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage of time based limitation upon
this town's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period.
   C.   Audit Limitation: Except as provided in subsection G of this section,
any taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and
promptly signs a waiver of subsection 3-2-19A1 of this chapter may be audited
by this town during the twelve (12) months after such request is submitted only
through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to
participate in such an audit.
   D.   Notice To Other Municipalities: If this town desires to participate in
the audit of a taxpayer that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit
pursuant to subsection C of this section, the town manager shall so notify the
finance director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the
taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The town manager shall then
cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of
arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time
during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be
covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records
most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit.
   E.   Audit Coordinator: If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit
was in response to a notice of audit issued by this town, this town's manager
shall facilitate arrangements between this town and other municipalities
participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some
other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The town
manager shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever
practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the
taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the
participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those
municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among
such participating municipalities.
   F.   Taxpayer Notice: If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was
in response to a notice of audit issued by this town, this town's manager
shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the town and other
participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the
taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be
audited and the records most likely to be required by participating
municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The town manager shall
also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit.
   G.   Restrictions: The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this section
shall not apply:
      1.   When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit,
      2.   To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the
effective date of this section,
      3.   When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of the statute of
limitations per subsection 3-2-19A1 of this chapter, or
      4.   When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a
coordinated audit as provided in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 225,
Series of 1994)
3-2-21: INTERTOWN CLAIMS FOR RECOVERY:
The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related
to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is
not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or
vendor to correctly pay, collect, and remit sales and lodging taxes to the
town.
   A.   Definition: As used here, "claim for recovery" means a claim for
reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction.
   B.   Notification Of Improper Tax Collections And/Or Remittances: When it is
determined by the town manager of the town that sales tax owed to the town has
been reported and paid to another municipality, the town shall promptly notify
the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as
of the date of the notice the vendor must cease improper tax collections and
remittances.
   C.   Claim For Recovery: The town may make a written claim for recovery
directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed
to the town, or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of
the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for recovery
shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or
vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality,
evidence to substantiate the claim, and a request that the municipality approve
or deny in whole or part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The
municipality to which the town submits a claim for recovery may, for good
cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of
such extension by the town shall not be reasonably withheld.
   D.   Response To Claim: Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for
recovery, the town shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a
portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the
municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved
or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the
claim is approved in whole or in part, the town shall remit the undisputed
amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of
approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or
taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for
recovery may only be made for good cause.
   E.   Denial Of Claim: The town may deny a claim on the grounds that it has
previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same
taxpayer.
   F.   Limitation: The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited
to the thirty six (36) month period prior to the date the municipality that was
wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. (Ord. 225, Series of
1994)
3-2-22: NOTICE OF SALES TAX ORDINANCE AMENDMENT:
   A.   Control Register Initiation: In order to initiate a central register of
sales and lodging tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales
tax collection, the town manager shall file with the Colorado Municipal League
prior to the effective date of this section a copy of the town sales tax
ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of this
section.
   B.   Control Register Maintenance: In order to keep current the central
register of sales tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales
tax collection, the town manager shall file with the Colorado Municipal League
prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales tax ordinance
amendment enacted by the town.
   C.   Failure To File: Failure of the town to file such ordinance or
ordinance amendment pursuant to this section shall not invalidate any provision
of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. (Ord. 225, Series
of 1994)
3-2-23: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Severance Clause: If a court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge to
be invalid or unconstitutional any word, clause, sentence, paragraphs, section,
article or part of this chapter, such judgment or decree shall not affect,
impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this chapter; but the effect
thereof shall be confined to the word, clause, sentence, paragraph, section,
article or part of this chapter so adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional
and to this end this chapter is declared to be severable.
   B.   Safety Clause: The town council hereby finds, determines and declares
that this chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health and safety.
   C.   Amendments: The town council may amend, alter or change this chapter
except as to the rate of tax herein imposed, subsequent to adoption by a
majority vote of the town council. Such amendment, alteration or change need
not be submitted to the electors of the town for their approval.
   D.   Elections: Beginning at the regular municipal election of 1996, and at
the regular municipal election each four (4) years thereafter, the question of
the continuation of the one percent (1%) sales tax increase and the lodging tax
approved at the special election of November 5, 1991, shall be submitted to the
town's qualified electors. Should the majority of those voting vote against the
continuation of such sales tax increase and lodging tax, such taxes shall, to
the extent not needed to meet debt service obligations on any then outstanding
revenue bonds issued by the town, be repealed effective July 1 of the year next
succeeding such election.
   E.   Repeal: The repeal or the repeal and reenactment of any provision of
this code or subsections thereof, as provided in this chapter, shall not affect
any right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any violation that occurred
prior to the effective date hereof, any prosecution commenced, not any other
action or proceeding as commenced under or by virtue of the provision repealed
or repealed and reenacted. The repeal of any provision hereby shall not revive
any provision or any ordinance previously repealed or superseded unless
expressly stated herein.
   F.   Health, Safety And Welfare: The town council hereby finds, determines
and declares that this chapter is necessary and proper for the health, safety
and welfare of the town of Winter Park and the inhabitants thereof. (Ord. 225,
Series of 1994)
3-2-24: ENHANCED SALES TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM:
   A.   Establishment: There is hereby established within the town an enhanced
sales tax incentive program (the "ESTIP").
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of the ESTIP is to encourage the establishment or
substantial expansion of retail sales tax generating businesses within the
town, thereby stimulating the economy of and within the town, providing
employment and opportunities for residents and guests of the town and others,
further expanding the goods available for purchase and consumption by residents
and guests of the town, and further increasing the sales tax collected by the
town, which increased sales tax collections will enable the town to provide
expanded and improved municipal services to and for the benefit of the
residents and businesses of the town, while at the same time providing public
or public related improvements at no cost, or at deferred cost, to the town and
its taxpayers and residents.
   C.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
    BASE AMOUNT: The historic level of sales taxes at the property in question,
or a similar property within the area in the event of a new business, and a
reasonable allowance for increased sales due to the improvements and upgrades
completed as a result of inclusion in the ESTIP.
   ENHANCED SALES TAX: The amount of sales tax collected by the town over and
above a base amount negotiated by, and agreed upon by, the applicant and the
town, and which amount is approved by the town council, which base amount shall
never be lower than the amount of sales tax collected by the town at the
property in question in the previous twelve (12) months.
   OWNER OR PROPRIETOR: The record owner or operator of an individual business.
   PUBLIC OR PUBLIC RELATED IMPROVEMENTS: Means and includes streets,
sidewalks, trails, curbs, gutters, pedestrian malls, streetlights, drainage
facilities, landscaping, statuaries, fountains, identification signs,
wayfinding signage, traffic safety devices, bicycle paths, off street parking
facilities, parking garages, benches, off site water and sewer lines, lift
stations, multimodal transportation infrastructure, and all necessary
incidental and appurtenant structures and improvements, together with the
relocation and improvement of existing utility lines, and any other
improvements of a similar nature which are specifically approved by the town
upon the town's finding that said improvements are public or public related
improvements and that such improvements shall benefit the economic health of
the town.
   D.   Application: Participation in the ESTIP shall be by approval of the
town, exercising its legislative discretion in good faith. An owner or
proprietor of a newly established or proposed retail sales tax generating
business or location, or the owner or proprietor of an existing retail sales
tax generating business or location which wished to expand substantially, may
apply to the town for inclusion within the ESTIP, provided that the new or
expanded business is reasonably likely to generate enhanced sales tax of at
least twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in the first year of operation.
   E.   Criteria: Approval of an application for inclusion in the ESTIP shall
be given by the town, at a public hearing, based upon the following criteria:
      1.   The amount of enhanced sales tax which is reasonably to be
anticipated to be derived by the town through the expanded or new retail sales
tax generating business;
      2.   The public benefits which are provided by the applicant through
public works, public improvements, additional employment for town residents and
the like;
      3.   The amount of expenditures which may be deferred by the town based
upon public improvements to be completed by the applicant;
      4.   The conformance of the applicant's property or project with the
comprehensive plan and zoning ordinances of the town; and
      5.   The execution of the agreement required by this section.
   F.   Agreement: Each applicant shall execute an agreement with the town
containing the following provisions, at a minimum:
      1.   A list of those public or public related improvements which justify
approval, and the amount which shall be spent on said improvements;
      2.   The maximum amount of enhanced sales taxes to be shared, and the
maximum time during which said agreement shall continue, it being expressly
understood that any such agreement shall expire and be of no further force and
affect upon the occurrence of the earlier to be reached of the maximum time of
the agreement (whether or not the maximum amount to be shared has been reached)
or the maximum amount to be shared (whether or not the maximum time set forth
has expired);
      3.   A statement that the agreement is personal, not transferable and
does not run with the land;
      4.   A statement that the agreement shall never constitute a debt or
obligation of the town within any constitutional or statutory provision;
      5.   The base amount per month, and a statement that if, in any month
sales taxes received from the property do not at least equal said amount, that
there shall be no sharing of funds for said month;
      6.   A provision stating that any enhanced sales taxes subject to sharing
shall be escrowed in the event there is a legal challenge to the ESTIP or the
approval of any application therefor;
      7.   A provision stating that the obligations and benefits agreement may
not be assigned in whole or in any part without the express consent of the
town, and that no third party shall be entitled to rely upon or enforce the
agreement; and
      8.   A provision that applicant shall have no right, claim, lien or
priority in or to the town's sales tax revenue superior to or on parity with
the rights, claims or liens of the holders as any sales tax revenue bonds,
notes, certificates, or debentures payable from or secured by any sales taxes,
existing or hereafter issued by the town; and that all rights of the successful
applicant are, and at all times shall be, subordinate and inferior to the
rights, claims, and liens of the holders of any and all such sales tax revenue
bonds, notes, certificates, or debentures, payable from or secured by any sales
taxes issued by the town.
   G.   Approval: Approval by the town of an agreement implementing the ESTIP
shall entitle the successful applicant to share in enhanced sales tax derived
from the applicant's property or business in an amount which shall not in any
event exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the enhanced sales taxes. The time
period in which said enhanced sales taxes may be shared shall not commence
until all public or public related improvements are completed, and shall be
limited by the town, in its discretion, to a specified time, or until a
specified amount is reached.
   H.   Permitted Use Of Funds: The uses to which said shared enhanced sales
tax funds may be put by an applicant shall be strictly limited to public or
public related improvements which are expressly approved by the town at the
time of consideration of the application.
   I.   Payment: The base figure for sales taxes shall be divided into twelve
(12) monthly increments, which increments are subject to agreement between the
parties, and approval by the town, and which increments shall be reasonably
related to the average monthly performance of the business or property in
question, or similar businesses in the area (adjusted for seasonal variations).
If in any month the agreed upon figure is not met by the applicant for said
month, no increment shall be shared until that deficit, and any other
cumulative deficit, has been met, so that at the end of any twelve (12) month
cycle, funds in excess of those enhanced sales tax funds agreed to be shared
shall not have been shared.
   J.   Existing Tax Revenue Sources Unaffected: It is an overriding
consideration and determination of the town that existing sources of town sales
tax revenues shall not be used, impaired or otherwise affected by the ESTIP.
Therefore, only enhanced sales taxes generated by the property described in an
application shall be subject to division under the ESTIP. It shall be the
affirmative duty of the finance director to collect and segregate all such
enhanced sales taxes apart from the sales taxes generated by and collected from
the town.
   K.   No Joint Venture: Notwithstanding any provision hereof, the town shall
never be a joint venturer in any private entity or activity which participates
in the ESTIP, and the town shall never be liable or responsible for any debt or
obligation of any participant in the ESTIP. (Ord. 496, Series of 2016)
CHAPTER 3
SPORTS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Liquor Sales On Optional Premises
3-3-1: LIQUOR SALES ON OPTIONAL PREMISES:
The Town hereby adopts the standards and regulations of the Colorado Liquor
Code applicable to the issuance of optional premises license or for optional
premises for a hotel and restaurant license, and also adopts the following
standards for issuance of an optional premises license or for optional premises
for a hotel and restaurant license: (Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
   A.   Issuance of an optional premises license shall be limited to the
following outdoor sports and recreational facilities:
      Country clubs
      Golf courses
      Ski areas
      Swimming pools
      Tennis courts
   B.   Each licensee shall demonstrate to the Town Council a need for optional
premises or premises license.
   C.   Applicants shall demonstrate to the Town Council that the size of the
proposed optional premises justifies the issuance of a separate optional
premises license.
   D.   Application for an optional premises license or optional premises for a
hotel and restaurant license shall be on forms provided by the Town Clerk.
   E.   No applications for an optional premises license or optional premises
for a hotel and restaurant license shall be considered by the Town Council
prior to seven (7) days after payment of fees and completion of all forms
required by the Town Clerk. (Ord. 110, Series of 1983)
   F.   The advance notice required by sections 44-3-310(3) and (4), Colorado
Revised Statutes shall not specify a date of use which is more than one hundred
eighty (180) days after the notice date. (Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Local Licensing Authority
3-4-2: Nudity, Sexual Conduct, Etc., In Licensed Establishments
3-4-3: Penalty
3-4-4: Duty To Report
3-4-5: Special Event Permits
3-4-6: Entertainment Districts
3-4-7: Alcoholic Beverage Tastings
3-4-1: LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority conferred by state law, there is hereby
created a Local Licensing Authority for the Town (the "Authority").
   B.   The Authority shall have two (2) divisions as follows: the Town Council
shall serve as the Authority for all new liquor license applications, liquor
license renewal applications, temporary permits, special event permits,
entertainment district applications, applications for change of manager,
applications for transfer of ownership, applications for modification of
existing liquor licenses, and applications for takeout and delivery permits;
and the Municipal Court shall serve as the Authority for all disciplinary
actions, including the show cause orders and hearings, fines, suspensions and
revocations, and other disciplinary actions. The Town Council may delegate any
of its duties under this Section to the Town Clerk, by ordinance. (Ord. 536,
Series of 2020; amd. Ord. 545, Series of 2020)
3-4-2: NUDITY, SEXUAL CONDUCT, ETC., IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   In this section:
   LICENSE: Any alcoholic beverage license issued by the Town.
   LICENSED PREMISES: The real estate in the Town for which a license is
issued.
   NUDITY: The showing of the postpubertal human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of a
postpubertal female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the
covered human male genitals in a discernably turgid state. For the purposes of
this definition, the female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only
or the nipple and the areola are covered.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of
the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
   B.   The following acts or conduct in a premises which has been issued a
license are contrary to the public welfare and, therefore, no license issued
under this chapter or under State law shall be held at any premises where such
conduct or acts are permitted to occur:
      1.   The licensee, owner, or manager of any licensed establishment
permitting or allowing any nudity to occur in the licensed establishment.
      2.   The licensee, owner, or manager of any licensed establishment
permitting or allowing any sexual conduct to occur in the licensed
establishment.
   C.   The Authority may suspend or revoke a license for violations of this
section upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with this section.
The authority may assess individual fines for violations. A fine schedule may
be adopted by resolution. This section shall not be deemed to preclude other
civil remedies, including injunctive relief, pending the outcome of the
hearing.
   D.   The Authority hereby adopts by reference the category of violations and
aggravating and mitigating factors created by the Department of Revenue in
Regulation 47-603 of 1 CCR 203-2, as amended. However, the Authority retains
the discretion in assessing penalties within the bounds of the law. (Ord. 186,
Series of 1991; amd. Ord. 536, Series of 2020; amd. Ord. 545, Series of 2020)
3-4-3: PENALTY:
In addition to all legal remedies available for the enforcement of this
chapter, such as injunctions and mandatory restraining orders and any other
relief, any violation of this chapter and the said code adopted hereby, from
and after the effective date hereof shall be punishable in accordance with
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 435, Series of 2010)
3-4-4: DUTY TO REPORT:
   A.   As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
    ASSAULT: Any of the offenses described in Colorado Revised Statutes
sections 18-3-202 through 18-3-204.
   DAMAGING PROPERTY: The offense described in section
4-9B-8 of this Code.
   DISORDERLY CONDUCT: The offense described in section
4-9B-4 of this Code.
   HARASSMENT: The offense described in Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-9-
111.
   LICENSE: Any license or special event permit issued by the Town under the
Colorado Beer Code, Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-4-101, et seq., the
Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-3-101, et seq., or
Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-5-101, et seq.
   LICENSED PREMISES: The premises defined in Colorado Revised Statutes
sections 44-3-103(3) and 44-3-103(24) and any premises for which a special
event permit has been issued under Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-5-101
et seq.
   LICENSEE: Any sole proprietor that holds a license; any partner of a general
partnership that holds a license; any general partner of a limited partnership
that holds a license; any member or manager of a limited liability company that
holds a license; any person owning ten percent (10%) or more of the issued and
outstanding stock of a corporation that holds a license; or any person having a
ten percent (10%) or more ownership interest in any other form of business
entity that holds a license.
   MENACING: The offense described in Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-3-
206.
   PROHIBITED USE OF A WEAPON: The offense described in Colorado Revised
Statutes section 18-12-106.
   PUBLIC INDECENCY: The offense described in section
4-9B-3 of this Code.
   TRESPASSING: The offense described in section
4-9B-9 of this Code. (Ord. 453, Series of 2012; amd. Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
   B.   It is unlawful for a licensee or any agent, manager, or employee
thereof to fail to immediately report to the Fraser- Winter Park Police
Department the occurrence of any of the following unlawful acts which occur on
the licensed premises: assault; damaging property; disorderly conduct;
harassment; menacing; prohibited use of a weapon; public indecency; or
trespassing.
   C.   It shall not be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
section that a person was not personally present upon the licensed premises at
the time of occurrence of any unlawful act set forth in subsection B of this
section. However, an agent, manager, or employee of a licensee shall not be
liable for a violation of this section when absent from the licensed premises
while not on duty.
   D.   In addition to any other penalty imposed by law, the Town and/or its
local licensing authority may consider a person's failure to comply with this
section in any action relating to the issuance, renewal, suspension,
revocation, or cancellation of a license. (Ord. 453, Series of 2012)
3-4-5: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
   A.   Pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-5-107(5)(a), the Town
Clerk, acting as the local licensing authority, need not notify the State
licensing authority to obtain the State licensing authority's approval or
disapproval of applications for special event permits. (Ord. 513, Series of
2018)
   B.   The provision of this section notwithstanding, the Town Clerk shall
report to the Colorado Liquor Enforcement Division, within ten (10) days after
the Town Clerk issues a special event permit, the name of the organization to
which the permit was issued, the address of the permitted location and the
permitted dates of alcohol beverage service. (Ord. 447, Series of 2011)
   C.   Upon receipt of an application for a special event permit, the Town
Clerk shall, as required by Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-5-107(5)(c),
access information made available on the State licensing authority's website to
determine the Statewide permitting activity of the organization applying for
the permit. The Town Clerk shall consider compliance with the provisions of
Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-5-105(3), which restricts the number of
permits issued to an organization within a calendar year to fifteen (15),
before approving any application. (Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
   D.   A special event permit may be issued only upon a satisfactory showing
by an organization or a qualified political candidate that:
      1.   Other existing facilities are not available or are inadequate for
the needs of the organization or political candidate; and
      2.   Existing licensed facilities are inadequate for the purposes of
serving members or guests of the organization or political candidate and that
additional facilities are necessary by reason of the nature of the special
event being scheduled; or
      3.   The organization or political candidate is temporarily occupying
premises other than the regular premises of such organization or candidate
during special events such as civic celebrations or County fairs and that
members of the general public will be served during such special events. (Ord.
447, Series of 2011)
   E.   Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount equal to the maximum local licensing fee
established by Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-5-107(2). (Ord. 513, Series
of 2018)
3-4-6: ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS:
   A.   Purpose: The Town is exercising its local option to allow common
consumption areas in the Town by establishing entertainment districts pursuant
to the Colorado Liquor Code. The regulations in this section are in addition to
all other applicable regulations in the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Beer
Code and this Code.
   B.   Authority:
      1.   The local licensing authority is authorized to: certify and
decertify promotional associations; designate the location, size, security, and
hours of operation of common consumption areas; and allow attachment of
licensed premises to common consumption areas consistent with this section.
      2.   The local licensing authority may impose reasonable conditions on
the licensing of common consumption areas, the certification of promotional
associations, and the attachment of licensed premises to common consumption
areas.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
    COMMON CONSUMPTION AREA: Means an area designed as a common area located
within a designated entertainment district and approved by the local licensing
authority that uses physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle
traffic and limit pedestrian access.
   ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT: Means an area within the Town that is designated as
an entertainment district of not more than one hundred (100) acres and
containing at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of premises licensed
as a tavern, lodging and entertainment facility, hotel and restaurant, brew
pub, distillery pub, vintner's restaurant, beer and wine licensee, manufacturer
or beer wholesaler that operates a sales room, or limited winery at the time
the district is created.
   LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY: Means the Town Council.
   PROMOTIONAL ASSOCIATION: Means an association that is incorporated in
Colorado that organizes and promotes entertainment activities within a common
consumption area and is organized or authorized by two (2) or more people who
own or lease property within an entertainment district.
   D.   Creation: Entertainment districts shall be approved by resolution of
the Town Council. Upon approval of an entertainment district, the Town
authorizes the licensing of designated common consumption areas in which
alcohol beverages may be sold and consumed subject to the requirements of this
Code, the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code.
   E.   Certification Of A Promotional Association:
      1.   An application to certify a promotional association shall include
the following minimum information:
         a.   A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws and a list of
all directors and officers of the promotional association. A member of each
licensed premises shall serve as one of the directors on the board of the
promotional association which shall have at least two (2) licensed premises
attached to the common consumption area;
         b.   A detailed map of the proposed common consumption area, including
without limitation: the location of physical barriers, entrances and exits, the
location of attached licensed premises, and identification of licensed premises
that are adjacent, but not to be attached to the common consumption area. The
size of the common consumption area shall not exceed the area approved as the
entertainment district within which the common consumption area is located but
may be a smaller area within the entertainment district at any time; provided
that the new area is clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the
area to motor vehicle traffic and to limit pedestrian access;
         c.   A security plan, including evidence of training and approval of
personnel, a detailed description of security arrangements and the approximate
location of security personnel within the common consumption area during
operating hours;
         d.   A list of dates and hours of operation of the common consumption
area;
         e.   Documentation showing possession of the common consumption area
by the promotional association;
         f.   A list of the attached licensees, of which there will be a
minimum of two (2), listing the following information: liquor license number, a
list of any past liquor violations, and a copy of any operational agreements;
         g.   An insurance certificate of general liability and liquor
liability insurance naming the Town as an additional insured in a minimum
amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00);
         h.   Documentation of how the application addresses the reasonable
requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the adult inhabitants as
evidenced by petitions, written testimony or otherwise; and
         i.   The application fee, as established by resolution of the Town
Council.
      2.   Upon approval by the local licensing authority, the terms and
conditions of the approval shall remain effective until and unless a revised or
amended application is submitted to the local licensing authority and approved
using the same procedures under which the original application was approved.
      3.   A certified promotional association shall file an application for
recertification by January 31st of each year, which shall include the
following: all of the information in the original application, plus a copy of
any changes to the articles of incorporation, bylaws or the directors and
officers of the promotional association. Failure to submit a complete
application shall be grounds for the denial of the recertification.
   F.   Application For Attachment To A Common Consumption Area:
      1.   Once certified, a promotional association may operate a common
consumption area within an entertainment district and authorize the attachment
of a licensed premises to the common consumption area, subject to approval by
the local licensing authority. Application for attachment of a licensed
premises to the common consumption area shall include without limitation the
following information:
         a.   Authorization for attachment from the certified promotional
association;
         b.   Name of the representative from the licensed premises proposed
for attachment who would serve as an additional director on the board of the
certified promotional association;
         c.   A detailed map of the common consumption area, including:
location of physical barriers, entrances and exits, location of attached
licensed premises, identification of licensed premises that are adjacent but
not to be attached to the common consumption area and approximate location of
security personnel; and
         d.   The application fee, as established by resolution of the Town
Council.
      2.   The local licensing authority may refuse to authorize, refuse to
reauthorize, or revoke an attachment if:
         a.   The licensed premises to be attached is not within or on the
perimeter of the common consumption area;
         b.   The licensee fails to obtain or retain authority to attach to the
common consumption area from the certified promotional association;
         c.   The licensee fails to establish that the licensed premises and
the common consumption area can be operated without violating this Code, the
Colorado Liquor Code or the Colorado Beer Code or creating a safety risk to the
neighborhood; or
         d.   The licensee violates any provision of the Colorado Liquor Code,
Colorado Beer Code or this Code.
   G.   Operation Of Common Consumption Areas:
      1.   A promotional association or attached licensed premises shall not:
         a.   Employ a person to serve alcohol beverages or provide security
within the common consumption area unless the server has completed the server
and seller training program established by the Director of the Liquor
Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue;
         b.   Sell or provide an alcohol beverage to a customer for consumption
within the common consumption area but not within the licensed premises in a
container that is larger than sixteen (16) ounces;
         c.   Sell or provide an alcohol beverage to a customer for consumption
within the common consumption area but within the licensed premises unless the
container is disposable and contains the name of the vendor in at least 24-
point font;
         d.   Permit customers to leave the licensed premises with an alcohol
beverage unless the beverage container complies with subsections G1b and G1c of
this section;
         e.   Operate the common consumption area during hours the licensed
premises cannot sell alcohol under the limitations imposed by the local
licensing authority or the Colorado Liquor Code;
         f.   Operate the common consumption area in an area that exceeds the
maximum authorized by the local licensing authority or the Colorado Liquor
Code;
         g.   Sell, serve, dispose of, exchange, or deliver, or permit the
sale, serving, giving, or procuring of, an alcohol beverage to a visibly
intoxicated person or to a known habitual drunkard;
         h.   Sell, serve, dispose of, exchange, or deliver, or permit the
sale, serving, or giving of an alcohol beverage to a person under twenty one
(21) years of age; or
         i.   Permit a visibly intoxicated person to loiter within the common
consumption area.
      2.   The promotional association shall promptly remove all alcohol
beverages from the common consumption area at the end of the hours of
operation.
      3.   No person shall consume alcohol within the common consumption area
unless it was purchased from an attached licensed premises.
   H.   Violations: In addition to any other applicable penalties, violations
of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the common
consumption area license, or decertification of the promotional association, or
both. (Ord. 515, Series of 2018)
3-4-7:     ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TASTINGS:
Alcoholic beverage tastings for licensed retail liquor stores, liquor licensed
drugstores and fermented malt beverage and wine retailer licensees are
permitted in the Town. The Town does not require a local application and does
not impose additional limitations on such tastings beyond those set forth in
Title 44, Chapter 3, of the Colorado Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 606, Series of 2023)
CHAPTER 5
NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Regulations
3-5-3: Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this section, the following terms shall mean:
NUDE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment open to the public in which
persons appear in a state of nudity for the purpose of entertaining the patrons
of such establishment.
NUDITY: The showing of the postpubertal human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of a
postpubertal female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the
covered human male genitals in a discernably turgid state. For the purposes of
this definition, the female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only
or the nipple and the areola are covered. (Ord. 185, Series of 1991)
3-5-2: REGULATIONS:
All nude entertainment establishments shall be subject to the following
regulations:
   A.   No one under twenty one (21) years of age shall be admitted to any nude
entertainment establishment. This minimum age limitation also applies to any
employees, agents, servants or independent contractors working on the premises
during hours when nude entertainment is being presented.
   B.   Nude entertainment shall only be available at nude entertainment
establishments from the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight, Monday through Saturday of each week.
   C.   No nude entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained
within five hundred feet (500') of any residentially zoned or used property,
measured from the closest property line of such residential property to the
property line of the nude entertainment establishment.
   D.   No nude entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained
within five hundred feet (500') of any school or church property, measured from
the closest property line of such school or church property to the property
line of the nude entertainment establishment. (Ord. 185, Series of 1991)
3-5-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance. Every person
convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
subsection 1-4-1C of this code. In addition to the penalty provided by this
section, the town may bring an action in the district court for Grand County
for an injunction against the operation of such establishments in a manner
which violates this chapter. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
CHAPTER 6
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
(Rep. by Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
CHAPTER 7
REGULATED MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Authority
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: License Required
3-7-4: Local Licensing Authority
3-7-5: Application; Phase 1 And Phase 2
3-7-6: Issuance, Duration, Renewal Of License
3-7-7: Persons Prohibited As Licensees And Employees
3-7-8: Annual Operating And Administrative Fees
3-7-9: Medical Marijuana Delivery
3-7-10: Operational Restrictions Of Regulated Marijuana Businesses
3-7-11: Signage
3-7-12: Number And Location Of Regulated Marijuana Businesses
3-7-13: Inspection Of Books, Records, And Licensed Premises
3-7-14: Unlawful Acts
3-7-15: Change In Manager; Change In Financial Interest; Transfer Of Ownership;
Change In Location
3-7-16: Reporting Required
3-7-17: Violations And Penalties
3-7-18: No Town Liability; Indemnification
3-7-1: AUTHORITY:
The Town Council hereby finds, determines, and declares that it has the power
to adopt this Chapter pursuant to: Chapter XVIII, section 16 of the Colorado
Constitution; Colorado Revised Statutes section 44-10-104(3); Chapter XX of the
Colorado Constitution; the Town of Winter Park Home Rule Charter; and the Local
Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Chapter 20 of title 29, Colorado
Revised Statutes. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
              A person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who has submitted an application
APPLICANT:    for a license or renewal of a license issued pursuant to this Chapter. If the
              applicant is an entity and not a natural person, applicant shall include all
              persons who are the members, managers, officers, and directors of such entity.
COLORADO      Chapter 10 of Title 44, Colorado Revised Statutes, as may be amended from time
MARIJUANA     to time.
CODE:
DUAL          A regulated marijuana business that operates as both a licensed medical
OPERATION:    marijuana center and a licensed retail marijuana store in accordance with this
              Chapter.
              For the purpose of denying, refusing to renew, suspending, or revoking a
              license, or exercising other discretionary authority granted the local licensing
              authority, means:
              1.   The applicant or licensee has violated, does not meet, or has failed to
              comply with any of the terms, requirements, conditions, or provisions of this
              Chapter, the Colorado Marijuana Code, its rules, or any applicable state or
              local law, rule, or regulation;
              2.   The local licensing authority has determined that the applicant or
              licensee's character, record, or reputation is not satisfactory after
              consideration of factors, which include without limitation the following:
              a.   The applicant or licensee has knowingly submitted false application(s),
              made willful misrepresentations, or knowingly committed fraudulent acts;
              b.   The applicant or licensee has a criminal history of crimes of moral
              turpitude, which may include without limitation murder, burglary, robbery,
              arson, kidnapping, sexual assault, and illegal drugs or narcotics convictions;
              c.   The applicant or licensee has had any previous retail or medical marijuana
              license denied or revoked as a result of violations of law, rule, or regulation,
              or a finding of bad moral character by any licensing authority;
              d.   The applicant or licensee has been found to be currently delinquent in the
              payment of any state or local taxes;
GOOD CAUSE:   e.   The applicant or licensee has an established pattern of multiple statutory
              violations which resulted in the revocation or denial of any other professional
              license, leading to the finding of bad moral character by any licensing
              authority; or
              f.   The licensed premises has been operated in a manner that adversely affects
              the public health, safety, or welfare. Evidence to support such a finding, may
              include without limitation a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct or drug
              related criminal conduct upon or in the immediate vicinity of the premises,
              continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the
              operation of the regulated marijuana business, or an ongoing nuisance condition
              emanating from or caused by the regulated marijuana business.
              3.   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with any special terms or
              conditions of a license, including without limitation those terms and conditions
              that were established at the time of issuance of the license and those imposed
              as a result of any renewal or suspension proceedings held subsequent to the date
              of issuance of the license; or
              4.   The licensed premises has been operated in a manner that adversely affects
              the public health, welfare, or safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the
              licensed business is located. Evidence to support such a finding can include
              without limitation a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct or continuing
              pattern of drug-related criminal conduct within the business.
LICENSE:      A document issued by the Town officially authorizing an applicant to operate a
              regulated marijuana business pursuant to this Chapter.
LICENSEE:     The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this Chapter.
              The premises specified in an application for a license under this Chapter, which
LICENSED      is owned or in possession of the licensee and within which the license is
PREMISES:     authorized to distribute, store, transport, or sell regulated marijuana or
              regulated marijuana products in accordance with state and local law.
              All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds
              thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound,
              manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds,
MARIJUANA:    or its resin, including marijuana concentrate, but excluding industrial hemp,
              fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant,
              sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of
              any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral
              administrations, food, drink, or other product.
MARIJUANA     An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell
CULTIVATION   marijuana to marijuana businesses, to marijuana product manufacturing
FACILITY:     facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA     An entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package
PRODUCT       marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana
MANUFACTURING product manufacturing facilities and to marijuana businesses, but not to
FACILITY:     consumers.
MARIJUANA     Products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended
PRODUCTS:     for use or consumption, including without limitation edible products, ointments,
              and tinctures.
MARIJUANA     An entity licensed by the state to analyze and certify the safety and potency of
TESTING       marijuana.
FACILITY:
MEDICAL       Marijuana that is grown and sold for a purpose authorized by Section 14 of
MARIJUANA:    Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution.
              A person authorized to be licensed to operate a business as described in the
MEDICAL       Colorado Marijuana Code that sells medical marijuana to registered patients or
MARIJUANA     primary caregivers as defined in Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado
CENTER:       Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver, and which a municipality is
              authorized to prohibit as a matter of law.
MEDICAL       A product infused with medical marijuana that is intended for use or consumption
MARIJUANA     other than by smoking, including but not limited to edible products, ointments,
PRODUCT:      and tinctures.
PATIENT:      Has the meaning provided in Section 14(1)(c) of Article XVIII of the Colorado
              Constitution.
PRIMARY       Has the meaning provided in Section 14(1)(f) of Article XVIII of the Colorado
CAREGIVER:    Constitution.
REGULATED     Medical marijuana and retail marijuana.
MARIJUANA:
REGULATED     Medical marijuana products and retail marijuana products, including, without
MARIJUANA     limitation, marijuana concentrate.
PRODUCTS:
RETAIL        Marijuana that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed, or sold by a licensed
MARIJUANA:    retail marijuana store.
RETAIL        A product infused with retail marijuana that is intended for use or consumption
MARIJUANA     other than by smoking, including but not limited to edible products, ointments,
PRODUCT:      and tinctures.
RETAIL        An entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities
MARIJUANA     and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing
STORE:        facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers.
STATE         The authority created by the Colorado Department of Revenue for the purpose of
LICENSING     regulating and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, manufacture,
AUTHORITY:    distribution, sale, and testing of regulated marijuana in the State of Colorado
              pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-10-201. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
 
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   The Town hereby authorizes the operation of regulated marijuana
businesses in the Town as set forth in this Chapter. It is unlawful for any
person to operate a regulated marijuana business in the Town without first
obtaining a license to operate such business in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter. A separate license is required for each specific
business or business entity and for each geographical location. Such license
shall be kept current at all times, and the failure to maintain a current
license shall constitute a violation of this Section.
   B.   The local licensing authority may issue the following regulated
marijuana business licenses:
      1.   Medical marijuana center; or
      2.   Retail marijuana store.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, marijuana cultivation facilities,
marijuana products manufacturers, and marijuana testing facilities remain
illegal in the Town. No marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana products
manufacturer, or marijuana testing facility shall be licensed under this
Chapter.
   D.   The dual operation of a medical marijuana business with its retail
marijuana equivalent at a single location is permitted so long as both licenses
are held by the same owners, all applicable state and local licenses have been
issued, such licenses remain valid and active for both operations, and both
operations are in compliance with all applicable state and local requirements.
   E.   The license requirement set forth in this Chapter are in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by
any other federal, state, or local laws, rules, or regulations, including
without limitation the Colorado Marijuana Code, its rules, and any applicable
local zoning or building code. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-4: LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY:
   A.   The local licensing authority shall have two (2) divisions as follows:
the Town Council shall serve as the local licensing authority for all new
regulated marijuana business license applications, regulated marijuana business
renewal applications, applications for change of manager, applications for
transfer of ownership, applications for modification or change of location of
existing licenses, and applications for delivery permits; and the Municipal
Court shall serve as the local licensing authority for all disciplinary actions
including, without limitation, imposing fines, suspensions, and revocations.
The Town Council may delegate any of its duties under this Section to the Town
Clerk, by ordinance.
   B.   The local licensing authority shall have the power to promulgate rules
and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to implement and administer the
requirements of this Chapter.
   C.   The local licensing authority shall have the authority to deny any
application that does not meet the requirements of the Colorado Marijuana Code,
its rules, this Chapter, and any other applicable state or local law, rule, or
regulation. The local licensing authority shall also have the authority to deny
any application that contains any false, misleading, or incomplete information.
Denial of an application for a license shall not be subject to administrative
review, but only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The local licensing authority may, after notice and hearing, suspend,
revoke, or refuse to renew a license for good cause. The local licensing
authority is authorized to adopt rules and procedures governing the conduct of
such hearings. No portion of any application or operating fees previously paid
shall be refunded in the event of any suspension or revocation of a license.
   E.   The local licensing authority may, in its discretion, revoke or elect
not to renew any license if it determines that the licensed premises has been
inactive, without good cause, for at least one (1) year.
   F.   When making a determination as to character, record, and reputation
when determining whether good cause exists for denying, refusing to renew,
suspending or revoking a license, or exercising other discretionary authority
granted the local licensing authority, the licensing authority shall also
consider evidence of rehabilitation. Such evidence may include, without
limitation, evidence of no criminal record information, educational
achievements, financial solvency, community standing, lack of additional
arrests or convictions, or the lack of parole or probation violations since the
date of last conviction.
   G.   The local licensing authority shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable terms and conditions on a license as may be necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, and to obtain compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and applicable law. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-5: APPLICATION; PHASE 1 AND PHASE 2:
   A.   A person seeking a license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall submit
a Phase 1 application to the local licensing authority on forms provided by the
Town Clerk. The purpose of the Phase 1 application is to determine whether an
applicant can be entered into the random selection process in subsection (E)
below. At the time of the Phase 1 application, each applicant shall pay a
nonrefundable fee to the Town in an amount to be determined by the Town by
separate resolution to defray the costs incurred by the Town including, without
limitation, for inspection, administration, and enforcement. In addition, the
applicant shall present one (1) of the following forms of identification:
      1.   An operator's, chauffer's, or similar type of driver's license
issued by any state within the United States or a U.S. Territory;
      2.   An identification card, issued by any state for the purpose of
proving age using requirements similar to those in C.R.S. §§ 42-2-302 and 42-2-
303;
      3.   A United States military identification card;
      4.   A valid passport; or
      5.   An enrollment card issued by the government authority of a federally
recognized tribe located in the State of Colorado.
   B.   The applicant shall also provide the following information on a form
approved by, or acceptable to the Town, which information shall be required for
the applicant, including the proposed manager of the regulated marijuana
business, and all controlling beneficial owners, as that term is defined in the
Colorado Marijuana Code, of the business or entity that is applying:
      1.   Name, address, and date of birth, demonstrated by one (1) of the
forms of identification listed in subsection (A) above;
      2.   Suitable evidence of proof of lawful presence, residence, if
applicable, and good character and reputation that the Town may request;
      3.   Proof of the State's finding of suitability to own a regulated
marijuana business;
      4.   If the applicant is a business entity, information regarding the
entity, including without limitation, the name and address of the entity,
identification of all controlling beneficial owners of the entity, as that term
is defined in the Colorado Marijuana Code, proof of entity's legal status, and
proof of the entity's registration with, or a certificate of good standing
from, the Colorado Secretary of State, as applicable;
   C.   The intent of the Phase 1 application process is to provide a fair
opportunity for qualified and eligible persons and entities to be selected for
a Phase 2 review and to potentially obtain a license in the Town. As such, the
following restrictions apply:
      1.   Multiple Phase 1 applications by the same person or entity or
applications by multiple entities with substantially the same ownership or who
are affiliated entities are prohibited and will be rejected. For purposes of
this Ordinance "substantially the same ownership" and "affiliated entities" are
defined as follows:
         a.   "Substantially the same ownership" means that entities share fify
percent (50%) or more ownership in common, as determined by the Town Clerk.
         b.   "Affiliated entities" means a person, as defined by the Colorado
Marijuana Code, having ownership or any level of control in common with an
entity, in whole or in part, including, without limitation, an entity's parent
corporation, franchisor, licensor, and any subsidiaries or affiliates of such
parent corporations. "Affiliated entities" also means a person that has direct
business or an immediate familial relationship with another person or a person
using the same trade name as another person.
      2.   No person or entity may apply on behalf of another person or entity.
The applicant for a license must be the true applicant and may not be a shell
or strawman for a third party. The selected applicant may not transfer an
application to a third party at any time during the Phase 1 and Phase 2 review
process.
      3.   To ensure compliance with this requirement, if a license is issued,
the licensee shall not transfer its license during the first two (2) license
years following the random selection process. In addition:
            a.   During the first two (2) license years following the random
selection process, a licensee shall not alter its ownership, ownership
structure, name, or trade name; and
            b.   Each applicant shall demonstrate a funding plan sufficient to
capitalize and cover the cost of initial construction and startup for the
proposed business, which funding is not shared with or spoken for by another
applicant.
      4.   The local licensing authority shall promulgate rules and regulations
as needed to carry out the intent of this Section to ensure and confirm that
each Phase 1 applicant entered into the random selection process is a wholly
separate business owned, operated, funded and controlled by a wholly separate
person, as defined by the Colorado Marijuana Code.
   D.   Review Of Phase 1 Application: The Town Clerk shall review a Phase 1
application for completeness. The Town Clerk shall reject a Phase 1 application
if any of the information required as part of the application was not
submitted. After a review of a Phase 1 application, the Town Clerk shall notify
the applicant in writing of the results of the review.
      1.   If an application is complete, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant that they will be entered into the random selection process in
Subsection (E) below.
      2.   If an application is rejected, the applicant may appeal the Town
Clerk's decision to the Town Manager by filing an appeal with the Town within
ten (10) days of the notification of the rejection by the Town Clerk. The
notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal and the relief sought
by the appellant. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Town Manager shall hold a
hearing on the appeal within ten (10) days of the receipt of the appeal. The
Town shall provide at least five (5) days' notice to the appellant of the
hearing. The Town Manager shall make a determination of the appeal within five
(5) days of the hearing and shall notify the appellant of the decision in
writing.
   E.   Random Selection: Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the
ordinance adopting this Chapter, the Town shall post notice on its website
indicating that Phase 1 applications for medical and retail marijuana store
licenses shall be accepted for a sixty (60) day period, the Town shall review
the Phase 1 applications. Once the sixty (60) day period has ended, the Town
Clerk has reviewed all Phase 1 applications, the appeal deadline in subsection
(D)(2) above has expired, and all appeals, if any, have been decided, the Town
may conduct the random selection of applicants for Phase 2 applications.
   F.   Once the maximum number of medical marijuana center and retail
marijuana store licenses have been issued, the Town shall not accept any
further applications for such use until an existing license is either revoked
or expires. When the number of licensed medical marijuana centers and retail
marijuana stores is less than the limit provided for in this Chapter for any
reason, including the cessation of operation of a medical marijuana center and
retail marijuana store either by license revocation or expiration, notice shall
be posted on the Town's website as provided for in subsection (E) above, and
the Town shall process applications as provided for herein in the two-phase
process.
   G.   Phase 2 Application: If the applicant is randomly selected, the
applicant shall pay a nonrefundable Phase 2 application fee to the Town in an
amount to be determined by the Town by separate resolution and shall provide
the following information for a Phase 2 application on a form provided by the
Town within ninety (90) days from the date of notification of the applicant's
selection:
      1.   The name and complete address of the proposed regulated marijuana
business, including the facilities to be used in furtherance of such business,
whether or not such facilities are, or are planned to be, within the
territorial limits of the Town;
      2.   A copy of any deed, lease, contract, or other document reflecting
the right of the applicant to possess and operate the proposed licensed
premises for its proposed purpose along with the conditions of occupancy of the
premises. If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed licensed premises,
upon initial application, a notarized statement from the owner of such property
authorizing the use of the property for a regulated marijuana business;
      3.   Evidence of a valid business license for the business;
      4.   Evidence of the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood for a
regulated marijuana business and the desires of the adult inhabitants of the
neighborhood related to such business by petitions, remonstrances, or
otherwise. For purposes of this section, the neighborhood is defined as the
residents and business owners or managers within a one thousand five hundred
(1,500) foot radius of the proposed business location.
      5.   A "to scale" diagram of the premises showing without limitation a
site plan, building layout, all entry ways and exits to the marijuana store,
loading zones and all areas in which regulated marijuana will be stored or
dispensed;
      6.   A comprehensive business operation plan for the regulated marijuana
business which shall contain without limitation the following:
         a.   A security plan;
         b.   A description by category of all products to be sold;
         c.   A signage plan that is in compliance with all applicable
requirements of this Chapter and other applicable provisions of the Winter Park
Town Code, as well as the Colorado Marijuana Code and all rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder; and
         d.   A plan for the disposal of marijuana.
      7.   Proof of application for, and receipt of, the special use permit in
compliance with Section
7-5B-2 or Section
7-5D-2, as appropriate, of the Winter Park Town Code.
      8.   Any additional information that the local licensing authority
reasonably determines to be necessary in connection with the investigation and
review of the application.
      9.   The applicant shall verify the truthfulness of the information
required by this Section by the applicant's signature on the Phase 2
application.
   H.   Review Of Phase 2 Application: Upon receipt, the Town Clerk shall
review the application for completeness and conformity with the requirements of
this Chapter. If the application is incomplete, the Town Clerk shall notify the
applicant in writing of the application's deficiencies within fifteen (15) days
of receipt of the application. The applicant shall have sixty (60) days from
the date of notification of any deficiencies by the Town Clerk to remedy the
deficiencies.
      1.   If the applicant fails to remedy the deficiencies within the period
provided for in subsection (E) above, the Town Clerk shall deny the application
and notify the applicant of the denial.
      2.   Determination that the application is incomplete or denial of an
application because it is incomplete are appealable to the Town Manager
pursuant to subsection (D)(2).
      3.   Once the appeal period has run or the appeal has been determined by
the Town Manager, the Town may randomly select another applicant to submit a
Phase 2 application.
   I.   Upon receipt of completed Phase 2 application, the Town Clerk shall
circulate the application to all affected departments of the Town to determine
whether the application is in full compliance with all applicable laws, rules,
and regulations, and the local licensing authority shall schedule a public
hearing on the application to be held not less than thirty (30) days after the
date of receipt of the completed Phase 2 application. The local licensing
authority shall cause a notice of such hearing to be posted as follows:
      1.   In a conspicuous place upon the proposed licensed premises and
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town not less than
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such posted notice given by posting shall
include a sign of suitable material, not less than twenty-two (22) inches wide
and twenty-six (26) inches high, composed of letters of not less than one (1)
inch in height. Both the posted and the published notice shall state the type
of license applied for, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the
applicant, and other information as may be required to fully apprise the public
of the nature of the application; and
      2.   The applicant shall pay the actual costs of having the Town Clerk's
office mail a notice via United States mail to landowners within a one-half
mile radius of the proposed licensed premises. Such payment shall be made at
least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing to cause the Town Clerk's office
to mail such notice postmarked at least seven (7) days, but no earlier than
fourteen (14) days, prior to the date of the public hearing on the application.
The Town Clerk's office shall provide the state licensing authority an
affidavit of said mailing.
   J.   Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the public hearing for
a new license, the local licensing authority shall cause its preliminary
findings based on its investigation to be known in writing to the applicant.
The local licensing authority shall deny any application that does not meet the
requirements of this Chapter. The local licensing authority shall also deny any
application that contains any false, misleading, or incomplete information. The
local licensing authority shall also deny or refuse to issue a license for good
cause. Denial of an application for a license shall not be subject to further
administrative review but only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   K.   Before entering a decision approving or denying the application for a
local license, the local licensing authority may consider, except where this
Chapter specifically provides otherwise, the facts and evidence adduced as a
result of its investigation, as well as any other facts pertinent to the type
of license for which application has been made, including the number, type and
availability of regulated marijuana businesses located in or near the premises
under consideration, and any other pertinent matters affecting the
qualifications of the applicant for the conduct of the type of business
proposed. In addition, the local licensing authority shall consider whether
approval of the application would result in any of the following demonstrable
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood:
      1.   An undue concentration of regulated marijuana businesses that would
require the use of additional law enforcement resources;
      2.   An increase in traffic congestion;
      3.   A shortage of available parking; or
      4.   Other demonstrable negative impacts caused by the new regulated
marijuana business.
   L.   A local license shall not be issued until a state license has been
granted and the building in which the business is to be conducted has passed
all applicable inspections and is ready for occupancy with such furniture,
fixtures, and equipment in place as are necessary to comply with any applicable
provisions of the code or any state law, rule, or regulation.
   M.   The local licensing authority shall issue its decision within ninety
(90) days of the hearing on the complete license application. Such decision
shall be by resolution and shall state the reasons for the decision. The
resolution shall be sent via certified mail to the state licensing authority
and the applicant at the address shown in the application. (Ord. 559, Series of
2021; amd. Ord. 569, Series of 2021)
3-7-6: ISSUANCE, DURATION, RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Upon issuance of a license, the Town shall provide the licensee with
one (1) original of such license for each regulated marijuana business to be
operated by the licensee in the Town. Each such copy shall show the name and
address of the licensee, that the license is issued for a regulated marijuana
business, and the address of the licensed premises at which it is to be
displayed.
   B.   Each license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for one (1)
year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only as provided in this
Chapter. All renewals of a license shall be for no more than one (1) year. An
application for the renewal of an existing license shall be made to the local
licensing authority not more than ninety (90) days and not less than sixty (60)
days prior to the date of expiration of the license. A licensee may submit to
the local licensing authority a late renewal application on the prescribed
forms and pay a non-refundable late application fee in an amount determined by
the Town by separate resolution for a renewal application made less than sixty
(60) days prior to the date of the expiration of the license. All other
provisions concerning renewal applications apply to a late renewal application.
The timely filing of a completed renewal application or a late renewal
application shall extend the current license until a final decision is made on
the renewal.
   C.   Notwithstanding state law to the contrary, a licensee whose license
expires and for which a renewal application has not been received by the
expiration date shall be deemed to have forfeited its license under this
Chapter. The Town shall not accept renewal applications after the expiration
date of such license.
   D.   A licensee whose license expires shall not distribute or sell regulated
marijuana or regulated marijuana products until all necessary new licenses have
been obtained.
   E.   In the event that there have been no violations of this Chapter or
Colorado Marijuana Code during the preceding year, and if there is no other
derogatory information regarding the licensee, its partners, officers,
directors, managers, or shareholders, then the Town Clerk may administratively
grant the renewal of a regulated marijuana business license, transfer of
ownership, change of corporate status, a request for modification of the
licensed premises that does not include an expansion of the licensed premises,
or manager registration on behalf of the local licensing authority. If,
however, the Town Clerk's investigation discloses any proved or alleged
violations of the Colorado Marijuana Code or this Chapter or derogatory
information as described above, the Clerk shall schedule action on the
application before the licensing authority. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-7: PERSONS PROHIBITED AS LICENSEES AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   No license shall be issued to, held by, or renewed by any of the
following:
      1.   Any person until all applicable fees have been paid;
      2.   Any person who is not of good moral character satisfactory to the
local licensing authority;
      3.   Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders
are not of good moral character satisfactory to the local licensing authority;
      4.   Any partnership, association or company, any of whose officers are
not of good moral character satisfactory to the local licensing authority;
      5.   Any person employing, assisted by, or financed in whole or in part
by any other person who is not of good character and reputation satisfactory to
the local licensing authority;
      6.   Any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, prosecuting officer,
and state or local licensing authority or any of its members, inspectors or
employees;
      7.   Any natural person under twenty-one (21) years of age;
      8.   Any person for a licensed location that is also a retail food
establishment or wholesale food registrant;
      9.   Any person who has discharged a sentence for a felony conviction
within the past five (5) years;
      10.   Any person who, at any time, has been convicted of a felony for
drug possession, distribution, or use, unless such felony drug charge was based
on possession or use of marijuana or marijuana concentrate that would not be a
felony if the person were convicted of the offense on the date he or she
applied for the license;
      11.   Any entity whose directors, shareholders, partners, or other
persons having a financial interest in said entity do not meet the criteria set
forth above;
      12.   Any person who employs another person at a regulated marijuana
business who has not submitted fingerprints for a criminal record history check
or whose criminal record history check reveals the employee is ineligible;
      13.   Any person who has made a false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement on his or her application;
      14.   Any person who fails to file any tax return with a taxing agency,
stay out of default on a government-issued student loan, pay child support, or
remedy outstanding delinquent taxes; or
      15.   Any person whose license for a regulated marijuana business in
another Town, county or state has been revoked.
   B.   In addition to the prohibitions listed in subsection (A) above, no
medical marijuana business license will be issued to or held by:
      1.   A licensed physician making patient recommendations.
      2.   An individual or other person whose authority to be a primary
caregiver has been revoked by the state health agency.
   C.   No licensee shall employ or contract with any person to perform work
functions directly related to the possession, dispensing, selling, serving, or
delivering of marijuana for a licensed regulated marijuana business, any of the
following:
      1.   Any person who is not of good moral character satisfactory to the
local licensing authority;
      2.   Any person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age;
      3.   Any person who has discharged a sentence for a felony conviction
within the past five (5) years;
      4.   Any person who, at any time, has been convicted of a felony for drug
possession, distribution, or use, unless such felony drug charge was based on
possession or use of marijuana or marijuana concentrate that would not be a
felony if the person were convicted of the offense on the date he or she
applied for the license; or
      5.   Any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, prosecuting officer,
and state or local licensing authority or any of its members, inspectors, or
employees.
   D.   In investigating the qualifications described herein, the local
licensing authority may have access to criminal history record information
furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by
such agency. In the event the local licensing authority takes into
consideration information concerning the applicant's criminal history record,
the local licensing authority shall also consider any information provided by
the applicant regarding such criminal history record, including without
limitation evidence of rehabilitation, character references, and educational
achievements, especially those items pertaining to the period of time between
the applicant's last criminal conviction and the consideration of the
application for a license. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-8: ANNUAL OPERATING AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
In addition to application, renewal, late renewal, and an annual operating fee,
the Town shall impose administrative fees for services, which include without
limitation the transfer of ownership, background investigations, change of
business manager, employee application, modification of premises, change of
location, application modification, license modification, change of corporate
structure, change of financier, zoning verification, duplicate license,
temporary permit, change of trade name, with all such fees to be established by
resolution of Town Council. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-9: MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY:
   A.   The authority may issue to any duly licensed medical marijuana center a
marijuana delivery permit, subject to obtaining a state delivery permit by the
State Licensing Authority, which shall authorize the permit holder to deliver
medical marijuana and medical marijuana products to private residences only. A
marijuana delivery permit is valid for one (1) year and may be renewed annually
upon renewal of the retail marijuana store license or medical marijuana center
license.
   B.   Only duly licensed medical marijuana centers with a valid marijuana
delivery permit may deliver medical marijuana and medical marijuana products to
private residences in Grand County; provided that such delivery complies with
C.R.S. § 44-10-501(11) and any applicable rules or regulations of the Colorado
Marijuana Code. Delivery outside of Grand County is prohibited.
   C.   Delivery of medical marijuana and medical marijuana products from
businesses located outside of the Town's jurisdictional boundaries to an
address within the Town's jurisdictional boundaries is permitted so long as the
delivery is made by a licensed medical marijuana center delivering medical
marijuana and medical marijuana products only, which holds a delivery permit
issued by the state or another local entity, and which is located in Grand
County. Delivery of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products is
prohibited, regardless of whether the business holds a delivery permit issued
by the state or another local entity.
   D.   A licensed medical marijuana center with a marijuana delivery permit
may deliver medical marijuana and medical marijuana products only to the
patient or parent or guardian who placed the order and who:
      1.   Is a current registrant of the medical marijuana patient registry
and is twenty-one (21) years of age or older or the parent or guardian of a
patient who is also the patient's primary caregiver;
      2.   Receives the delivery of medical marijuana or medical marijuana
products pursuant to rules adopted by the state; and
      3.   Possesses an acceptable form of identification.
   E.   Prior to transferring possession of the order to an individual, the
person delivering the order shall inspect the individual's identification and
verify that the information provided at the time of the order matches the name
and age on the individual's identification.
   F.   The licensed medical marijuana center shall charge a one dollar ($1.00)
surcharge on each delivery. The licensee shall remit the surcharges collected
on a monthly basis to the Town for local law enforcement costs related to
marijuana enforcement. Failure to comply with this subsection may result in
nonrenewal of the delivery permit.
   G.   All sales of medical marijuana and medical marijuana products delivered
to an address within the Town are subject to the Town's applicable sales tax.
   H.   A delivery permit issued by the authority is deemed a revocable
privilege of a licensed medical marijuana center. A violation related to a
delivery permit is grounds for a fine or suspension or revocation of the
delivery permit or medical marijuana center license. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-10: OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS OF REGULATED MARIJUANA BUSINESSES:
   A.   Any storage, display, sales, or other distribution of marijuana shall
occur only within the restricted area of a regulated marijuana business and
shall not be visible from the exterior of the licensed premises.
   B.   A regulated marijuana business shall be closed to the public and no
sale or other distribution of marijuana shall occur upon the premises between
the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. through and including eight o’clock (8:
00) A.M.
   C.   A retail marijuana store may sell retail marijuana or retail marijuana
products to persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older only in the
quantities permitted by state law.
   D.   A medical marijuana center may sell within any seven (7) day period of
time to any one (1) registered patient or primary caregiver only the quantities
of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products permitted by state law.
   E.   Dual Operations:
      1.   If a medical marijuana center that allows medical marijuana patients
under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be on the premises is dually located
with a retail marijuana store, the medical marijuana store and the retail
marijuana store must maintain complete and distinct physical separation of the
licensed premises, including without limitation separate sales and storage
areas, separate entrances and exits, separate inventories, separate point-of-
sale operations, and separate record-keeping. For other dual operations, the
licensee shall maintain visual and operational separation of the two (2)
licensed operations.
      2.   A medical marijuana center that does not authorize patients under
the age of twenty-one (21) years to be on the premises may hold a retail
marijuana store license and operate a dual operation retail business at a
shared licensed premises with the same entrances and exits to the shared
premises and medical and retail marijuana may be separately displayed on the
same floor.
      3.   Licensees of a dual operation shall maintain separate and distinct
inventory tracking processes for medical marijuana and retail marijuana
inventories. The inventories must be clearly tagged or labeled so that the
products can be reconciled to a particular medical or retail business.
   F.   The regulated marijuana offered for sale and distribution must be
packaged and labeled in accordance with state law.
   G.   Regulated marijuana businesses are prohibited from selling, soliciting,
or receiving orders for regulated marijuana or regulated marijuana products
over the internet.
   H.   Regulated marijuana business licensees are prohibited from selling or
giving away any consumable product that is not a regulated marijuana product,
including without limitation cigarettes or tobacco products, alcoholic
beverages, and food products or non-alcoholic beverages that are not regulated
marijuana products.
   I.   A regulated marijuana business shall be ventilated to ensure the odor
of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the
exterior of the regulated marijuana business or at any adjoining property.
   J.   No regulated marijuana business may store regulated marijuana or any
regulated marijuana product in any off-premises storage facility located within
the Town.
   K.   Licensees who are natural persons shall either manage the licensed
premises themselves or employ a separate and distinct manager on the premises
and report the name of such manager to the local licensing authority. Licensees
that are entities shall employ a manager on the premises and report the name of
the manager to the local licensing authority. All managers must be natural
persons who are at least twenty-one (21) years of age. No manager shall be a
person who has discharged a sentence for a felony conviction within the past
five (5) years, or who has been convicted of a felony for drug possession,
distribution or use, unless such felony drug charge was based on possession or
use of marijuana or marijuana concentrate that would not be a felony if the
person were convicted of the offense on the date he or she applied for the
license. The manager must be a Colorado resident at the time of reporting and
at all times the individual is acting as manager for the licensed premises.
   L.   A legible sign shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each
regulated marijuana business containing the following warnings:
      1.   That the use of marijuana or marijuana products may impair a
person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery, and it is
illegal under state law to drive a motor vehicle or to operate machinery when
under the influence of or impaired by marijuana;
      2.   That loitering in or around a regulated marijuana business is
prohibited by law;
      3.   That possession and distribution of marijuana is a violation of
federal law; and
      4.   That no one under the age of twenty-one (21) years is permitted on
the premises.
   M.   Security measures at regulated marijuana businesses shall follow all
requirements of state law and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Security surveillance cameras installed to monitor all entrances,
along with the interior and exterior of the premises, to discourage and
facilitate the reporting of criminal acts and nuisance activities occurring at
the premises. All security recordings shall be preserved for at least forty
(40) days by the licensee and be made available to the Fraser Winter Park
Police Department upon request for inspection;
      2.   Robbery and burglary alarm systems that are professionally monitored
and maintained in good working condition;
      3.   A locking safe permanently affixed to the premises or secure room
that is suitable for the storage of cash if cash will be stored overnight on
the licensed premises;
      4.   Exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the
licensed premises and complies with applicable provisions of this Chapter and
other applicable provisions of the Winter Park Town Code; and
      5.   Deadbolt locks on all exterior doors. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-11: SIGNAGE:
   A.   All signage and advertising for a regulated marijuana business shall
comply with all applicable state laws as well as the provisions of this Chapter
and other applicable provisions of the Winter Park Town Code.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person licensed under this Chapter or any other
person to advertise any retail marijuana or retail marijuana product anywhere
in the Town where the advertisement is visible to members of the public from
any street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, including advertising,
utilizing any of the following media: any billboard; any sign mounted on a
vehicle, any hand-held or other portable sign; or any handbill, leaflet or
flier directly handed to any person in a public place, left upon a motor
vehicle, or posted upon any public or private property without the consent of
the property owner. The prohibition set forth in this Section shall not apply
to:
      1.   Any sign located on the same lot as a regulated marijuana business
that exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the regulated
marijuana business and that otherwise complies with the Town's zoning
requirements and any other applicable Town laws and regulations; provided,
however, that the maximum sign area for any regulated marijuana business shall
be one-half of the sign area otherwise permitted by Section
6-2-7-7 of the Winter Park Town Code, as amended.
      2.   Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine, or other
periodical of general circulation within the Town; or
      3.   Advertising that is purely incidental to sponsorship of a charitable
event by a regulated marijuana business. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-12: NUMBER AND LOCATION OF REGULATED MARIJUANA BUSINESSES:
   A.   Subject to the following number limits, a regulated marijuana business
may locate only within the area designated on the map attached to Ordinance No.
596, Series of 2023, on property zoned D-C. Within the designated area, zoning
regulations and all land use approvals and requirements continue to apply.
      1.   Within the designated area, there may be up to two (2) retail
marijuana stores or licensed medical marijuana centers or dual operations or
any combination thereof not exceeding two (2) businesses. For purposes of this
limitation, a dual operation shall be considered a single marijuana business.
      2.   If a regulated marijuana business is operating and in good standing
with the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division at the
time of annexation into the Town, the existing regulated marijuana business
shall not count toward the Town’s limit of two (2) regulated marijuana
businesses. Except for the random selection process in Section 3-7-5(E) and
this exemption from the number limits, all licensing requirements of this
Chapter shall apply to such business.
      3.   The maximum aggregate number of regulated marijuana businesses
within the Town shall not exceed three (3) at any point in time, which may be
retail marijuana stores, licensed medical marijuana centers, dual operations,
or any combination thereof.
      4.   For purposes of this limitation, a dual operation shall be
considered a single marijuana business.
      5.   If a regulated marijuana business is operating and in good standing
with the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division at the
time of annexation into the Town, the existing regulated marijuana business
shall not count toward these number limits. Except for the random selection
process in Section 3-7-5 (E) and this exemption from the number limits, all
licensing requirements of this Chapter shall apply.
   B.   No regulated marijuana business may be located within:
      1.   Five hundred (500) feet of any other regulated marijuana business;
or
      2.   Upon any Town of Winter Park owned property.
      3.   The distances set forth in this Section are to be computed by direct
measurement from the nearest property line, right-of-way boundary, or portion
of the footprint of the land uses set forth herein to the nearest portion of
the footprint of the regulated marijuana business.
   C.   The licensed premises of a regulated marijuana business shall not
exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet.
   D.   Each regulated marijuana business shall be operated from a permanent
location. No regulated marijuana business shall be permitted to operate from a
moveable, mobile or transitory location.
   E.   The suitability of a location for a regulated marijuana business shall
be determined at the time of the issuance of the first license for such
business. The fact that changes in the neighborhood occurring after the
issuance of the first license might render the site unsuitable for a regulated
marijuana business under this Section shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke
or refuse to renew the license for such business so long as the license for the
business remains in effect.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/339b7c94aa2a01c2cbe7a10dece1c50796e8fc0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1706.png]
(Ord. 559, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 596, Series of 2023)
3-7-13: INSPECTION OF BOOKS, RECORDS, AND LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   Every licensee shall maintain an accurate and complete record of all
regulated marijuana purchased, sold, or dispensed by the regulated marijuana
business in any usable form. Such record shall include the following:
      1.   The identity of the seller and purchaser involved in each
transaction;
      2.   The total quantity of and amount paid for the regulated marijuana
and/or the regulated marijuana product(s); and
      3.   The date, time, and location of each transaction.
   B.   All transactions shall be kept in a numerical register in the order in
which they occur.
   C.   All records required to be kept under this Chapter must be kept in the
English language in a legible manner and must be preserved and made available
for inspection for a period of three (3) years after the date of the
transaction. Information inspected by the Winter Park Police Department or
other Town departments pursuant to this Chapter shall be used for regulatory
and law enforcement purposes only and shall not be a matter of public record.
   D.   The licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by the local
licensing authority, its duly authorized representatives, and the Winter Park
Police Department during all business hours and other times of apparent
activity, for the purpose of inspection or investigation. For examination of
any inventory or books and records required to be kept by the licensees, access
shall be required during business hours. Where any part of the licensed
premises consists of a locked area, upon demand to the licensee by the local
licensing authority or any other authorized Town personnel, such area shall be
made available for inspection without delay. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-14: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to:
   A.   Employ any person at a regulated marijuana business who is not at least
twenty-one (21) years of age or who has a criminal history as described in
Section
3-7-7.
   B.   Allow marijuana or marijuana products to be consumed upon its licensed
premises.
   C.   Sell regulated marijuana or regulated marijuana products to a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age or to a person who does not present a
government-issued identification at the time of purchase.
   D.   Sell medical marijuana or medical marijuana products to non-patients.
   E.   Purchase or otherwise obtain regulated marijuana from any source that
is not properly authorized under state and local law to sell or dispense
regulated marijuana.
   F.   Permit the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed
premises.
   G.   Dispense regulated marijuana to a person that is or appears to be under
the influence of alcohol or under the influence of any controlled substance,
including marijuana.
   H.   Refuse to allow inspection of a regulated marijuana business upon
request of an authorized Town employee. Any licensee, owner, business manager,
operator of a regulated marijuana business, or owner of the property where a
regulated marijuana business is located may be charged with violation of this
requirement.
   I.   Violate any provision of this Chapter or any condition of an approval
granted pursuant to this Chapter, or any law, rule, or regulation applicable to
the use of regulated marijuana or the operation of a regulated marijuana
business, including without limitation any provision, term, condition, or
requirement of the Colorado Marijuana Code.
   J.   Engage in any form of business or commerce involving the sale,
distribution, or consumption of marijuana other than that form of business and
commerce that is expressly permitted by Section 16 of Chapter XVIII of the
Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Marijuana Code, and this Chapter, which
permits only regulated marijuana business. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-15: CHANGE IN MANAGER; CHANGE IN FINANCIAL INTEREST; TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP;
CHANGE IN LOCATION:
   A.   Change In Manager: Each licensee shall report any change in managers to
the local licensing authority within thirty (30) days after the change. Such
report shall include all information required for disclosing managers under
this Chapter.
   B.   Change In Financial Interest: Each licensee shall report in writing to
the local licensing authority any transfer or change of financial interest in
the license holder or in the regulated marijuana business that is the subject
of the license. Such report must be filed with the local licensing authority
within thirty (30) days after any such transfer or change. A transfer
application shall be required for any transfer of the capital stock of a
corporation or any other interest totaling more than ten percent (10%) of the
stock in any one (1) year, as well as any transfer of a controlling interest in
the corporation whenever a sufficient number of shares have been transferred to
effectuate the transfer of a controlling interest. No person having or
acquiring a financial interest in the regulated marijuana business that is the
subject of a license shall be a person who has discharged a sentence for a
felony conviction within the past five (5) years, or who has been convicted of
a felony for drug possession, distribution or use, unless such felony drug
charge was based on possession or use of marijuana or marijuana concentrate
that would not be a felony if the person were convicted of the offense on the
date he or she applied for the license.
   C.   Transfer Of Ownership: For a transfer of ownership, a license holder
shall apply to the state and local licensing authority on forms provided by the
state and local licensing authority. In considering whether to permit a
transfer of ownership, the local licensing authority shall consider only the
requirements of this Chapter, the Colorado Marijuana Code, and the regulations
promulgated in conformance therewith. The local licensing authority may hold a
hearing on the application for a transfer of ownership, but such hearing shall
not be held until a notice of such hearing has been posted on the licensed
regulated marijuana business premises for a period of at least ten (10) days
prior to such hearing, and the applicant has been provided at least ten (10)
days prior notice of such hearing.
   D.   Change Of Location:
      1.   A licensee from another jurisdiction that has previously obtained a
license from the state and any other local licensing authority as applicable
may move his or her permanent location to the Town of Winter Park so long as
the applicant and the new location conform to the requirements of this Chapter,
and a new local license is obtained.
      2.   A licensee within the Town that seeks to change its location, may
move his or her permanent location so long as the new location conforms to the
requirements of this Chapter. The local licensing authority shall schedule a
public hearing on the application, provided however, the local licensing
authority shall only consider the proposed location of the licensed premises
pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-16: REPORTING REQUIRED:
Licensees shall immediately report to the Winter Park Police Department any
unlawful act, conduct, or disturbance committed upon the premises. In no case
shall the report be provided later than seventy-two (72) hours of the event.
(Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
In addition to the possible denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a
license under the provisions of this Chapter, any person, including without
limitation any licensee, manager or employee of a regulated marijuana business,
or any customer of such business, who violates any of the provisions of this
Chapter, shall be subject to the following penalties:
   A.   Any person convicted of having violated any provision of this Chapter
shall be punished as set forth in Section
1-4-1C of this Code.
   B.   The operation of a regulated marijuana business without a valid license
issued pursuant to this Chapter may be enjoined by the Town in an action
brought in a court of competent jurisdiction, including the Winter Park
Municipal Court.
   C.   The operation of a regulated marijuana business without a valid license
issued pursuant to this Chapter is specifically determined to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 559, Series of 2021)
3-7-18: NO TOWN LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, the licensee
waives and releases the Town, its officers, elected officials, employees,
attorneys, and agents from any liability for injuries, damages or liabilities
of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of regulated marijuana
business owners, operators, employees, clients, or customers for a violation of
state or federal laws, rules, or regulations.
   B.   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, all licensees,
jointly and severally, if more than one (1), agree to indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Town, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys,
agents, insurers and self-insurance pool against all liability, claims and
demands on account of any injury, loss or damage, including, without
limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness,
disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind
whatsoever arising out of or in any manner connected with the operation of the
regulated marijuana business that is the subject of the license. (Ord. 559,
Series of 2021)
CHAPTER 8
DISPOSABLE BAG FEE
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Disposable Bag Fee Imposed
3-8-3: Remittance And Use Of Disposable Bag Fees
3-8-4: Required Signage
3-8-5: Exemptions
3-8-6: Audits
3-8-7: Violation And Penalty
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CUSTOMER: A person who makes a retail purchase from a retail store or food
store.
DISPOSABLE BAG: A bag that is not a reusable bag, but excluding:
   A.   Bags used by consumers inside stores to:
      1.   Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy
or small hardware items;
      2.   Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish;
      3.   Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may pose a problem; or
      4.   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
   B.   A non-handled bag used to protect a purchased item from damaging or
contaminating other purchased items when placed in a reusable bag.
   C.   Bags provided by pharmacists to contain prescription drugs.
   D.   Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags, or bags
sold in packages containing multiple bags for uses such as food storage,
garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags.
FOOD STORE: A retail market located in the Town in a permanent building,
operating year-round and selling a line of staple foodstuffs, meats, produce
and dairy products and perishable items.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG: A paper bag that is one hundred percent (100%) recyclable
and contains at least forty percent (40%) post- consumer recycled content.
RETAIL STORE: A commercial business located in the Town and engaged in the sale
of personal consumer goods, household items, or groceries to customers who use
or consume such items, but specifically excluding:
   A.   Temporary vendors at farmers' markets or other temporary events; and
   B.   Restaurants or other service businesses, such as salons and spas, where
retail sales are clearly secondary and incidental to the primary activity
occurring within the business.
REUSABLE BAG: A bag that: is designed and manufactured to withstand repeated
uses; is made from a material that can be cleaned and disinfected regularly; if
made from plastic, is at least 2.25 millimeters thick; has a minimum lifetime
of seventy five (75) uses; and has the capability of carrying a minimum of
eighteen (18) pounds. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019)
3-8-2: DISPOSABLE BAG FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Every customer shall pay a disposable bag fee of twenty cents ($0.20)
per disposable bag provided by a retail store or food store.
   B.   Every customer transaction receipt issued by a retail store or food
store shall state the number of disposable bags provided to the customer and
the total amount of the disposable bag fees charged.
   C.   No retail store or food store may refund any part of the disposable bag
fee, nor may a retail store or food store advertise or convey to customers that
it will refund any part of the disposable bag fee charged to a customer.
   D.   No retail store or food store may exempt a customer from the disposable
bag fee except as provided in section
3-8-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019; amd. Ord. 538, Series of
2020; Ord. 555, Series of 2021)
3-8-3: REMITTANCE AND USE OF DISPOSABLE BAG FEES:
   A.   A retail store or food store shall remit to the Town sixty percent
(60%) of the disposable bag fees collected.
   B.   Disposable bag fees remitted to the Town shall only be used for
expenditures intended to mitigate the effects of disposable bags, including
without limitation the following:
      1.   Administrative costs associated with developing and implementing the
disposable bag fee program.
      2.   Administrative costs associated with the following Town activities:
         a.   Providing reusable carryout bags to residents and visitors;
         b.   Educating residents, businesses, and visitors about the impacts
of disposable bags on the Town's environmental health, the importance of
reducing the number of disposable bags that enter the waste stream, and the
expenses associated with mitigating the effects of disposable bag use on the
Town's drainage system, transportation system, wildlife, and environment;
         c.   Funding programs and developing infrastructure that allows the
Town to reduce waste associated with disposable bag use;
         d.   Contributing funds to the Town's pay as you throw trash and
recycling program known as "The Drop";
         e.   Purchasing and installing equipment designed to minimize
disposable bag pollution, including without limitation recycling containers and
waste receptacles for disposable bags;
         f.   Funding community cleanup events or other activities designed to
reduce waste associated with disposable bags;
         g.   Maintaining a public website designed to educate residents on the
progress of waste reduction efforts associated with disposable bags; and
         h.   Funding other sustainability initiatives.
   C.   No disposable bag fees may be used for general government purposes.
   D.   A retail store or food store may retain forty percent (40%) of the
disposable bag fees collected (the "retained percent"). The retained percent
will not be classified as revenue for the purpose of calculating Sales Tax. The
retained percent may only be used by the retail store or food store for the
following:
      1.   Providing educational information to customers about the disposable
bag fee;
      2.   Developing and displaying signage required by section
3-8-4 of this chapter;
      3.   Training staff members in the implementation or administration of
the disposable bag fee;
      4.   Improving or altering infrastructure to allow for the
implementation, collection, administration, of the fee or to increase
disposable bag recycling;
      5.   Collecting, accounting for, or remitting the disposable bag fee to
the Town; or
      6.   Developing and displaying signage to inform consumers about the
disposable bag fee, encourage the use of reusable bags or promote recycling of
disposable bags. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019)
3-8-4: REQUIRED SIGNAGE:
Every retail store or food store shall display a sign in a location outside or
inside of the business, viewable by customers, alerting customers of the
disposable bag fee. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019)
3-8-5: EXEMPTIONS:
A retail store or food store may waive the disposable bag fee for a customer
that presents evidence that he or she is a participant in a Federal or State
food assistance program. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019)
3-8-6: AUDITS:
   A.   Every retail store or food store shall make the following records
available for audit by the Town Manager or designee to verify compliance with
this chapter, and each such record must be kept for a period of three (3) years
after the end of the calendar year of the creation of such record:
      1.   The total amount of disposable bag fees collected;
      2.   The number of disposable bags provided to customers;
      3.   The forms and receipts of any notice required by this chapter; and
      4.   Any underlying records, including any books, accounts, invoices, or
other records necessary to verify the accuracy and completeness of the above
records.
   B.   All records kept pursuant to this section shall be treated as
confidential commercial documents, to the extent permitted by law.
   C.   If, based upon an audit, the Town Manager determines that the retail
store or food store has failed to collect the disposable bag fee, or has
underpaid the disposable bag fee, the Town Manager shall, based on available
information, make an estimate of the fees due.
      1.   The Town Manager shall serve upon the delinquent retail store or
food store personally, by electronic mail, or by first class mail to the last
address of the retail store or food store on file with the Town a Notice of
Final Determination, Assessment, and Demand for Payment containing the
following information:
         a.   A statement of the estimated fees, penalties, and interest due;
         b.   A statement that payment is due within twenty (20) calendar days
after the date of the Notice of Final Determination; and
         c.   A statement that the retail or food store may request a hearing
on the assessment as provided in section
3-2-15 of this title.
      2.   If payment of any amount listed in the Notice of Final Determination
is not received on or before the applicable due date, penalty and interest
charges shall be added to the amount due as follows:
         a.   A penalty of ten percent (10%) of total due; and
         b.   An interest charge of one percent (1%) of the total penalty per
month. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019)
3-8-7: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter.
   B.   The penalty for any violation of this chapter is set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 520, Series of 2019)
CHAPTER 9
MOBILE VENDING
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Permit Required
3-9-3: General Requirements
3-9-4: Review And Approval
3-9-5: Term And Renewal
3-9-6: Site Selection
3-9-7: Suspension And Revocation
3-9-8:    Penalty
3-9-9: Appeal
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
DISPLAY APPARATUS: A nonpermanent structure, table, wagon, tray, or cart for
the display and vending of goods, merchandise, food, wares or services and used
in mobile vending.
LONG-TERM MOBILE VENDING: Mobile vending other than short-term mobile vending.
MOBILE VENDING: The act of selling or offering for sale wares, goods,
merchandise, food, or services with or without a display apparatus, from a
location outside of a building, whether on public or private property, which
activity is not an accessory use as defined by this Code. Mobile vending
includes both short-term mobile vending and long-term mobile vending. Mobile
vending does not include yard sales.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All real property owned, leased, or managed by the Town,
including without limitation public rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, parks,
and parking areas.
SHORT-TERM MOBILE VENDING: Mobile vending which occurs for a time period not
exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days within a six (6) month period.
YARD SALE: The sale of one or more household’s personal goods occurring on
private property not exceeding three (3) consecutive days in duration and
totaling not more than nine (9) days per year.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in mobile vending in the Town
without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this Chapter.
   B.   In addition to a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, a special use
permit issued pursuant to Title 7 of this Code is required for long-term mobile
vending.
   C.   In addition to all permits required by this Code, events within
Hideaway Park require a vendor license from the Chamber of Commerce.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall apply to all mobile vending applications and
permits:
   A.   Application and Fee: An application for a mobile vending permit shall
be submitted to the Town on forms provided by the Town with the application fee
set by resolution of the Town Council.
   B.   Insurance: Permittees shall hold evidence of liability insurance in an
amount and form satisfactory to the Town.
   C.   Approval from Health Department: Permittees shall obtain approval from
the Grand County Public Health Department when the mobile vending activity
includes any food product.
   D.   Indemnification: Permittees shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless
the Town, its officers, employees, and agents against any and all claims for
damage to persons or property arising out of or resulting from the permittee’s
actions or omissions in carrying out the permitted use.
   E.   Maintenance: Permittees shall maintain both the permitted area, the
immediate area surrounding the permitted area and the display apparatus in a
appropriate, clean, and hazard-free condition.
   F.   Noninterference: No permittee shall make any unnecessary sounds or
noise, obstruct any public sidewalk or other public or private property,
disturb or impede other persons, or otherwise cause any public nuisance.
   G.   Display Apparatus:
      1.   Display apparatus shall be removed from public property at the end
of each working day except in extraordinary circumstances and with prior
written approval by the Town. Display apparatus shall not be left unattended.
Dogs shall not be hitched to the display apparatus at any time.
      2.   The use of gas-powered generators is prohibited. Noiseless
alternative energy generators will be considered with review by Town staff.
      3.   The use of a tent as a display apparatus is permitted for short-term
mobile vending use only. Tents shall be appropriate to the surrounding
environment in size and material as determined by the Community Development
Director.
   H.   Restrooms: Mobile vending activities that include food service and
provisions for seating of patrons shall provide accessible restrooms within the
immediate area that meet the specifications of the Grand County Public Health
Department.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-4: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Short-term mobile vending. The Community Development Director may
administratively approve an application for a short-term mobile vending permit
when the following criteria are satisfied:
      1.   A complete application, including fees and insurance evidence, is
submitted to the Town; and
      2.   The applicant has demonstrated compliance with all applicable
requirements of the Winter Park Town Code and any permit conditions.
   B.   Long-term mobile vending. The Planning Commission and Town Council
shall review and approve an application for a long-term mobile vending permit
when the application satisfies the criteria set forth in subsection A hereof
and in Section 5-E-2 of Title 7 of the Winter Park Town Code and the display
apparatus:
      1.   Conforms with the Design Guidelines in Appendix A of Title 7;
      2.   Minimizes any adverse impacts on neighboring properties including
pedestrian and vehicle traffic;
      3.   Provides sufficient landscaping, impervious surface, plants,
benches, tables, and trash receptacles;
      4.   Is comprised of materials, finishes and colors that are compatible
with the surrounding area; and
      5.   Conforms with Chapters 2 and 2A of Title 6.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-5: TERM AND RENEWAL:
   A.   A short-term vending permit shall be valid for the period stated in the
permit, unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. A long-term vending
permit shall be valid for one (1) year, unless revoked or suspended prior to
expiration.
   B.   Permit renewal shall be processed in the same manner as the initial
application.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-6: SITE SELECTION:
   A.   The Community Development Director may designate certain sites on
public property for use by mobile vendors, when the following criteria are
satisfied:
      1.   Diversity of offered wares, goods, merchandise, food, or services
both Town-wide and in the vicinity of the designated site;
      2.   The number of seasons the applicant has lawfully vended on public
property in the Town;
      3.   Appearance, quality, and safety of the display; and
      4.   Compliance and performance review.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-7: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this
Chapter include, without limitation, the following:
      1.   A violation by a permittee of any provision of the permit, this
Chapter, or any other applicable law;
      2.   Conducting mobile vending activities in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, and
welfare;
      3.   Failure to pay state or local taxes that are related to the
operation of the business associated with the permit;
      4.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement of material fact
contained in the original or renewal permit application; and
      5.   Any reasonable purpose including when other Town events, activities,
or operations may create a conflict with the operation of the permit issued
under this Chapter.
   B.   The Town shall deliver written notice to the permittee stating the
action taken and the reason supporting such action. The written notice may be
delivered to the permittee’s place of business or mailed to the permittee’s
last known address.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Violations of this Chapter may result in the immediate suspension or
revocation of any vending permit by the Town.
   B.   Violations of this Chapter shall further be punished as set forth in
Section
3-1-14 of the Winter Park Town Code. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
3-9-9: APPEAL:
An appeal of any decision by the Community Development Director made pursuant
to this Chapter, including denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit, may
be made by filing with the Town a written notice of appeal within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the decision being appealed. The Town Council will hear
such appeal de novo within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal at a
public hearing. Failure to file an appeal within the time allotted shall be a
jurisdictional bar to such appeal. The decision of the Town Council shall be
final, subject only to judicial review under C.R.C.P. 106(a)(4).
(Ord. 604, Series of 2023)
CHAPTER 10
SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-10-1: Title
3-10-2: Purpose
3-10-3: Definitions
3-10-4: Registration Requirement
3-10-5: Conditions For All Short-Term Rental Units
3-10-6: Penalties And Revocation
3-10-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the Short-Term Rental Registration Ordinance.
(Ord. 552, Series of 2021)
3-10-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to facilitate the registration of short-term
rental units subject to appropriate restrictions and standards and to allow for
varied accommodations and experiences for visitors while retaining the
character of residential neighborhoods and protecting the public health,
safety, and welfare. (Ord. 552, Series of 2021)
3-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall apply to this chapter as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:
HIGH-IMPACT SHORT-TERM RENTAL: A short-term rental accommodating occupancy of
twenty (20) or more people at one time.
RESPONSIBLE AGENT: A management company, rental agent, or individual who is
identified by a registered owner as the registered owner's responsible agent.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: A property rented or otherwise made available by way of a
rental agreement, lease, permit, or any other means, whether oral or written,
for compensation or consideration, of residential property, a dwelling unit, or
a portion thereof located within the Town, for a period of less than thirty
(30) consecutive days. (Ord. 552, Series of 2021)
3-10-4: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or booking service provider to
operate or advertise to rent any short-term rental unit without first
registering with the Town Manager or designee.
   B.   Each short-term rental unit shall be registered separately. The short-
term rental registration does not run with the unit but is issued to the
specific owner of a specific short-term rental unit. The registration shall not
be transferred or assigned to another individual, person, entity, or address
but may be managed by a third-party on behalf of the owner.
   C.   Prior to registration, a high-impact short-term rental shall apply for
and receive a special use permit pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 9 of this Code.
   D.   Any person found to be advertising for rent or renting a short-term
rental unit without registering with the Town shall be notified by certified
mail to resolve all violations. Upon receipt of the notice, the owner of the
short-term rental unit shall have ten (10) business days to correct the
violation(s). Corrective options shall include without limitation removing the
offending advertisement, terminating the rental of the offending unit(s), or by
registering the short-term unit with the Town. If the owner of the short-term
rental unit fails to correct the violations or receives subsequent violations,
the owner shall be subject to the fines as provided in Section
3-10-6 of this Chapter. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a
separate offense.
   E.   Hotels and Motels and Condo-Hotels, as defined in Title 7 of the Town
Code, shall be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter.
   F.   A business license shall be required for all short-term rental units.
Short-term rental units utilizing a property management company shall be
permitted to operate under a collective business license with a valid short-
term rental registration for the individual property. Proof of a collective
business license shall be provided to the Town upon registering a short-term
rental.
   G.   The term of a registration shall be for twelve (12) months; annual
renewal is required. Registration fees shall be set by resolution of Town
Council. If a registration fee is paid by credit card, the Town may impose a
convenience fee for the use of this alternative form of payment in an amount
not to exceed the actual additional cost incurred by the Town to process the
transaction. Any such convenience fee shall be imposed in accordance with the
rules of the credit card provider. In the event of declined payment or
insufficient funds, the Town may assess a penalty in an amount set by
resolution. After a second declined payment or second instance of insufficient
funds, the Town may require all payments from that person to be by certified
funds, cashier’s check or cash.
   H.   Beginning on August 1, 2025, all short-term rental registrations and
renewals shall provide proof of satisfactory completion of a fire and life
safety inspection by the East Grand Fire Protection District completed within
the previous twelve (12) months. (Ord. 552, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 572,
Series of 2022; Ord. 624, Series of 2024; Ord. 631, Series of 2025)
3-10-5: CONDITIONS FOR ALL SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNITS:
   A.   The owner of a short-term rental unit registered pursuant to this
Chapter shall be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   An advertisement offering to rent a short-term rental unit shall
prominently display the unit's short-term rental registration number in the
advertisement as, "Winter Park Short-Term Rental Registration No. [insert
number]." Failure to prominently display the required information in any
advertisement of the unit shall be considered a violation of this Section.
      2.   The motor vehicles of all occupants of the short-term rental unit
shall be parked only on the site of the unit, or in a Town designated parking
area. No motor vehicles shall be parked on the lawn or landscaped areas of a
unit or in the public street or right of way adjacent to the unit. No person
shall be permitted to stay overnight in any motor vehicle, which is parked at a
short-term rental unit. All forms of advertisement for the short-term rental
unit shall list the number of available on-site parking spots provided. If no
on-site parking is provided, the advertisement shall list that no parking is
provided, and that no on-street parking is permitted.
      3.   The storage and disposal of all trash and garbage from a short-term
rental unit shall comply with the requirements of Title 4, Chapter 10 of this
Code.
      4.   The owner of a short-term rental unit shall take appropriate steps
to inform occupants of community quiet hours between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. and shall take reasonable steps to enforce such quiet hours
within the short-term rental unit. Occupants of a short-term rental unit shall
not cause unreasonable noise in violation of Section
4-1-4 or Section
4-9B-4(A)(2) of this Code. A prima facie showing that a violation of this
subsection 4 has occurred shall consist of evidence that between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. noise was audible at a distance of fifty feet (50')
from its source, distinguishable from any other source of sound in the
vicinity, and was of a greater volume than any other single source of sound in
the vicinity.
      5.   No short-term rental unit shall be operated in such a manner as to
constitute a nuisance pursuant to Title 4, Chapter 12 of this Code.
      6.   Open burning at the site of a short-term rental unit shall be
permitted in accordance with Section
4-1-3 of this Code.
      7.   If additional burning restrictions or drought mitigation
restrictions adopted by the Grand County Board of Commissioners or the Town are
in effect, the owner of the short-term rental unit shall post this information
in the unit in a conspicuous location.
      8.   At the time of registration, a responsible agent shall be identified
by name, address, and telephone number and shall be authorized by the owner of
the short-term rental unit to receive communications from the Town concerning
the unit. The designated responsible agent may be changed by the owner during
the term of the registration. The owner shall notify the Town of the change, in
writing at least seven (7) days prior to the change, and shall provide the
name, address and telephone number of the replacement responsible agent.
         a.   The responsible agent, or such agent's employee or designee,
shall be available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, to
respond to any complaint, about the operation or condition of the short-term
rental unit, filed with or through the Town, or a website provided by the Town
for the submission of complaints. The responsible agent shall respond within
sixty (60) minutes of receiving notice of a complaint. The responsible agent's
failure to respond to a complaint, as required by this Section, shall be a
violation enforced against the short-term rental unit and the owner and subject
to this Code. Complaints regarding the operation or condition of the short-term
rental unit shall include without limitation those defined in the Town's
administrative rules and regulations.
         b.   An alternate responsible agent may be identified by the owner in
the event that the designated responsible agent is not successfully contacted
by the Town in response to a complaint or regarding a violation of the Town's
administrative rules and regulations. The owner shall provide the same
information for an alternate responsible agent as required under Section
3-10-5(A)(8).
      9.   A high-impact short-term rental shall comply at all times with all
conditions imposed by its special use permit.
   B.   Each short-term rental unit shall comply with all of the following
minimum health and safety standards at all times while the property is being
occupied:
      1.   The applicable requirements of the Town's building and technical
codes adopted by reference in Title 6, Chapter 1 of this Code;
      2.   The applicable requirements of any other ordinance, rule, or
administrative regulation of the Town;
      3.   The terms and conditions of any development permit issued to the
owner with respect to the short-term rental unit;
      4.   Smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, and fire extinguishers
installed in the unit and shall be operable at all times;
      5.   Wood-burning fireplaces and stoves inside the short-term rental unit
cleaned on an annual basis; and
      6.   All pets shall be subject to Title 4, Chapter 2 of this Code.
   C.   All property and sales taxes that are lawfully assessed against a
short-term rental unit shall be paid to the appropriate taxing authority.
   D.   Owner Liable: Compliance with the conditions set forth in this Chapter
shall be the nondelegable responsibility of the owner of the short-term rental
unit, and each owner of a short-term rental unit shall be strictly liable for
compliance with the conditions set forth in this Chapter.
   E.   Owner to Receive Conditions: At the time of the issuance of a
registration, the Town shall provide the owner with a copy of the conditions
set forth in this section.
      1.   Owner to Post Registration and Conditions: The owner shall post a
copy of the registration and the conditions set forth in this section in a
conspicuous location within the short-term rental unit.
      2.   Owner to Provide Responsible Agent With Conditions: The owner shall
provide the responsible agent with a copy of the conditions set forth in this
section. (Ord. 552, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 633, Series of 2025)
3-10-6: PENALTIES AND REVOCATION:
   A.   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter. Violations of
this Chapter shall be civil infractions. Each day a violation exists shall be
deemed a separate offense and be punishable as such.
   B.   Town Code and registration violation penalties are as follows and are
considered within a registration's twelve (12) month term:
      1.   First offense - warning, five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine, and/or
administrative suspension of the short-term rental registration for a period of
ninety (90) days or less; and
      2.   Second and subsequent offenses - one thousand dollar ($1,000.00)
fine and/or administrative revocation of the short-term rental registration
and/or new registration prohibited for up to two (2) years.
   C.   Upon notice by the Finance Director of the finding of a violation and
imposition of a fine, administrative suspension for a period of ninety (90)
days or less, or administrative revocation, the owner may appeal the decision
to the Town Manager by filing a written appeal within ten (10) days of the
notification of the violation. The appeal shall specify the grounds for the
appeal and the relief sought by the owner. The Town Manager shall hold a
hearing on the appeal within ten (10) days of the receipt of the appeal. The
Town shall provide at least five (5) days' notice to the owner of the hearing.
The Town Manager shall make a determination on the appeal within five (5) days
of the hearing and shall notify the owner of the decision in writing. The Town
Manager's decision is final, subject only to judicial review.
   D.   Enforcement of this Chapter may be initiated any of the following ways:
      1.   A notice of violation may be served by posting on the front door of
the short-term rental unit, or by personally serving the owner or the
responsible agent, or by mailing first class or certified mail to the last
known address of the owner or responsible agent;
      2.   A summons and complaint may be served on the owner of the short-term
rental unit as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Civil
Procedure; or
      3.   A summons and complaint may be served on the responsible agent or
the associated property management company of the short-term rental unit as
provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Civil Procedure.
      4.   For a high-impact short-term rental, its special use permit may be
revoked pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 9 of this Code.
   E.   In addition to the penalties described above, the Town shall have any
and all remedies provided by law and in equity for a violation of this Chapter,
including without limitation: damages; specific performance; and injunctive
relief, including without limitation an injunction requiring eviction of any
occupants of the short-term rental unit and an injunction to prohibit the
occupancy of the property in violation of this Chapter. All remedies shall be
cumulative. (Ord. 552, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 574, Series of 2022; Ord. 633,
Series of 2025)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH AND SAFETY RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Purpose
4-1-2: Removal Of Rubbish, Trash And Refuse
4-1-3: Open Burning Restrictions
4-1-4: Loud Noises Prohibited
4-1-5: Disturbing The Peace
4-1-6: Obstructing Public Ways
4-1-7: Deposits On Public Ways
4-1-8: Discharge Of Firearms
4-1-9: Violation And Penalty
4-1-1: PURPOSE:
The town council hereby finds, determines and declares that this chapter is
promulgated under the general police power of the town, that it is promulgated
for the health, safety and welfare of the public, and that this chapter is
necessary for the preservation of the health and safety and for the protection
of public convenience and welfare. The town council further determines that
this chapter bears a rational relationship to the proper legislative objects
sought to be obtained. (Ord. 85, Series of 1982)
4-1-2: REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH AND REFUSE:
   A.   Definitions: "Rubbish", "trash" and "refuse" of all kinds, as used
herein, shall be defined as any discarded: machinery, broken or unbroken glass,
tin cans, papers, rags, kitchen refuse, decayed waste, dead animals, decomposed
matter of any kind or nature, cinders, ashes, plastic, sawdust, and all
building materials that are not associated with an active building permit
issued by the town of Winter Park.
   B.   Storage; Containers: Storage of rubbish, trash and refuse shall be
accomplished in strict conformance with the provisions of section
7-3-6 of this code. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep
in, on or about any dwelling, building premises, or any other place in the
town, vegetation or animal substance, garbage, trash, rubbish or refuse matter
of any kind which may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the
residents of the town unless the same is covered in receptacles as nearly
airtight as may be practicable; however rubbish, trash or refuse may be
disposed of in properly tied plastic bags, provided such bags are not located
outside of an enclosed building and are not placed outside the building except
as provided in section
7-3-6 of this code.
   C.   Removal Of Rubbish, Trash Or Refuse: All persons, corporations and
other entities shall cause the removal of all rubbish, trash or refuse from
such properties as they may own, possess through lease or other lawful means,
or occupy within the town at least once each week. All such persons shall
remove all such rubbish, trash or refuse from their property within twenty four
(24) hours after being notified to do so by the town. Any person who fails to
remove any "rubbish", "trash" or "refuse" as above defined from any property
which he owns, occupies or controls, following notification from the town to so
remove such rubbish, trash or refuse, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section
4-1-9 of this chapter.
   D.   Unremoved Rubbish, Trash Or Refuse: When the town becomes aware of
unremoved rubbish, trash or refuse, the town shall provide personal notice to
the owner or occupant of the property upon which the rubbish, trash or refuse
is located of such fact, or, if the owner or occupant is not personally
available to receive such personal notice then the town shall provide written
notice to the owner or occupant at the address of the property upon which the
rubbish, trash or refuse has not been removed of such fact. Such owner or
occupant shall have twenty four (24) hours from the date of such personal or
mailed written notice to remove such rubbish, trash or debris. In the event
that a person, entity or corporation after receipt of such notice fails to
remove any rubbish, trash or debris within the time period provided in the
notice the town is authorized to remove such rubbish, trash or refuse and
assess the entire cost thereof, including a fifteen percent (15%) fee for
inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith against the
property. If the assessment should remain unpaid for ninety (90) days, the
outstanding balance will be certified to the Grand County treasurer for
collection on the property tax statement attributable to the property. A
collection fee of thirty percent (30%) of the certification amount will be
assessed by the Grand County treasurer. Assessment and collection of the fees
described herein shall be in addition to the penalties described in section
4-1-9 of this chapter.
   E.   Scattered Rubbish, Trash And Refuse: All persons, corporations and
entities shall be responsible for immediately removing scattered rubbish, trash
or refuse originating from their storage containers or land and being scattered
onto either private and public property, which scattering is a result of animal
scavenging, vandalism, wind or other weather conditions, or any other action or
event that shall cause such rubbish, trash or refuse to become scattered,
whether or not such action or event is within the control of the owner or
occupant of the property. The town will attempt to contact the property owner
in the manner set forth in subsection D of this section about the scattered
rubbish, trash or refuse. If the property owner cannot be contacted
immediately, the town will remove the rubbish, trash and/or refuse and assess
the whole cost thereof, including fifteen percent (15%) for inspection and
other incidental costs in connection therewith against the property. If the
town is notified of a second scattered rubbish, trash or refuse occurrence from
the same property and the town is required to collect scattered rubbish, trash
or refuse, an additional fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be added to
the costs and assessments provided for herein, which may be collected as
provided for hereinabove. (Ord. 323, Series of 2002)
4-1-3: OPEN BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Open burning is prohibited at all times in the town, except under the
following conditions:
      1.   The burning is for the noncommercial cooking of food for human
consumption;
      2.   The burning is for recreational purposes and is located within an
established campfire ring, fire pit, or other similar protective enclosure, and
the fire is no larger than three feet (3') in diameter and two feet (2') in
height;
      3.   The burning is a smokeless flare or safety flare used to indicate
danger or distress to the public or public safety officials; or
      4.   The burning is conducted in compliance with a permit issued by the
town manager or designee, which permit may be issued by the town manager or
designee if the town manager or designee finds that such burning can be
accomplished in a safe manner and in compliance with all other applicable
regulations.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the town council may by
resolution, in its sole discretion, place additional restrictions on open
burning upon receipt of credible evidence of the need for additional
restrictions or bans.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, all open burning is
prohibited in the town during any periods of time when the board of county
commissioners of the county of Grand, state of Colorado has adopted burning
restrictions, in accordance with such restrictions, provided that the town may,
at the discretion of the town manager or designee, exempt certain locations or
devices from the burning restrictions adopted by the board of county
commissioners, or adopt additional restrictions on locations or devices that
are more restrictive than those adopted by the board of county commissioners by
public notice placed at the location and at the designated posting location
identified under section 13.14 of the Winter Park home rule charter. (Ord. 460,
Series of 2012)
4-1-4: LOUD NOISES PROHIBITED:
The playing, operation or use by any person within the town of any loudspeaker,
sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or
any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and
is attached to and upon any vehicle or upon any building or structure, not
housed within any building, shall be deemed a public nuisance, unless the owner
or user thereof first applies for and receives a written permit from the town
council to operate such device for a limited period. (Ord. 85, Series of 1982)
4-1-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It is unlawful for any person, wilfully, maliciously, intentionally or
unnecessarily, to disturb the peace and quiet of another or of any neighborhood
or family or religious congregation or other assembly within the town by loud
or unusual noises or indecent behavior, offensive and unbecoming conduct (where
such behavior or conduct is likely to cause an immediate breach of the peace).
Any violation of the provisions of this section is hereby declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 232, Series of 1995)
4-1-6: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to obstruct or impede
public travel upon any public street, highway or sidewalk or in any place of a
public nature within the town, or to interfere with the free and unobstructed
use of public streets, highways, sidewalks or places by any other person or
persons; and it is the duty of any person or groups of persons to comply with a
request of the mayor or any police officer so authorized by the town, to
disperse or discontinue any obstruction or interference with the use of any
public street, way, sidewalk or place within the town. (Ord. 85, Series of
1982)
4-1-7: DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, sweep, or shovel, or in any
manner deposit any rubbish or snow in or upon any public street, alley,
sidewalk, gutter, sewer intake, parking lot, vacant lot, or any other public
real property; any such action by any person is further declared to be a
nuisance. (Ord. 92, Series of 1982)
4-1-8: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
   A.   Unlawful Within Town Limits: It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or cause to be discharged any firearm within or into the town limits.
   B.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to the following:
      1.   A sworn peace officer or a member of the armed forces of the United
States or the Colorado national guard, or an employee of the United States
department of agriculture acting in lawful performance of their duties.
      2.   A person discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of persons or
property.
      3.   A person discharging a firearm in the course of lawful hunting,
target, or recreational shooting on public or private land when the discharge
will not endanger adjacent persons or property, except on, across, or within
fifty feet (50') of the centerline of any public roadway, or within two hundred
(200) yards of any dwelling or occupied structure. (Ord. 461, Series of 2012)
4-1-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 460, Series of 2012)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Title
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Purpose
4-2-4: License And Vaccination Of Dogs
4-2-5: Animals Running At Large; Unlawful Acts
4-2-6: Animal Defecation On Public Or Private Property; Exemptions
4-2-7: Harassment Of Assistance Dogs Prohibited
4-2-8: Impounding
4-2-9: Quarantine Of Animals
4-2-10: Possession Of Wild Or Vicious Animals
4-2-11: Misuse Of Animals
4-2-12: Animals In Heat
4-2-13: Care And Control
4-2-14: Animal Attacks
4-2-15: Disposition Of Animals
4-2-16: Noise
4-2-17: Interference Prohibited
4-2-18: Police Service Dog Unit
4-2-19: Violations And Penalties
4-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the TOWN OF WINTER PARK ANIMAL
CONTROL ORDINANCE OF 2009. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any living creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person designated by the police department or the
town manager as an "animal control officer", code enforcement officer, police
officer, Grand County animal control officer, or Grand County sheriff's deputy
with the duties of investigation, control and enforcement of this code and
state laws pertaining to animals.
ASSISTANCE DOG: A dog that has been specially trained, or is being specially
trained, to guide and/or assist a blind, visually impaired, deaf, hearing
impaired, or physically or mentally disabled or impaired person.
BODILY INJURY: Physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical or mental
condition.
EFFECTIVE AND IMMEDIATE CONTROL: Such direct, physical or verbal restraint
sufficient to prevent attack or uninvited contact by the animal upon a person
other than the owner or another animal, to prevent entry upon public property
if the animal is not on a leash controlled by a human or to prevent entry upon
private property of another without the consent of the person in possession of
such private property.
EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCE: Events that justify a departure from usual legal
procedures such as the obtaining of a warrant, typically in order to save a
life, preserve evidence, or prevent a suspect from fleeing.
GOOD CAUSE: To act out of necessity or take action against an animal to defend
a person or property from imminent harm or damage.
HARBOR: The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing premises to
which the animal returns for food, shelter or care.
KENNEL: Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or
boarding dogs and/or cats or engaged in the training of dogs for guard or
sentry purposes.
LIVESTOCK: Any bovine animal, horse, mule, ass, sheep, goat, or any other
animal kept for ranching, agricultural, or animal husbandry purposes.
MUTILATE: To detach or destroy an animal's limb or other essential part or to
otherwise cripple or maim an animal.
OWNER: Any person owning, possessing, keeping, leasing or harboring any animal
within the town.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, organization or other entity, and includes the term "owner"
as defined in this section.
PET SHOP: Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling or
boarding animals of any species.
PREMISES: Real property, buildings and other improvements.
RUNNING AT LARGE: An animal that is not restricted to its owner's premises or
not under the effective and immediate control of a person or such animal's
owner.
SEVERE BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury which involves a substantial risk of death,
a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement or a substantial risk of
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body.
TO OWN: To own, possess, keep, harbor or lease.
UNPROVOKED ATTACK: The infliction of bodily injury on one or more persons or
animals by an animal, which injury is not necessary to:
   A.   Protect a person from an unlawful assault.
   B.   Protect the property of a person against theft, criminal mischief or
criminal trespass.
   C.   Protect the animal from an unjustified and unprovoked attack which
could cause serious bodily injury to it.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for the boarding of animals or for the diagnosis and treatment of
diseases and injuries of animals. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009; amd. Ord. 475,
Series of 2013)
4-2-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the regulations and expectations of
both owners and domestic pets in order to maintain the health and well being of
animals, prevent damage to people or property, and protect the public health,
safety, and welfare. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-4: LICENSE AND VACCINATION OF DOGS:
   A.   License Required And Rabies Inoculation: No dog over the age of six (6)
months shall be kept, maintained or harbored within the town for fifteen (15)
or more consecutive days unless the dog owner has had the dog vaccinated
against rabies and obtained a county dog license and tag.
   B.   Application For License And Tag; Fees: Applications for dog licenses
and tags shall be made to the Grand County animal control division or the town
clerk on forms provided therefor. A nonrefundable fee as established by Grand
County shall be paid for each license issued.
   C.   Duration Of License: A dog license shall expire at the end of the
calendar year in which it was issued.
   D.   Information On License: A dog license shall state the following
information:
      1.   Name and address of the pet owner;
      2.   Breed, sex, age and description of the dog;
      3.   Whether the dog is neutered or spayed;
      4.   Amount of license fee paid;
      5.   Date of issuance of license; and
      6.   Number of the license.
   E.   Issuance Procedure For Tag: A dog tag shall be issued with the dog
license to the dog owner and shall be regarded as a part of the license. The
tag will be made of a durable material, shall be suitable to be attached to a
dog collar or harness, and will state the year of issuance and the number of
the dog license.
   F.   Tag Not Transferable: Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog
to another, and no refunds shall be made for any dog license fee because of the
death of the dog, or due to the licensed dog's permanent removal from the
county prior to the expiration of the license year.
   G.   License And Tag; Use Restricted: It shall be unlawful to knowingly
possess and/or fix a license and respective tag to or for any dog other than
that specific animal for which the respective license and tag have been issued.
   H.   Fees For License And Tag: Licenses and other fees as required to be
paid under this chapter shall be established by the county commissioners,
except that no license fees or charges shall be charged for the licensing of an
assistance dog.
   I.   Receipt For License And Tag; Duplicate Tag: Upon payment of the license
fee as provided in subsection H of this section, the official receiving said
license fee shall issue to the applicant a receipt for the payment received for
each dog licensed. The receipt shall contain the number of the license as shown
on the tag. Said receipt shall be retained by the respective owner for
inspection as may be reasonably required by the authorized enforcement
authorities of the town. In the event a dog tag is lost, destroyed or
mutilated, a duplicate tag may be issued by the appropriate official, upon
presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the
current year, and upon the additional payment of a fee as established by the
county commissioners for such duplicate tag.
   J.   Registration Required: Dogs over the age of six (6) months shall be
licensed by January 1 of each year, or within thirty (30) days after having
attained the age of six (6) months.
      1.   Late registration shall be permitted after January 1 of each year,
subject to the payment of the late registration fee.
      2.   With respect to a dog brought into the town subsequent to January 1
of each year, within thirty (30) days after the entry of such dog, the dog
owner shall obtain a license for the dog and the regular fee shall apply to the
registration. After such thirty (30) days, the late registration fee shall be
paid.
   K.   Vaccination, Inoculation By Veterinarian: The vaccination or
inoculation against rabies required in order to obtain a dog license must be
performed by a licensed veterinarian.
      1.   The dog owner shall obtain from the veterinarian a vaccination
certificate which states the type of vaccination with which the dog was
inoculated, date of the inoculation and recommended year of renewal of
inoculation.
   L.   Display Of License And Tag: A dog owner who obtains a dog license shall
retain it during the license year and is required to present it for inspection
by the authorized enforcement authorities of the town in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter.
      1.   A dog owner who obtains a dog tag in conjunction with the dog
license shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the licensed dog, and
said collar or harness must be worn by said dog at all times.
   M.   Kennel Exemption: Dogs kept or maintained by a licensed kennel need not
be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter while they are within
the confines of the kennel premises. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-5: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to fail to prevent such dog from
running at large within the town.
   A.   Running At Large: An animal shall be deemed to be running at large
under circumstances where the animal is not either restrained by means of a
leash, rope, chain or other physical restraint of sufficient strength to
control the animal or is not under the effective and immediate control of the
owner or other responsible person present with the animal and immediately
obedient to that person's commands.
      1.   An animal shall be deemed to be running at large if the animal is
left unattended in a motor vehicle or the bed of a pickup truck and is not
tethered or confined in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, so as
to prevent the animal from exiting the vehicle of its own volition or posing a
risk to passersby.
      2.   An animal shall be deemed to be running at large, on its owner's
premises, under circumstances where the animal is unattended and is not
confined within a secure enclosure as defined in this chapter or is not
restrained by a leash, rope, chain or other tethering device sufficient to
restrain the animal to the owner's premises.
      3.   An animal shall be deemed to be running at large, if on public
property, or property generally accessible to the public, said animal is
tethered or chained in such a manner that it poses a risk of an unprovoked
attack to passersby by lunging at or attacking other persons or animals.
   B.   Exceptions: The following shall constitute exceptions to running at
large:
      1.   An animal is not considered to be running at large, either on or off
the premises of its owner, if the animal is being physically held by the owner
or other responsible person or is in the immediate presence of the owner or
other responsible person and is immediately obedient to that person's command.
      2.   An animal is not considered to be running at large if it is confined
within a motor vehicle or secured within the confines of the bed of a pickup
truck, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, in such manner that
it cannot exit the vehicle or pose a risk to any person outside the confines of
the vehicle by its own volition.
      3.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs while
actually working livestock, locating or retrieving wild game in season for a
licensed hunter, assisting law enforcement officers or actually being trained
for any of these pursuits.
   C.   Fowl Running At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or
having in their possession or custody any chickens or feathered fowl to have
the same running at large in the town and upon the property of others or upon
the streets, alleys or other public places within the town.
   D.   Livestock Running At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person owning
or having in their possession any livestock to have said livestock be running
at large and unattended within the town.
   E.   Violation: Unattended animals in violation of this section shall be
ordered impounded by the town manager or their designee in a pound, stable, or
other location designated by the town manager or their designee, and the
reasonable cost of the transporting, feeding and keeping such animal shall be
paid by the owner before the animal is released from said pound.
   F.   Enhanced Penalties: Any person who shall violate any parts of this
section shall, upon conviction, in addition to the penalties set forth in
section
4-2-19 of this chapter, be subject to enhanced penalties, as follows:
      1.   Ordered to have the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed
veterinarian or a licensed shelter; and
      2.   Ordered to have the animal be permanently identified through the
implantation of a microchip containing owner identification information by a
licensed veterinarian or a licensed shelter. The microchip information shall be
registered with the appropriate company responsible for maintaining such
information for the microchip; and a copy of the initial registration and a
receipt acknowledging completion of registration from the company shall be
provided to the animal control division of the Grand County sheriff's office.
      3.   Notwithstanding the penalties herein, violations of subsections 4-2-
5C and D of this chapter shall be punishable as provided for in subsection 1-4-
1C of this code.
      4.   It shall not be a defense to this section that the owner did not
permit the animals to be running at large. (Ord. 475, Series of 2013)
4-2-6: ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No person, having possession, custody or control of any animal, shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any nuisance,
i.e., defecation upon the grounds of any public area, or upon any private
property other than the property of the owner of such animal.
   B.   Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other
animal which commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation, in any area other than the
private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as prohibited in
subsection A of this section, shall be required to immediately remove any feces
from such surface and either:
      1.   Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
      2.   Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or
litter receptacle.
   C.   The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply
to any assistance dog that is accompanying, guiding, leading or physically in
the control of a disabled person. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-7: HARASSMENT OF ASSISTANCE DOGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall distract, harass, strike, injure, seize, entice,
intimidate, frighten or otherwise interfere with any assistance dog that is
accompanying, guiding, leading or physically in the control of a disabled
person, or that is engaged in training with a handler.
   B.   No dog owner, or person charged with the custody or control of a dog
shall allow their dog, or a dog over which they are to have control, to attack,
injure, harass, frighten or otherwise interfere with an assistance dog that is
guiding, leading, accompanying or being controlled by a disabled person or an
assistance dog training handler.
   C.   For purposes of this section, "disabled person" shall mean a blind,
visually impaired, deaf, hearing impaired or physically or mentally handicapped
or impaired person. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-8: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal
control officer or police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to an
animal shelter or other impoundment facility, inside or outside the
jurisdictional limits of the town, any dog that exhibits behavior in violation
of this chapter; and, upon receiving any dog, to make a complete registry
entering the breed, sex and color of such dog and whether licensed; and if
licensed, to enter the name and address of the owner and the date and number of
the dog tag.
   B.   It shall be lawful for any animal control officer to go upon any
property, excluding a dwelling, using such force as may be reasonably
necessary, for the purpose of pursuing and catching any animal to be impounded.
      1.   Absent probable cause and exigent circumstances, an animal control
officer shall not go within the interior of a dwelling to remove an animal
without a court order or the consent of an occupant of the dwelling who is of
sufficient age to understand the benefits and/or consequences of granting such
consent. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-9: QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS 1 :
   A.   Person Bitten Or Injured: A dog which is known to have bitten or
injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin or a dog which, in
the opinion of the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian, appears
to be afflicted with rabies, shall be closely confined by the dog owner in
accordance with the directions of the chief of police for a period of not less
than ten (10) days. If said dog dies while confined or impounded as provided in
this section, proper medical tests shall be conducted at the expense of the dog
owner upon said dog to determine whether the animal was suffering from rabies
at the date of death.
   B.   Owner To Produce Animal: The owner of any animal that has been reported
to have bitten any person shall, on demand of any member of the police
department or an animal control officer, produce the animal for examination and
quarantine. If the owner of any such animal refuses to produce the animal, the
owner shall be subject to immediate arrest if there shall be probable cause to
believe that the animal has bitten any person and that the owner is keeping or
harboring the animal upon such a demand, and the owner may be charged with a
violation of this section by failing to produce such an animal. If the owner of
any such animal shall wilfully or knowingly secrete or refuse to produce such
animal, such act shall constitute a separate and individual violation of this
section.
   C.   Unclaimed Dog: If the owner of a dog referred to in subsection A of
this section cannot be determined or located, the town shall confine said dog
for a period of not less than five (5) days. If the owner of said dog is not
determined or located or the dog claimed from confinement within said five (5)
days, the chief of police or Grand County sheriff may order such dog destroyed.
If said dog is determined by a veterinarian to be suffering from rabies, it
shall be destroyed immediately.
   D.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for a dog owner, knowing or reasonably
suspecting that a dog has rabies, to allow such dog to be taken off his or her
property or premises or beyond the limits of the town without the written
permission of the chief of police. Every dog owner or other person, upon
ascertaining that a dog is rabid, shall immediately notify the chief of police
who shall either remove the dog to an animal shelter or other suitable place
or, if necessary for the protection of the public, immediately destroy the dog.
   E.   Rabies Inoculation During Quarantine: If the animal is inoculated for
rabies during the ten (10) day quarantine, an additional ten (10) days of
quarantine is required. Total quarantine, if so inoculated, shall be twenty
(20) days.
   F.   Proof Of Ownership: A valid rabies tag worn by any animal shall be
presumptive evidence that the owner of the animal is the person registered as
obtaining the rabies vaccination for such animal. The registered owner of an
animal may be charged with any violation the animal committed. (Ord. 419,
Series of 2009)
 
Notes
1 1. CRS §31-15-401(1)(m).
4-2-10: POSSESSION OF WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
No person shall keep or permit to be kept on such person's premises any wild or
vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or
for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a zoological
garden, theatrical exhibit or circus, except that no theatrical exhibit or act
shall be held in which animals are encouraged to perform through the use of
chemical, electrical or mechanical devices. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-11: MISUSE OF ANIMALS:
No person shall give away any live vertebrate animal as a prize for or as an
inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as an inducement
to enter a place of amusement, or no person shall offer such vertebrate as an
incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the vertebrate is for
the purpose of attracting trade. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-12: ANIMALS IN HEAT:
The owner of every female dog or cat in heat shall keep the dog or cat confined
in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat
cannot come into contact with another animal, except for planned breeding, and
such that the animal does not create a nuisance by attracting other dogs or
cats. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-13: CARE AND CONTROL 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or recklessly engage in
any of the following acts, or any combination thereof:
      1.   Fail to provide an animal with sufficient food and water, proper
shelter and protection from the weather to avoid harm to an animal;
      2.   Fail to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and
injury to an animal;
      3.   To, without good cause, mutilate an animal;
      4.   To, without good cause, beat repeatedly or kill or attempt to kill
an animal; except for the licensed harvest of wild game animals during any
legal hunting season;
      5.   To cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse any
animal to the extent that the animal is in imminent danger of injury, sickness
or death;
      6.   To cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other
combat between animals or between humans and animals;
      7.   To abandon such animal or neglect such animal to the extent that the
animal is in imminent danger of injury, sickness or death. The term "neglect"
shall include leaving an animal unattended in a vehicle without adequate
ventilation or to leave an animal unattended in any manner that subjects the
animal to extreme temperatures or conditions and thereby creates a risk of
imminent injury, sickness or death to the animal;
      8.   To crop a dog's ears or neuter an animal. This provision shall not
apply to actions of a licensed veterinarian; and
      9.   To poison any dog or cat or distribute poison in any manner
whatsoever with the intent or for the purpose of poisoning any dog or cat.
Any member of the police department or an animal control officer may take
necessary and appropriate steps to abate any violation of this subsection and,
further, may impound the animals affected until a dispositional hearing can be
held before the judge of the municipal court in the manner and form provided in
this chapter.
   B.   No owner shall fail to maintain areas where animals are kept in a clean
and sanitary fashion. It shall be the duty of every owner to dispose of, in a
reasonable manner, any accumulation of animal excretion on premises where
animals are kept, in order to prevent the attraction of flies, insects or other
pests, and in order to prevent the propagation of obnoxious odors.
   C.   No person shall harbor or allow there to be more than a total of three
(3) dogs, three (3) cats or one Vietnamese potbellied pig or, if dogs, cats and
pigs are harbored or allowed, any combination not exceeding four (4) such
animals per residential dwelling unit that they occupy. This subsection shall
not apply to dogs or cats under three (3) months old from the same litter of a
female dog or cat harbored or allowed per residential dwelling unit. This
section shall not apply to animals maintained in an agricultural district.
   D.   Any person who shall violate any other provision of this section,
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in subsection 4-2-19C of this
chapter. In addition to any penalty provided above, the court shall have the
authority to include any of the following requirements:
      1.   The owner of the animal provides a separate enclosure in the rear
yard of the owner's property that securely limits the animal's access to the
public as determined by an animal control officer, unless the animal is under
the physical control of a responsible person and restrained by a lead not to
exceed four feet (4') in length;
      2.   The owner and the animal shall complete a socialization or behavior
program approved by animal control;
      3.   The owner of the animal shall notify the police department in person
or by telephone as soon as practicable but no later than one hour after the
owner's knowledge of the occurrence of either of the following events: the
animal has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner or
the animal has attacked a person or domestic animal;
      4.   The owner shall post a conspicuous warning sign on the building or
front portion of the property notifying others that a dangerous dog is housed
in the building or on the property. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
 
Notes
1 1. CRS §§18-9-201 et seq., 31-15-401(1)(i).
4-2-14: ANIMAL ATTACKS:
   A.   It is unlawful to own an animal that:
      1.   Causes severe bodily injury to a person in an unprovoked attack,
whether on or off the premises of its owner. The owner of an animal that causes
severe bodily injury to a person in an unprovoked attack, whether on or off the
premises of its owner, shall be responsible for all the medical expenses
incurred by such person. Any owner who violates this subsection shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. The
court shall also assess against the owner of the animal all costs incurred in
apprehending, detaining, treating and disposing of the animal.
      2.   Causes bodily injury to a person in an unprovoked attack, whether on
or off the premises of its owner. The owner of an animal that causes bodily
injury to a person in an unprovoked attack, whether on or off the premises of
its owner, shall be responsible for all the medical expenses incurred by such
person. Any owner who violates this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. The court shall also
assess against the owner all costs incurred in apprehending, detaining,
treating and disposing of the animal.
      3.   Causes bodily injury to another animal in an unprovoked attack while
on or off the premises of its owner. Any owner who violates this subsection
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this
code. The court shall also assess against the owner all costs incurred in
apprehending, detaining, treating and disposing of the animal that caused the
attack as well as any costs incurred by the owner of the attacked animal in
treating it or disposing of its body if it was killed. (Ord. 473, Series of
2013)
   B.   Any person who shall violate any provision of subsection A of this
section shall, upon conviction, be:
      1.   Ordered to pay for all costs associated with the confinement and
destruction of the animal; or
      2.   Ordered to have the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed
veterinarian or a licensed shelter; and
      3.   Ordered to have the animal be permanently identified through the
implantation of a microchip containing owner identification information by a
licensed veterinarian or a licensed shelter. The microchip information shall be
registered with the appropriate company responsible for maintaining such
information for the microchip; and a copy of the initial registration and a
receipt acknowledging completion of registration from the company shall be
provided to the animal control division of the police department.
      4.   The owner shall post a conspicuous warning sign on the building or
front portion of the property located within the city notifying others that a
dangerous dog is housed in the building or on the property.
   C.   In addition to any penalty provided above, the court shall have the
authority to include any of the following requirements:
      1.   The owner of the animal provides a separate enclosure in the rear
yard of the owner's property that securely limits the animal's access to the
public as determined by an animal control officer, unless the animal is under
the physical control of a responsible person and restrained by a lead not to
exceed four feet (4') in length;
      2.   The owner and the animal shall complete a socialization or behavior
program approved by animal control;
      3.   The owner of the animal shall notify the police department in person
or by telephone as soon as practicable but no later than one hour after the
owner's knowledge of the occurrence of either of the following events: the
animal has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner or
the animal had attacked a person or domestic animal. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-15: DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Following the impoundment of an animal pursuant to sections
4-2-8 and
4-2-9 of this chapter, an animal control officer or police officer shall leave
a notice with a person over the age of eighteen (18) years at the residence of
the owner of the seized animal. The notice shall indicate the date and time on
which the animal was seized, the location where the animal is impounded and the
date, time and location of the hearing concerning the seizure of the animal.
Within two (2) working days of the seizure of the animal, a copy of this notice
shall be sent to the owner of the animal by certified or registered mail.
   B.   Any animal that causes bodily injury to a person or serious bodily
injury to an animal in an unprovoked attack may be impounded by animal control
officers or the police department without prior notice to the animal's owner. A
police officer or animal control officer may remove the animal from the
premises of the owner without civil or criminal liability if the animal is not
located within the residence of its owner. In the event that an animal is
located within the residence of its owner, the police department or animal
control unit may obtain a court order from the municipal or county court
authorizing the seizure of the animal prior to removing it from its owner's
residence or may remove the animal from its owner's residence upon receiving
the owner's consent.
   C.   The owner of an animal seized pursuant to this chapter shall be
entitled to a hearing before the municipal court at the next regularly
scheduled municipal court date. At the hearing, the court shall determine
whether the animal caused bodily injury to a person or severe bodily injury to
a person or to a domesticated animal and whether the attack was unprovoked. If
the court determines, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the
animal, in an unprovoked attack, caused severe bodily injury to a person, the
court shall order the animal destroyed and all the costs associated with the
seizure, confinement and destruction of the animal assessed against its owner.
If the court determines, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the
animal caused bodily injury to a person in an unprovoked attack or caused
severe bodily injury to a domesticated animal in an unprovoked attack, the
court may order the destruction of the animal in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. Upon a second or subsequent unprovoked attack on a
person or domesticated animal, the court shall order the destruction of the
attacking animal and shall assess all costs associated with the seizure,
confinement and destruction of the animal to its owner. (Ord. 419, Series of
2009)
4-2-16: NOISE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or other animal
which, by barking, howling, baying, yelping, crying, whining or other
utterance, disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
   B.   Any noise emitted by a dog or other animal which is audible from the
boundary of the animal harborer's property shall be presumed to disturb the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood, if any peace officer or animal control
officer for the town investigates the report thereof and determines that such
noise is occurring as defined herein, taking into consideration the proximity
of the complainant's residence or place of business with respect to the point
of origin of the noise, and determining that such noise would disturb the
senses of the average citizen or resident of the neighborhood under the
circumstances complained of. Such presumption shall be rebuttable by the
defendant.
   C.   Prior to issuance of a citation for violation of this section, the
animal control officer or peace officer shall issue a written warning to the
harborer of the dog causing the noise and request that the dog be silenced. If
the same dog is a repeat offender of the offense defined in this section, and
such repeat offense occurs within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the
warning, a citation shall be issued to the harborer of the offending dog.
   D.   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
dog was barking due to provocation. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-17: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or
prevent the members of the police department, an animal control officer, or any
licensed veterinarian of the state, in the discharge of their respective duties
as prescribed in this chapter, or to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-18: POLICE SERVICE DOG UNIT:
The police service dog unit of the Fraser/Winter Park police department will be
using trained police dogs. The actions of trained police dogs, when operating
in connection with and under the control of the police service dog unit and
while such actions are within the scope and in furtherance of the duties
associated with the police service dog unit, shall be exempt from all
provisions of this chapter. This provision shall not exempt the canines from
the requirements to have all the canines used in connection with the police
service dog unit to be vaccinated as with any other canine located within the
town, pursuant to section
4-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
4-2-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of section
4-2-4,
4-2-5,
4-2-6,
4-2-7,
4-2-9,
4-2-10, or
4-2-12 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon the second conviction within any twelve (12) month period,
be fined a sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Subsequent convictions shall
be punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. Minimum fines in
this subsection shall not be suspended by order of the court, except that, if
proof of neutering or spaying is provided to the court at the time of
sentencing, the court shall reduce or suspend the penalty by the amount of the
cost of such procedure. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
      1.   The procedures set forth for penalty assessments in Colorado Revised
Statutes 16-2-201 shall be followed as set forth below:
         a.   First and second violations of the above sections shall be issued
in the form of a penalty assessment citation, showing the offense, minimum
fine, and applicable surcharges.
         b.   A violator may within twenty (20) days of receiving the citation,
pay the minimum fine and surcharge without appearing in court.
         c.   After twenty (20) days, the citation becomes a summons requiring
the appearance of the defendant in court.
   B.   Any citation issued for a third or subsequent violation of the above
section shall be in the form of a summons requiring the violator to appear in
the municipal court.
   C.   Any person who shall violate any of the other provisions of this
chapter shall be punished in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of this code,
except as provided for violations in section
4-2-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 419, Series of 2009)
CHAPTER 3
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
SECTION:
4-3-1: Model Traffic Code Adopted
4-3-2: Applicability
4-3-3: Speed Limits
4-3-4: Parking
4-3-5: Idling Of Motor Vehicles
4-3-6: Turning
4-3-7: Motorcycles And Malfunctioning Traffic Signals
4-3-8: Electric Scooters
4-3-9: Snowplows In Echelon Formation
4-3-10: Violation And Penalty
4-3-1: MODEL TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
The Town hereby adopts by reference the 2020 edition of the “Model Traffic Code
for Colorado Municipalities”, promulgated and published as such by the Colorado
Department of Public Safety, Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas
Avenue, Denver, CO 80222 (the “MTC”). A copy of the MTC is available for
inspection at the office of the Town Clerk during regular business hours. (Ord.
534, Series of 2020)
4-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk, driveway, park, and
every other public way within the Town, the use of which the Town has the
authority to regulate, provided that Sections 1401, 1402, 1413, and Part 16 of
the MTC, concerning reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police
officer, and accidents and accident reports, shall apply not only to public
ways but also to private property in the Town. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-3: SPEED LIMITS:
The maximum speed limit on any state or federal highway within Town shall be
thirty-five (35) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. The maximum speed
limit on all Town streets shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, unless otherwise
posted. Any speed in excess of such limits shall be prima facia evidence that
the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-4: PARKING:
Section 1204 of the MTC is amended by the addition of new Subsections (6), (7),
(8), and (9), to read as follows:
   (6)   The Town Manager is hereby delegated the authority to determine the
appropriate restrictions on vehicular standing or parking to be applied to
various streets and other public places in the Town and to cause to be posted
official signs to give notice of such restrictions.
   (7)   Enforcement of any parking restriction may be initiated in any of the
following ways:
      (a)   A parking ticket may be served by leaving it under the windshield
wiper or otherwise attached to the vehicle, or handing it to the driver or
owner if the driver or owner is present, or mailing by first-class or certified
mail to the address of the vehicle as shown in the motor vehicle ownership
records of the state of registration; or
      (b)   A summons and complaint may be served on the owner or driver of the
vehicle as provided in the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (8)   It is unlawful for any person, or any person in charge of any vehicle
to cause or knowingly permit any other person, to drive, stop, or park on any
street or highway within Town, or any Town property, any vehicle that has been
assigned a license plate or plates unless the current registration year is
properly attached to and displayed on the vehicle, in accordance with state
law. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-5: IDLING OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to idle or permit the idling of any motor vehicle
for a period of fifteen (15) minutes or longer. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-6: TURNING:
Section 909(1) of the MTC is amended to read as follows:
   (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle intending to turn shall do as follows:
      (a)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway; and the turn shall be completed into the right lane or edge of the
roadway on the roadway turned onto; and the vehicle shall remain in said right
lane after the turn for at least one hundred (100) feet before changing lanes
in order to allow a proper lane change signal to be given.
      (b)   Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall
approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. Whenever practicable, the
left turn shall be made to the left of the center of the intersection so as to
leave the intersection or other location in the extreme left hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the same direction as such vehicle on the
roadway being entered and said vehicle shall remain in said lane after the turn
for at least one hundred (100) feet before changing lanes in order to allow
proper lane change signal to be given.
      (c)   Double turns. Two vehicles turning abreast of one another is
prohibited unless specifically authorized by signs, signals or markings.
      (d)   The Town may cause official traffic control devices, including
solid white lines, arrows and single or double solid yellow lines, to be placed
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this Section be traveled by turning vehicles and, when such devices are so
placed, no driver shall turn a vehicle other than as directed and required by
such devices. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-7: MOTORCYCLES AND MALFUNCTIONING TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
When a driver of a motorcycle approaches an intersection and faces a traffic
control signal that is inoperative, that remains steady red or steady yellow
during several time cycles, or that does not recognize the motorcycle, the
driver may proceed past the signal only with caution, as if the signal were
flashing yellow. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-8: ELECTRIC SCOOTERS:
   A.   For purposes of this Section, electric scooter means any device that
weighs less than one hundred (100) pounds, has handlebars, is powered by an
electric motor, and has a maximum speed of twenty (20) miles per hour on a
paved level surface when powered solely by the electric motor, but the term
does not include an electrical assisted bicycle, electric personal assisted
mobility device, motorcycle, or low-powered scooter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to operate an electric scooter on any
sidewalk in the Town. Electric scooters shall be operated only on roadways in
the bicycle lane, if one is available.
   C.   A person operating an electric scooter in the Town shall be subject to
the same rules as persons operating bicycles and other human powered vehicles
as set forth in C.R.S. § 42-4-1412. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-9: SNOWPLOWS IN ECHELON FORMATION:
   A.   For purposes of this Section, echelon formation means a formation in
which snowplows are arranged diagonally, with each unit stationed behind each
other and to the right, or behind and to the left, of the unit ahead.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to pass a snowplow operated by a state,
county, or local government in echelon formation.
   C.   Any person who violates this Section commits a Class A Traffic
Infraction. (Ord. 534, Series of 2020)
4-3-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   It is a criminal traffic offense for any person to violate any of the
following provisions of the MTC:
      1.   Any offense causing or contributing to an accident resulting in
injury or death to any person;
      2.   Failure to stop in the event of an accident causing death, personal
injury or property damage;
      3.   Disregarding the lawful order/direction of a police officer
directing traffic;
      4.   Reckless driving;
      5.   Exceeding the speed limit by twenty-five (25) or more miles per
hour;
      6.   Exhibition of speed or speed contest;
      7.   Operation of an uninsured motor vehicle upon a public roadway;
      8.   Eluding or attempting to elude a police officer; and
      9.   Failure to stop for a stopped school bus displaying flashing red
lights.
   B.   Except for those violations classified as criminal offenses pursuant to
subsection A, all violations of this Chapter are hereby classified as
noncriminal traffic infractions and shall be deemed to be civil matters. The
Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure shall apply to proceedings in which
the defendant is charged with such a noncriminal traffic infraction, except
that no warrant for arrest shall be issued for the defendant’s failure to
appear when the only violation charged would constitute a noncriminal traffic
infraction. Instead, the court may enter a judgment of liability by default
against the defendant for any such failure to appear, assess any penalty and
costs established by law, and report the judgment to the state motor vehicle
division which may assess points against the defendant’s driving privileges and
may deny an application for or renewal of the defendant’s driver’s license
until the judgment and all other lawful costs are satisfied. Further, no writ
of mittimus shall issue where the only basis for the fine and costs imposed was
the finding of guilty or liability for a noncriminal traffic infraction.
   C.   A defendant charged with a criminal traffic offense, as defined in
subsection A, may demand a trial by jury upon compliance with the provisions of
state law and the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. No defendant
shall have a right to a trial by jury for any noncriminal traffic infraction.
If a defendant is charged with more than one traffic violation arising out of
the same incident and at least one of the charged violations is listed in
subsection (1), the defendant shall have the right to demand a trial by jury as
to all offenses, which shall be consolidated for purposes of trial.
   D.   The following penalties shall apply to violations this Chapter:
      1.   A person convicted of a criminal traffic offense shall be punished
as provided in Section
1-4-1(C).
      2.   A person admitting liability for, pleading no contest to, found
guilty of, or against whom a default judgment has been entered for any
noncriminal traffic infraction shall be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1(B). No defendant found to be guilty of any noncriminal traffic infraction
shall be punished by imprisonment for such infraction. (Ord. 534, Series of
2020)
CHAPTER 4
TOWING, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Abandonment Of Motor Vehicles; Public Tow; Emergency Removal And Towing
Of Vehicles
4-4-3: Report; Opportunity To Request Hearing; Public Tow
4-4-4: Conduct Of Hearing
4-4-5: Abandonment Of Motor Vehicles; Private Tow
4-4-6: Inoperable Vehicles
4-4-7: Appraisal; Sale
4-4-8: Proceeds Of Sale
4-4-9: Penalty
4-4-10: Exemption
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: A. Any motor vehicle left unattended on private
property for a period of twenty four (24) hours or longer without the consent
of the owner or lessee of such property or his legally authorized agent; or
   B.   Any motor vehicle left unattended on public property, including any
portion of a street or highway right of way, within the limits of the town of
Winter Park for a period of seventy two (72) hours or longer; or
   C.   Any motor vehicle stored in an impound lot at the request of its owner
or the owner's agent or the Winter Park police department and not removed from
the impound lot according to the agreement with the owner or agent or within
seventy two (72) hours of the time the town's police department notifies the
owner or agent that the vehicle is available for release upon payment of any
applicable charges or fees. If the town's police department requested the
storage, the provisions governing public tows of this chapter apply as the time
of abandonment, and the town's police department shall be deemed the
responsible law enforcement agency. Otherwise, the private tow provisions of
this chapter apply as of the time of abandonment.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any vehicle registered with the state of Colorado department
of revenue, or the department of motor vehicles of any other state, as a
collector's item.
APPRAISAL: A bona fide estimate of reasonable market value made by any motor
vehicle dealer licensed in this state or by any employee of the Colorado state
patrol, Grand County sheriff's department or Winter Park police department
whose appointment for such purpose has been reported by the head of the
appointing agency to the executive director of the department.
DEPARTMENT: The Colorado department of revenue acting directly or through its
duly authorized officers and agents.
IMPOUND LOT: A parcel of real property which is owned or leased by the town of
Winter Park or an operator at which motor vehicles are stored under appropriate
protection.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or trailer that does not have a current
license plate and valid sticker lawfully affixed thereto or that is apparently
inoperable due to being wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled or having
essential parts missing.
OPERATOR: A person or firm licensed by the public utilities commission as a
towing carrier.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the town of Winter Park or any
other law enforcement body or organization under contract with the town to
provide law enforcement services to the town.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property which is not public property.
PRIVATE TOW: Any tow of a motor vehicle not requested by the Winter Park police
department.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property having its title, ownership, use or
possession held by the federal government, state of Colorado or any county,
municipality or other governmental entity of this state, including any portion
of a street, highway or right of way open to the general use of the public.
PUBLIC TOW: Any tow of a motor vehicle requested by the Winter Park police
department. (Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
4-4-2: ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES; PUBLIC TOW; EMERGENCY REMOVAL AND TOWING
OF VEHICLES:
   A.   No person shall abandon any motor vehicle upon public property in the
town. Any Winter Park police officer who finds a motor vehicle which he has
reasonable grounds to believe has been abandoned shall require such motor
vehicle to be removed or cause the same to be removed and placed in storage in
any impound lot designated or maintained by the town.
   B.   Whenever any Winter Park police officer finds a motor vehicle, attended
or unattended, standing upon any portion of a street, highway or right of way
generally open to the use of the public in such a manner as to constitute a
hazard or an obstruction to traffic, proper highway maintenance, snow removal,
construction, or repair, or which is standing in an area of the public right of
way signed as a tow away or handicapped parking zone, such officer is
authorized to cause the motor vehicle to be moved to eliminate any such hazard,
obstruction or violation; or to be removed and placed in storage in any impound
lot designated or maintained by the town; and neither the officer nor anyone
acting under his direction shall be liable for any damage to such motor vehicle
occasioned by such removal or towing and impoundment. (Ord. 158, Series of
1987)
4-4-3: REPORT; OPPORTUNITY TO REQUEST HEARING; PUBLIC TOW:
   A.   1. Upon having a motor vehicle towed pursuant to this chapter, the
Winter Park police department shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the
motor vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, the police
department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful
owner and terminate the proceedings under this chapter. The Winter Park police
department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs
to recover and secure the motor vehicle.
      2.   As soon as possible, but in no event later than three (3) working
days after having a motor vehicle towed, the Winter Park police department
shall report the same to the department by first class or certified mail or
personal delivery, which report shall be on a form prescribed and supplied by
the department.
      3.   The Winter Park police department upon receiving the department's
report required by Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1604(2), shall determine,
from all available information and after reasonable inquiry, whether or not the
motor vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, shall recover and
secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the
proceedings under this chapter. The Winter Park police department shall have
the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure
the motor vehicle.
      4.   The Winter Park police department, within five (5) working days of
the receipt of the report from the department required by Colorado Revised
Statutes 42-4-1604(2), shall notify by certified mail the owner of record, if
ascertained, and any lienholder, if ascertained, of the fact of such report and
the claim, if any, of a lien under Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1607, and
shall send a copy of such notice to the operator. The notice shall contain
information that the identified motor vehicle has been towed or reported
abandoned to the department, the location of the motor vehicle, and the
location from which it was towed, and that, unless claimed within thirty (30)
calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark
on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. Such notice shall also
inform the owner of record of his opportunity to request a hearing concerning
the legality of the towing of his motor vehicle, and the fact that said owner
must contact the Winter Park police department to request a hearing. Such
request shall be made in writing to the Winter Park police department within
ten (10) days of the postmarked date of sending such notice.
   B.   1. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner of a motor vehicle
that has been towed by the Winter Park police department, or said owner's
agent, from appearing at the Winter Park police department to reclaim his motor
vehicle. If the owner or his agent can show proof of ownership, or if the
Winter Park police department confirms the ownership of the vehicle, and the
owner does not contest the legality of the tow, the vehicle may be reclaimed by
payment of the towing fee, any accrued storage fees, and a reasonable
administrative fee assessed by the town.
      2.   If the owner or his agent can show proof of ownership, or if the
Winter Park police department confirms the ownership of the vehicle, and the
owner wishes to contest the legality of the tow, the owner may request a
hearing, in writing, on forms to be supplied by the Winter Park police
department. Prior to a scheduled hearing, the owner of the towed vehicle may
obtain said vehicle by posting a bond in the amount of the towing fee, the
accrued storage fees to date, plus storage fees for each day up to and
including the date of the hearing, and a reasonable administrative fee assessed
by the town. If the person requesting the hearing fails to appear at said
hearing, or if the hearing officer, pursuant to section
4-4-4 of this chapter, finds that there was probable cause to tow the vehicle,
the amount of the bond will be forfeited. (Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
4-4-4: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
   A.   Any requested hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer
appointed by the town manager within seventy two (72) hours (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays) of receipt of a written demand for such
hearing, unless the person requesting the hearing waives the right to a speedy
hearing. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there was
probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. "Probable cause to impound"
shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and
prudence to believe that there was a sufficient breach of municipal, state or
federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle.
   B.   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and shall not be
governed by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall
carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession
of the vehicle. The Winter Park police department shall carry the burden of
establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question.
The hearing officer shall only determine that, as to the vehicle in question,
either: 1) there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, or 2) there was not
such probable cause to impound the vehicle. The decision of the hearing officer
is final.
   C.   Upon a finding of no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be
paid by the town in accordance with arrangements made between the town and the
operator; if a bond was posted pursuant to subsection 4-4-3B2 of this chapter,
said bond shall be returned. If the owner of the vehicle or his agent fails to
claim the vehicle from the operator within six (6) hours of a finding of no
probable cause, excluding such days when the operator is not open for business,
the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. It
shall be the responsibility of the Winter Park police department to notify the
operator in writing of a finding of no probable cause immediately after such
finding is made.
   D.   If probable cause is found, the owner of the vehicle may have the
vehicle returned to him upon payment of the towing fees, accrued storage fees,
and a reasonable administrative fee assessed by the town.
   E.   Failure of the owner of the vehicle in question to request a hearing or
attend a scheduled postseizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to
such hearing. (Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
4-4-5: ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES; PRIVATE TOW:
   A.   No person shall abandon any motor vehicle upon private property other
than his own. Any owner or lessee, or his agent authorized in writing, may have
an abandoned motor vehicle removed from his property by having it towed and
impounded by an operator.
   B.   Any operator having in his possession any abandoned motor vehicle from
a private tow shall immediately notify the Winter Park police department as to
the name of the operator and the location of the impound lot where the vehicle
is located and a description of the abandoned motor vehicle, including the
make, model, color and year, the number, issuing state and expiration date of
the license plate, and the vehicle identification number. Upon such
notification, the Winter Park police department shall ascertain, if possible,
whether or not the vehicle has been reported stolen and, if so reported shall
recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and
terminate the abandonment proceedings under this chapter. The Winter Park
police department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable
costs to recover and secure the vehicle.
   C.   The owner or lessee of real property or an agent authorized by the
owner or lessee may cause any vehicle, parked on such property without the
permission of the owner, lessee or occupant of the property, to be removed or
impounded by an operator, but, except on property used as a single-family
residence, only if the requirements of subsection B of this section have been
met. It is not necessary that a citation be issued for violation of parking on
private property contrary to section
4-3-4 of this title, for a vehicle to be removed or impounded pursuant to this
section.
   D.   Except on property used as a single-family residence, the owner, lessee
or occupant of real property or an agent thereof, prior to causing the removal
and impoundment of a vehicle from such person's property, shall provide clear
notice on signs or pavement markings meeting the requirements of section
4-3-3 of this title, that unauthorized vehicles will be towed away at the
owner's expense. (Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
4-4-6: INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
   A.   Any inoperable vehicle parked, stored or left or permitted to be
parked, stored or left upon any private property within the town for a period
longer than thirty (30) days constitutes a public nuisance. But nothing in this
section applies to an antique vehicle, a vehicle in an enclosed building, a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise that services and repairs such
vehicles, a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained
for impounded vehicles, or a vehicle deemed inoperable solely because it lacks
a current license plate or validation sticker.
   B.   Whenever the town manager has probable cause to believe that an
inoperable vehicle is on private property in violation of subsection A of this
section, the manager shall follow the abatement procedures outlined in chapter
12 of this title. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-4-7: APPRAISAL; SALE:
   A.   Public tow motor vehicles or motor vehicles abandoned in an impound lot
subsequent to a public tow shall be appraised and sold by the Winter Park
police department or its designated representative at a public or private sale
held not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the date the
notice required by section
4-4-3 of this chapter was mailed.
   B.   If the appraised value of an abandoned motor vehicle sold pursuant to
this section is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, the sale shall be made
only for the purpose of junking, scrapping or dismantling such motor vehicle,
and the purchaser thereof shall not, under any circumstances, be entitled to a
Colorado certificate of title. The Winter Park police department shall cause to
be executed and delivered a bill of sale, together with a copy of the report
described in Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1604, to the person purchasing such
motor vehicle. The bill of sale shall state that the purchaser acquires no
right to a certificate of title for such vehicle. The Winter Park police
department shall promptly submit a report of sale, with a copy of the bill of
sale, to the department and shall deliver a copy of such report of sale to the
purchaser of the motor vehicle.
   C.   If the appraised value of a motor vehicle sold pursuant to this section
is more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the sale may be made for any
intended use by the purchaser thereof. The Winter Park police department shall
cause to be executed and delivered a bill of sale, together with a copy of the
report described in Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1604 and an application for
a Colorado certificate of title signed by the Winter Park police department.
(Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
4-4-8: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
   A.   If the sale of any motor vehicle and its attached accessories or
equipment under the provisions of this chapter produces an amount less than or
equal to the sum of all charges of the operator who has perfected a lien
pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes 4-4-1607, then the operator shall have a
valid claim against the owner of record for the full amount of such charges,
less the amount received upon the sale of such motor vehicle. Such charges
shall be assessed in the manner provided for in subsection B1 of this section.
   B.   If the sale of any motor vehicle and its attached accessories or
equipment under the provision of this chapter produces an amount greater than
the sum of all charges of the operator who has perfected his lien pursuant to
Colorado Revised Statutes 42-2-1607:
      1.   The proceeds shall first satisfy the operator's charges as follows:
The cost of towing the motor vehicle with a maximum charge of fifty dollars
($50.00); the mileage for tows of greater than twenty five (25) miles one way,
to be computed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per mile for each mile in
excess of twenty five (25) miles one way; and the storage of the motor vehicle
to be charged at the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per day for a maximum of
sixty (60) days. In the case of a motor vehicle weighing in excess of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply and
the operator's charges shall be determined by negotiated agreement between the
operator and the Winter Park police department.
      2.   Any balance then remaining shall be paid to the Winter Park police
department to satisfy the cost of mailing notices, having an appraisal made,
advertising and selling the motor vehicle and any other costs, taxes, fines,
and penalties due.
      3.   Any balance then remaining shall be forwarded to the department for
disbursal pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes 42-4-1610(2)(c) and (d).
   C.   The provisions of subsections B1 and B2 of this section shall not apply
if the town has entered a towing contract which provides for different charges
by the operator. (Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
4-4-9: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter is subject
to punishment as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. (Ord. 473, Series
of 2013)
4-4-10: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include or apply to authorized
emergency vehicles while such vehicles are actually and directly engaged in,
coming from, or going to an emergency. (Ord. 158, Series of 1987)
CHAPTER 5
DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS AND SOLICITATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Distribution Of Handbills On Vehicles
4-5-2: Solicitations Prohibited
4-5-3: Soliciting Invitations Prohibited
4-5-4: Enforcement To Suppress Nuisances
4-5-1: DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter, or cast any commercial or noncommercial circular, handbill,
advertisement, or other literature in or upon any automobile or other vehicle.
The provisions of this section shall not be deemed or construed to prohibit the
handling, transmitting or distributing of any noncommercial circular, handbill
or other literature to an occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is
willing to accept the same. (Ord. 174, Series of 1988)
4-5-2: SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED:
The practice of going in and upon private residences, streets, public buildings
and offices in the town by purchasers, solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant
merchants and transient vendors of goods, wares and merchandise, services,
books, pictures, periodicals, real property or tangible or intangible personal
property of any nature including insurance in any form, not having been
requested or invited by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of private
residences, streets, public buildings or offices for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale or purchase of goods, wares and merchandise, services,
books, pictures, periodicals, real property or tangible or intangible personal
property of any nature, including insurance in any form, or for the purpose of
disposing of or peddling or hawking them is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and to be unlawful. (Ord. 174, Series of 1988)
4-5-3: SOLICITING INVITATIONS PROHIBITED:
Any attempt to obtain an invitation to visit such private residences, public
buildings and offices by personal solicitations or promise of any
demonstrations, pecuniary benefit, advantage or any gift shall be deemed a
violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 174, Series of
1988)
4-5-4: ENFORCEMENT TO SUPPRESS NUISANCES:
The town manager with the assistance of the Winter Park police department is
hereby required and directed to suppress and abate any such nuisance as
described in the preceding sections. (Ord. 174, Series of 1988; amd. Ord. 348,
Series of 2005)
CHAPTER 6
UNDESIRABLE PLANT CONTROL
SECTION:
4-6-1: Undesirable Plants
4-6-2: Declaration Of Nuisance
4-6-3: Removal Of Undesirable Plants Required By Property Owner
4-6-4: Enforcement
4-6-5: Penalty
4-6-1: UNDESIRABLE PLANTS:
Russian, spotted and diffuse knapweed, Canadian thistle, and leafy spurge are
declared to be undesirable plants and controlled in accordance with this
chapter. (Ord. 200, Series of 1992)
4-6-2: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
Leafy spurge, Canadian thistle, Russian knapweed, spotted knapweed, and diffuse
knapweed, and all other plants designated "undesirable plants" by the town are
declared to be a public nuisance. Such action may be taken as is available for
nuisance abatement under the laws of this state and the town of Winter Park,
and as the town council, in its sole discretion, deems necessary. (Ord. 200,
Series of 1992)
4-6-3: REMOVAL OF UNDESIRABLE PLANTS REQUIRED BY PROPERTY OWNER:
Property owners within the town shall be responsible for the elimination of
undesirable plants from their property. Such removal shall be accomplished in
an ecologically feasible and environmentally safe manner in accordance with all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 200, Series of 1992)
4-6-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The town shall have the right to enter upon any premises, lands, or places,
whether public or private, during reasonable business hours or upon proper
notice for the purpose of inspecting for the existence of undesirable plants,
and shall have the right to propose, implement or enforce the management of
undesirable plants upon such lands in accordance with the provisions of
Colorado Revised Statutes section 35-5.5-109. (Ord. 200, Series of 1992)
4-6-5: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00), in addition to any other remedies provided herein or allowed by
ordinance, law, rule, or regulation. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
CHAPTER 7
LIMITATION AND CONTROL OF SOLID FUEL BURNING APPLIANCES AND/OR DEVICES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-2: Definitions
4-7-3: Permits; Fees
4-7-4: Existing Appliances And Devices; Replacement
4-7-5: Permitted Devices; Limitations
4-7-6: Rebate Program
4-7-7: Appeals
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Section is to improve the air quality of the Town by
limiting the number of solid fuel burning appliances and devices, improving the
emission of existing solid fuel burning appliances and devices and requiring
all new installations of solid fuel burning appliances and devices to meet
minimum standard for the emission of particulates. (Ord. 236, Series of 1996)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED NONSOLID FUEL BURNING APPLIANCE OR DEVICE: An appliance or device
which burns a nonsolid fuel such as natural gas, liquefied petroleum (LP) or
similar fuel, in an appliance or device which has been approved by
Underwriter's Laboratory, American Gas Associates or the Building Official.
APPROVED SOLID FUEL BURNING APPLIANCE OR DEVICE: An appliance or device which
is designed or intended to burn solid fuel and which is certified by the air
pollution control division of the State of Colorado Department of Health to
meet the emission standards set forth in Section IV of regulation #4 of Volume
I of the Standards of the State Air Quality Control Commission. In addition,
those solid fuel burning appliances or devices which appear on a list of
certified devices developed by the State of Oregon Department of Environmental
Quality established pursuant to those standards set forth in Oregon's
Administrative Rules, Chapter 340, Division 21, Sections 100 to 190, adopted
November 19, 1984, shall also be considered approved.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The official or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Chapter and the Town's building codes.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation,
for not more than one family, or a congregate residence for ten (10) or less
persons.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage
or a group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants) who need not
be related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
SOLID FUEL BURNING APPLIANCE OR DEVICE: Any fireplace, stove, firebox,
appliance or device intended or used for the purpose of burning wood, coal,
pulp, paper or other nonliquid or nongaseous fuel. (Ord. 236, Series of 1996)
4-7-3: PERMITS; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
cooperative to install or permit to be installed in any building within the
Town any solid fuel burning appliance or device without first obtaining a
building permit from the Building Official.
   B.   Fee Required: In addition to any other permit fees which may be
required, a solid fuel burning appliance or device fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be paid to the town for each solid fuel burning appliance or
device installed within the town after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 236,
Series of 1996)
4-7-4: EXISTING APPLIANCES AND DEVICES; REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Existing Solid Fuel Burning Appliances Or Devices: Existing solid fuel
burning appliances or devices which are legally existing at the effective date
hereof may continue subject to the limitations of subsection B of this section.
   B.   Solid Fuel Burning Appliance Or Device Replacement: No person, firm or
cooperative shall replace a solid fuel burning appliance or device which is
substantially destroyed, demolished, or in need of replacement with another
solid fuel burning appliance or device unless the replacement appliance or
device is an approved solid fuel burning appliance or device. (Ord. 236, Series
of 1996)
4-7-5: PERMITTED DEVICES; LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Devices: Only approved solid fuel burning appliances or
devices shall be permitted to be installed within any dwelling unit or
commercial building within the town after the effective date hereof.
   B.   Limitation On The Number: The number of approved solid fuel burning
appliances or devices which may be installed shall not exceed the following
limits:
      1.   Detached Single-Family Dwelling: One approved solid fuel burning
appliance or device per dwelling.
      2.   Building With Two Dwelling Units: One approved solid fuel burning
appliance or device per dwelling unit provided the dwelling unit is greater
than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in total living area.
      3.   Apartments, Condominiums, Commercial And Industrial Buildings:
Apartments, condominiums, commercial and industrial buildings shall be allowed
to install one approved solid fuel burning appliance or device in a lobby or
other common area of the apartment, condominium, or hotel. Only an approved
nonsolid fuel burning appliance may be installed within any apartment,
condominium or hotel/motel room.
In all buildings, the installation of any additional solid fuel burning device
is prohibited if the resulting number of solid fuel burning devices exceeds the
limitations contained in this section. (Ord. 236, Series of 1996)
4-7-6: REBATE PROGRAM:
A rebate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to any building owner
who converts or replaces his approved solid fuel burning appliance or device
with an approved natural gas, liquefied petroleum (LP) or electric appliance; a
rebate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to any building owner who
converts or replaces his nonapproved solid fuel burning appliance or device
with an approved solid fuel burning appliance or device and a rebate of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid to any building owner who converts or
replaces his nonapproved solid fuel burning appliance or device with an
approved natural gas, liquefied petroleum (LP) or electric appliance. (Ord.
236, Series of 1996)
4-7-7: APPEALS:
Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official
relative to the application and interpretation of this chapter shall be heard
by the construction and fire code board of appeals pursuant to section
6-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 236, Series of 1996; amd. Ord. 468, Series of 2013)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
SECTION:
4-8-1: Definitions
4-8-2: Standards Adopted
4-8-3: Jurisdiction
4-8-4: Discharges Unlawful
4-8-5: Waste Prohibited
4-8-6: Compliance With Permits
4-8-7: Penalties And Relief
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
DISCHARGE: The addition of any pollutant to the streams or sources contributing
to municipal water supplies by means of any discernible, confined and discrete
conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, or concentrated
animal feeding operation, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
ENJOINED: Shall include temporary, preliminary and permanent injunctive relief.
MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLIES: All water rights, whether absolutely or conditional
decreed, owned, leased or used by the Winter Park water and sanitation district
or Grand County water and sanitation district no. 1, which are used or are
capable of being used for any beneficial purpose, including, without
limitation, municipal, commercial, aesthetic, irrigation, minimum stream flow,
fish and game propagation, recreation, domestic, snowmaking and industrial
uses.
PERMIT: A permit lawfully issued pursuant to section 401 et seq., of the
federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972 and 1977, (33 USC
section 1341 et seq.) or pursuant to state statutes.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
PRESUMPTION: Within the context of this chapter, means that any person charged
with the waste of water resources shall bear the burden of proving that the
water diversions which were wasted did not contribute to or result in a
degradation of the water quality standards set forth in section
4-8-2 of this chapter.
SOURCES: The area which contributes to the water supply of any stream or river
and includes, without limitation, the drainage basin and underground aquifer.
WASTE: The failure to apply water diverted from any streams or source which
contributes to municipal water supplies to a beneficial use and includes,
without limitation, causing or permitting the application of water in excess of
that reasonably required to accomplish the purpose or purposes for which the
water is diverted; permitting water to escape from ditches, canals, or other
structures in excess of reasonable loss; and any diversion of water rights
decreed for given purpose under circumstances which cannot reasonably justify
such usage. (Ord. 306, Series of 2000)
4-8-2: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
Within the jurisdictional areas set forth in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, the standard for water quality shall be those standards
adopted from time to time by the water quality control commission pursuant to
statute, as applicable to the waters located within the jurisdiction of this
chapter. Said standards are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 306, Series
of 2000)
4-8-3: JURISDICTION:
   A.   Pursuant to statute, and for the purpose of maintaining and protecting
the municipal water supply from injury and pollution, the town shall exercise
regulatory and supervisory jurisdiction for a distance of five (5) miles above
the points from which municipal supplies are diverted by Winter Park water and
sanitation district and Grand County water and sanitation district no. 1.
   B.   For the purpose of maintaining and protecting the municipal water
supplies from injury or pollution, the town shall exercise regulatory and
supervisory jurisdiction pursuant to its home rule powers over all streams and
sources contributing to municipal water supplies. (Ord. 306, Series of 2000)
4-8-4: DISCHARGES UNLAWFUL:
Within the jurisdictional areas defined in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any
pollutant or engage in any activity which will result in the degradation of
water quality below the standards set forth in section
4-8-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 306, Series of 2000)
4-8-5: WASTE PROHIBITED:
Within the jurisdictional areas defined in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to waste water
resources. The failure to apply diverted water to a beneficial use shall give
rise to a presumption of waste. (Ord. 306, Series of 2000)
4-8-6: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMITS:
Compliance with an applicable permit held by any person charged with a
violation of this chapter shall constitute an absolute defense to any such
violation. (Ord. 306, Series of 2000)
4-8-7: PENALTIES AND RELIEF:
   A.   A person found in violation of section
4-8-4 or
4-8-5 of this chapter shall be fined as provided in subsection 1-4-1B of this
code. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
   B.   Any person in violation of section
4-8-6 of this chapter may be enjoined from further or continued violations.
(Ord. 306, Series of 2000)
CHAPTER 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. POLICE ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
4-9A-1: Creation; Composition
4-9A-2: Oath Of Office
4-9A-3: Departmental Rules And Regulations
4-9A-4: Police Chief; Appointment, Powers And Duties
4-9A-5: Duties Of Police Officers
4-9A-6: Intergovernmental Agreements
4-9A-1: CREATION; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a police department for the town which shall consist of
one police chief, and as many police officers as may from time to time be
deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the town. (Ord. 348, Series
of 2005)
4-9A-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the police chief and each police
officer shall take and subscribe an oath that he will support the constitution
of the United States, the constitution and laws of the state of Colorado, and
the ordinances of the town, and that he/she will faithfully perform the duties
of the office upon which he/she is about to enter. (Ord. 348, Series of 2005)
4-9A-3: DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The police department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such
departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be developed by the
chief of police, under the direction of the town manager. (Ord. 348, Series of
2005)
4-9A-4: POLICE CHIEF; APPOINTMENT, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The town manager shall appoint the police chief, said officer to be the head of
the police department. It shall be the duty of the police chief to:
   A.   See that the ordinances of the town and laws of the state of Colorado
are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the police department
obeyed, and to perform such duties as may be required by the town manager.
   B.   Direct the operations of the police department, subject to the rules
and regulations thereof.
   C.   Arrest any person violating any of the laws of the state of Colorado
and/or town ordinances and take such violator before the appropriate court for
trial.
   D.   Prepare an annual proposed budget for the police department, and keep
the records of his/her office open to inspection by the town manager or his
designee at reasonable times. (Ord. 348, Series of 2005)
4-9A-5: DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS:
All sworn members of the police department shall have powers and duties as
follows:
   A.   They shall perform all duties required by the police chief.
   B.   They shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace,
apprehend all disorderly persons in the town and shall pursue and arrest any
person fleeing from justice in any part of the state.
   C.   They shall be the enforcement officers of the town and shall see to the
compliance of the ordinances of the town and the laws of the state of Colorado.
They shall arrest without process all persons engaged in the violation in their
presence of any provisions of this code or law of the state. Upon such arrest,
they shall forthwith convey such offenders before the proper court to be dealt
with according to law; provided, that they may incarcerate any person whom they
shall arrest at a late and unusual hour of the night until the following
morning, and provided further, that in the special cases relating to traffic
and other minor offenses, they may release an arrested person upon his written
promise to appear in court.
   D.   They shall report such offenses as may come to their knowledge to the
police chief, securing a warrant for the arrest of offenders when necessary.
   E.   They shall execute and return all writs and processes to them directed
by the municipal judge in any case arising under a town ordinance, and they may
serve the same in any part of Grand County, Colorado.
   F.   They shall observe the condition of the streets, sidewalks and alleys
of the town and of any obstruction, nuisance or impediments therein, and shall
take necessary measures to remove or abate the same. (Ord. 348, Series of 2005)
4-9A-6: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The town may enter into intergovernmental agreements with other local
governments for the purpose of jointly providing police services. (Ord. 348,
Series of 2005)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES
SECTION:
4-9B-1: Possession Of Marijuana, Marijuana Products And Marijuana Accessories
4-9B-2: Drug Paraphernalia
4-9B-3: Public Indecency
4-9B-4: Disorderly Conduct
4-9B-5: Disobeying An Order Of A Police Officer Or Firefighter
4-9B-6: Littering On Public Or Private Property
4-9B-7: Theft
4-9B-8: Damaging Property
4-9B-9: Trespassing
4-9B-10: Parking Motor Vehicle On Private Ground
4-9B-11: Open Containers Prohibited
4-9B-12: Illegal Possession Or Consumption Of Alcohol By Underage Person
4-9B-13: Unlawful Conduct On Public Property
4-9B-14: Unauthorized Use Of Waste Receptacles
4-9B-1: POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA, MARIJUANA PRODUCTS AND MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate, and in certain
circumstances prohibit, the use and possession of marijuana.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
    MARIJUANA: All parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate, but the term
does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the
stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the
plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient
combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food,
drink, or other product.
   MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES: Equipment, products, or materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
   MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products
that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use
or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and
tinctures.
   OPENLY OR PUBLICLY: The consumption or growing of marijuana in a place
commonly or usually open to or accessible by the general public, or to which
members of the general public may resort, including, without limitation, public
ways, streets, sidewalks, alleys, bicycle paths, trails, golf courses, public
buildings, parks, open spaces, parking lots, shopping centers, places of
business usually open to the general public, and automobiles or other vehicles
in or upon any such place or places, but excluding the interior or enclosed
yard area of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments. For
purposes of this section, "openly or publicly" expressly includes the
consumption or growing of marijuana in any place not used for residential
purposes where individuals gather to consume or grow marijuana, regardless of
whether such place calls itself private or public or charges an admission or
membership fee.
   C.   Unlawful Possession Or Use Of Marijuana:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to use, display, purchase, transport,
possess or transfer more than one ounce of marijuana.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to possess, grow, process or transport
more than six (6) marijuana plants, with three (3) or fewer being mature,
flowering plants. A person may possess the marijuana produced by these plants,
provided that such possession is limited to the premises where the plants were
grown and further provided that the growing takes place in an enclosed locked
space and is not conducted openly or publicly or made available for sale.
      3.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) to
use, display, purchase, transport, possess or transfer marijuana, marijuana
products or marijuana accessories anywhere within the town.
      4.   It is unlawful for a person twenty one (21) years of age or older to
use, display, purchase, transport, possess or transfer marijuana, marijuana
products or marijuana accessories for any reason other than personal use.
      5.   It is unlawful for any person twenty one (21) years of age or older
to purchase on behalf of, transfer to, or otherwise assist a person under the
age of twenty one (21) in obtaining marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana
accessories.
      6.   It is unlawful for any person to openly or publicly consume or grow
marijuana or to consume marijuana in a manner that endangers others.
      7.   In addition to any other competent evidence identifying a substance
as marijuana:
         a.   Results of the field test known as the "Duquenois-Levine Reagent
System" shall be admissible in evidence and shall be prima facie evidence of
whether the substance tested was marijuana.
         b.   The qualitative result of a marijuana test or tests performed by
a drug recognition expert ("DRE"), certified as such, or by persons otherwise
certified under a drugs that impair certification, shall be admissible at the
trial of any person charged with a violation of this subsection C and shall be
prima facie evidence of whether the person charged had consumed, ingested or
used marijuana.
         c.   Laboratory test of marijuana shall be admitted in evidence
pursuant to Colorado Revised Statutes section 16-3-309, as amended.
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be
punished, upon conviction, by fine in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      2.   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this
section that a person is in possession of a valid registry identification card
authorizing the medicinal use of marijuana issued by the state health agency,
so long as consumption or use does not occur openly or publicly. (Ord. 464,
Series of 2012)
4-9B-2: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products, and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws
of this state. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances under circumstances in violation of the laws of this
state;
      2.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      3.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      4.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      5.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      6.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances; or
      7.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         b.   Water pipes;
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         d.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         e.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         f.   Chamber pipes;
         g.   Carburetor pipes;
         h.   Electric pipes;
         i.   Air driven pipes;
         j.   Chillums;
         k.   Bongs; or
         l.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   B.   Determination; Considerations: In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, a court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all
other relevant factors, the following:
      1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      2.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      3.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
      4.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably
should know that the object could be used to facilitate the use of a controlled
substance in violation of state statute;
      5.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      6.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      7.   The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the
community; and
      8.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   C.   Violation: It is unlawful for a person to possess drug paraphernalia if
he or she knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be
used to facilitate the use of a controlled substance in violation of state
statute. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation of this
section for a person twenty one (21) years of age or older to possess, use,
display, purchase or transport "marijuana accessories", as that term is defined
in subsection 4-9B-1B of this article.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine in an
amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this
section that a person is in possession of a valid registry identification card
authorizing the medicinal use of marijuana issued by the state health agency so
long as possession or use does not occur in a public place. (Ord. 464, Series
of 2012)
4-9B-3: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where
the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public
commits public indecency:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   An act of deviant sexual intercourse; or
      3.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of any person; or
      4.   To knowingly expose his genitals to the view of any person under
circumstances in which said conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the
other person; or
      5.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person. (Ord. 380,
Series of 2006)
4-9B-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Designated: It shall be unlawful to commit disorderly conduct. A person
commits disorderly conduct if he intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly:
      1.   Threatens physical harm to any person in a public place; or
      2.   Makes, causes or controls unreasonable noise in a public place or
that is audible upon a private premises that he has no right to occupy; or
      3.   Fights with another in a public place, except in an amateur or
professional contest of athletic skill; or
      4.   Makes statements or gestures calculated to cause embarrassment or
provoke anger in any person in a public place when such statements or gestures
cause any person to inflict bodily injury upon any person or tends to invite an
immediate breach of the peace; or
      5.   Urinates or defecates upon any public or private place other than in
a toilet facility provided for such purpose.
   B.   Evidence:
      1.   A prima facie showing that a violation of subsection A2 of this
section shall consist of evidence that the defendant caused or controlled such
noise between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M., that was audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from its source,
distinguishable from any other source of sound in the vicinity, and was of a
greater volume than any other single source of sound in the vicinity.
      2.   It is an affirmative defense under subsection A1 of this section
that the actor has significant provocation for his threatening conduct.
   C.   Exemption: Subsection A2 of this section shall not apply to noise
emanating from an exterior loudspeaker at a business, a premises licensed for
the on premises sale of alcoholic beverages, or any special event which has
received a special use permit from the town. (Ord. 380, Series of 2006)
4-9B-5: DISOBEYING AN ORDER OF A POLICE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully disobey the lawful or reasonable
order or direction of any police officer, firefighters, emergency personnel, or
military personnel given incident to the discharge of the official duties of
such police officer or firefighter, or incident to the duties of emergency
personnel or military personnel when coping with an emergency, explosion or
other disaster within their official concern. (Ord. 380, Series of 2006)
4-9B-6: LITTERING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Any person who deposits, throws or leaves any litter on any public
place or private property or in any waters commits littering.
   B.   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of littering that:
      1.   Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such
material and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use
the property; or
      2.   The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such
property for that purpose; or
      3.   Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such
property, or has first obtained written consent of the owner or tenant in
lawful possession, or the act is done under the personal direction of said
owner or tenant.
   C.   It is in the discretion of the court, upon the conviction of any person
and the imposition of a fine under this section, to suspend the fine upon the
condition that the convicted person gather and remove from specified public
property or specified private property, with prior permission of the owner or
tenant in lawful possession thereof, any litter found thereon.
   D.   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle in violation of this section, the operator of said motor vehicle in
violation is presumed to have caused or permitted the litter to be so thrown,
deposited, dropped or dumped therefrom. (Ord. 380, Series of 2006)
4-9B-7: THEFT:
   A.   It is unlawful to commit theft. A person commits theft when they
knowingly obtain or exercise control over anything of value of another person
without authorization or by threat or deception; and
   B.   Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit
of the thing of value; or
   C.   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such a
manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefits; or
   D.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intended that such use,
concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its
use and benefits; or
   E.   Demands any consideration to which they are not legally entitled as a
condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person; and
   F.   Where the value of the thing involved is less than two thousand dollars
($2,000). (Ord. 600, Series of 2023)
4-9B-8: DAMAGING PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly to
injure, deface, destroy, or sever in any manner any real or personal property,
or improvements thereto, of any other person in this Town, including property
owned by the Town, where the aggregate damage is less than two thousand dollars
($2,000). (Ord. 600, Series of 2023)
4-9B-9: TRESPASSING:
It is unlawful for any person, without legal privilege, to enter or to remain
upon the premises of another, or fail or refuse to remove himself from said
premises when requested to leave by the owner, occupant or person having lawful
control thereof. (Ord. 380, Series of 2006)
4-9B-10: PARKING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE GROUND:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a motor vehicle or other
personal property on premises of another or in the lawful possession of another
without the permission of the owner or person in possession thereof. (Ord. 380,
Series of 2006)
4-9B-11: OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage, as
defined by title 44, article 3 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, or fermented
malt beverage, as defined by title 44, article 4 of the Colorado Revised
Statutes, in any open container in any public place within the Town or in the
interior of any automobile while the automobile is either parked on a public
street or alley within the Town or is being operated on a public street or
alley within the Town, except: (Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
      1.   Within an establishment licensed by the Town to sell such beverages
for consumption upon the premises; or
      2.   Public streets, parking lots, or sidewalks on which the Town has
granted a special use permit for a sidewalk cafe, beer garden, or equivalent
use that includes on site alcohol sales; or
      3.   Special events if the Town has granted a special event or other
permit that, during the event, authorizes or permits persons attending the
event to consume alcoholic beverages in areas where such consumption/possession
is otherwise prohibited by this section; or
      4.   Town owned parks and open spaces, unless excluded by the provisions
of a special event or other permit granted by the Town.
   B.   Any peace officer is authorized to seize any alcoholic beverage which
is used in the commission of a violation of subsection A of this section. If no
summons or complaint is issued for a violation of this section, and if the
circumstances reasonably permit, the peace officer may require the person who
has committed a violation of this section to abandon the alcoholic beverage to
the officer for destruction. (Ord. 417, Series of 2009)
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person in
possession of one opened but resealed container of partially consumed vinous
liquor which was lawfully removed from the licensed premises of an
establishment holding a hotel and restaurant license pursuant to section 44-3-
423 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. (Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
4-9B-12: ILLEGAL POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY UNDERAGE PERSON:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to possess or consume ethyl alcohol by an underage
person as set forth in Colorado Revised Statutes 18-13-122, which statute, as
amended, is incorporated herein by this reference provided, however, penalties
shall be in accordance with subsection B of this section.
   B.   Any violation of subsection A of this section shall be punished as
provided in article C of this chapter. The Municipal Court Judge may impose
alcohol education classes and/or useful public service in addition to any fine.
(Ord. 380, Series of 2006)
4-9B-13: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building
or on any public property or to conduct himself or herself in or on the same in
violation of any order, rule, or regulation concerning any matter prescribed in
this subsection, limiting or prohibiting the use or activities or conduct in
such public building or on such public property, issued by any officer or
agency having the power of control, management, or supervision of the building
or property. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, each such
officer or agency may adopt such orders, rules, or regulations as are
reasonably necessary for the administration, protection, and maintenance of
such public buildings and property, specifically, orders, rules, and
regulations upon the following matters:
      1.   Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers,
statues, buildings and grounds, and other structures, and any object of
scientific, historical, or scenic interest;
      2.   Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or
property as to time, manner, or permitted activities;
      3.   Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on
public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere
with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a
general nuisance or which may interfere with, impair, or disrupt a funeral or
funeral procession;
      4.   Necessary sanitation, health, and safety measures, consistent with
section 25-13-113, Colorado Revised Statutes;
      5.   Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages, and other
individual or group usages, including the place, time, and manner in which such
activities may be permitted;
      6.   Use of all vehicles as to place, time, and manner of use;
      7.   Control and limitation of fires, including, but not limited to, the
prohibition, restriction, or ban on fires or other regulation of fires to avert
the start of or lessen the likelihood of wildfire, and the designation of
places where fires are permitted, restricted, prohibited, or banned.
   B.   No conviction may be obtained under this section unless notice of such
limitations or prohibitions is prominently posted at all public entrances to
such building or property or unless such notice is actually first given the
person by the officer or agency, including any agent thereof, or by any law
enforcement officer having jurisdiction or authority to enforce this section.
(Ord. 448, Series of 2011)
4-9B-14: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WASTE RECEPTACLES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, or place any waste in
any dumpster or waste receptacle located within the Town without the consent of
the owner or authorized user of such waste receptacle or dumpster, whether or
not such receptacle is on public or private property.
   B.   This section does not apply to the disposal of waste in receptacles
provided and marked for the public disposal of trash or waste.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the term "waste" includes solid or liquid
waste, whether organic or inorganic, including without limitation, trash,
garbage, refuse, debris or litter, rubbish, animal carcasses, offal or manure,
paper, ashes, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, tree limbs, compost, glass,
rags, discarded clothing or other discarded objects.
   D.   For purposes of this section, "waste receptacle" means any container
purposed for waste disposal, including without limitation a dumpster, garbage
can, trash can, rubbish bin, recycling bin, compost bin, wastebasket and trash
barrel. (Ord. 512, Series of 2018)
ARTICLE C. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
4-9C-1: General Violations And Penalty
4-9C-2: Separate Offense
4-9C-1: GENERAL VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Except
in cases where a different punishment is prescribed, any person convicted of a
violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of
this code. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
4-9C-2: SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 448, Series of 2011)
CHAPTER 10
WILDLIFE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Purpose
4-10-2: Definitions
4-10-3: Residential Refuse Disposal
4-10-4: Maintenance And Operation Of All Refuse Containers And Enclosures
4-10-5: Special Event Refuse Disposal
4-10-6: Construction Site Refuse Disposal
4-10-7: Commercial Refuse Disposal
4-10-8: Compactors
4-10-9: Feeding Of Wildlife Prohibited
4-10-10: Exceptions
4-10-11: Enforcement
4-10-12: Violations And Penalties; Penalty Assessment
4-10-13: Violator's Responsibility
4-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and maintain wildlife in the town of
Winter Park and surrounding areas and to minimize the risk of dangerous
interaction between humans and wildlife. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ATTRACTANT: Any substance which could reasonably be expected to attract
wildlife or does attract wildlife, including, but not limited to, food
products, pet food, feed, compost, grain or salt.
DUMPSTER ENCLOSURE: A fully enclosed structure consisting of four (4) sides and
a secure door or cover, which shall have a latching device of sufficient
strength and design to prevent access by wildlife. Dumpster enclosures are
subject to all planning and zoning requirements and building codes. An
enclosure of less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet shall not require a
building permit. An enclosure of one hundred twenty (120) square feet or larger
requires a building permit.
REFUSE: Any waste that could reasonably attract wildlife which includes, but
shall not be limited to, kitchen, organic waste, food, food packaging,
toothpaste, deodorant, cosmetics, spices, seasonings and grease.
REFUSE CONTAINER: Any trash can, dumpster, or similar device used for the
collection and storage of solid waste.
RESIDENT: Any person, firm, corporation or organization within the town of
Winter Park or on town controlled land.
SPECIAL EVENT: An outdoor gathering such as a concert, conference or festival,
whether occurring on public land or private.
WILDLIFE: Any undomesticated animal, including, but not limited to, elk, deer,
sheep, lynx, skunks, magpies, crows, bears, raccoons, coyotes, beavers,
porcupines, mountain lions, bobcats and foxes.
WILDLIFEPROOF REFUSE CONTAINER: A container used for the storage of refuse that
has been certified to be wildlifeproof by the Colorado division of wildlife,
the U.S. park service, or the U.S. forest service. A container not so
certified, is considered a wildlifeproof refuse container if it is fully
enclosed, of sturdy construction, and includes a latching mechanism suitable to
prevent wildlife from opening the container. Latching mechanisms shall allow a
gap between the container lid of no more than one- half inch (1/2"). Latching
mechanisms shall keep the lid closed in the event the container is turned on
its side or upside down. Wildlifeproof refuse containers may include drain
holes no larger than one inch (1") in any dimension. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-3: RESIDENTIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   All residential containers that receive refuse edible by wildlife must
be secured inside the home or garage. Residents unable to keep their refuse
container inside the home or garage shall store their refuse in a wildlifeproof
refuse container or enclosure approved by the town of Winter Park building
official or his designee.
   B.   Residents with curbside pick up shall place refuse containers at the
curb, alley, or public right of way at or after six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the
morning of scheduled pick up. After pick up, all containers must be removed
from the curb, alley or public right of way by eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the
same day.
   C.   Other household waste that cannot reasonably be considered "refuse" or
an "attractant" as defined in this chapter, including, but not limited to:
nonedible yard maintenance waste, household items, and cardboard, shall not
require the use of wildlifeproof containers when not commingled with refuse or
any other attractant.
   D.   Multi-family housing developments and other types of clustered
residential housing, utilizing centralized refuse containers, must use either a
wildlifeproof refuse container or a dumpster enclosure for all refuse. The
container or enclosure shall be kept closed in a secure manner except when
refuse is being deposited. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-4: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF ALL REFUSE CONTAINERS AND ENCLOSURES:
   A.   All refuse containers defined in this chapter shall be kept closed and
secured when refuse is not being deposited. Any container which is overfilled
so as to prevent a container's designed latching is not a wildlife resistant or
wildlifeproof refuse container within the meaning of this chapter.
   B.   If a container or enclosure is damaged, allowing access by wildlife,
repairs must be made within forty eight (48) hours after written notification
by town of Winter Park police department personnel. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-5: SPECIAL EVENT REFUSE DISPOSAL:
Outdoor special event sites shall be kept free from the accumulation of refuse.
Refuse must be collected from the grounds at the close of each day's activities
and shall be deposited into appropriate wildlifeproof containers or dumpster
enclosures as provided in this chapter, or shall be removed to an appropriate
disposal site. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-6: CONSTRUCTION SITE REFUSE DISPOSAL:
All construction sites must have a designated refuse container which receives
"refuse" or attractants as defined by this chapter. This container shall be a
wildlifeproof refuse container. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-7: COMMERCIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   All refuse containers receiving refuse from commercial establishments
and restaurants shall be in wildlifeproof containers, or shall be secured in a
dumpster enclosure.
   B.   Container lids and dumpster enclosure doors shall be kept closed and
latched at all times except when loading or removing refuse. The area around
the container or enclosure must be kept free from refuse at all times.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, this requirement shall not apply to
municipal refuse containers which are emptied at the end of each day, or
multiple times per day. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-8: COMPACTORS:
Trash compactors are compliant with this chapter when no refuse is exposed.
Compactor doors must be kept closed at all times, except when loading or
removing refuse and the area around the compactor must be kept clean of refuse
and debris. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-9: FEEDING OF WILDLIFE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Intentional Or Unintentional: No person shall intentionally or
unintentionally feed or provide food in any manner for wildlife on public or
private property within the town of Winter Park. A person will be considered to
be in violation of this chapter if they leave or store any garbage, refuse or
attractant in a manner which would create or does create a lure or enticement
for wildlife. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008)
4-10-10: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The following entities or actions are exempt from the requirements of
this chapter:
      1.   Any individual, company or corporation that is duly licensed by the
state of Colorado or is entitled under law to possess wildlife of any kind.
      2.   Any action that is officially sanctioned by the state of Colorado,
federal agencies, or the town of Winter Park that would require feeding,
baiting, or luring of wildlife (i.e., capturing and tagging wildlife for
relocation or scientific projects and study).
      3.    Bird feeders are allowed provided that, between April 1 and
December 1 of each year, all bird feeders must be suspended on a cable or other
device at a height above the ground or structure so as to be inaccessible to
bears. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008; amd. Ord. 542, Series of 2020)
4-10-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Compliance with this chapter notwithstanding, the town of Winter Park
police and code enforcement officers may issue a "notice of violation" and
order any resident to purchase and use a wildlifeproof refuse container for all
storage of refuse that is attractive to or edible by wildlife if the town
receives a documented, substantiated report that any animal, whether wild or
domestic, has entered into or removed refuse from a refuse container located on
the property or placed at the property curbside for pick up. Such order shall:
      1.   State that a wildlifeproof container shall be obtained for the
property within seven (7) days.
      2.   Shall be served either personally or by means of posting on the
premises upon which the nuisance exists. If notice is served by posting, a copy
of the notice shall also be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the owner of record of the property given to any town of Winter Park or
Grand County government office. If the identity of the resident is not known,
the entity responsible for payment of the garbage removal services for the
subject location will be held responsible for complying with this chapter and
for any penalties assessed pursuant to the same. (Ord. 409, Series of 2008;
amd. Ord. 542, Series of 2020)
4-10-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; PENALTY ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Second Notice Of Violation: Offenders who continue to violate this
chapter or continue to fail in achieving timely compliance as set forth in any
previous notice of violation may be issued a second notice of violation, which
shall be in the form of a citation or summons. Such summons shall be subject to
a graduated fine schedule as set forth below.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who or entity that is issued a citation or
summons shall be punished as follows:
      1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
offense.
      2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
offense.
      3.   A third violation shall constitute a misdemeanor and will require a
mandatory appearance in municipal court. Punishment shall be in accordance with
subsection
1-4-1B of this code.
   C.   Suspension Of Penalties: The penalties outlined above may be reduced or
suspended upon the offender showing proof that he/she has purchased or
installed a wildlifeproof refuse container or dumpster enclosure. (Ord. 409,
Series of 2008)
4-10-13: VIOLATOR'S RESPONSIBILITY:
In addition to the penalties outlined in this chapter, violators may be
required to perform all necessary actions to remove or abate attractants of
wildlife. This may include, but shall not be limited to: the removal of bird
feeders or pet food, cleaning or appropriate storage of barbecue grills,
additional storage requirements for refuse containers and/or the required use
of wildlifeproof containers and/or dumpster enclosures. (Ord. 409, Series of
2008)
CHAPTER 11
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
4-11-1: Purpose
4-11-2: Definitions
4-11-3: General Smoking Restrictions
4-11-4: Exceptions To Smoking Restrictions
4-11-5: Optional Prohibitions
4-11-6: Other Applicable Regulations Of Smoking; Local Counterpart Regulations
Authorized
4-11-7: Unlawful Acts; Violations
4-11-8: Nonretaliation
4-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by prohibiting smoking in buildings open to the public or serving
places of work, except in certain buildings where the Council has determined
that smoking should not be prohibited, and fixing the requirements of property
owners in this regard. In addition, this chapter regulates access of minors to
tobacco products. (Ord. 425, Series of 2009)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AUDITORIUM: The part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a
performance, and includes any corridors, hallways, or lobbies adjacent thereto.
BAR: Any indoor area that is operated and licensed under the Colorado Liquor
Code, primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on premises
consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of
such beverages.
EMPLOYEE: A. Any person who:
      1.   Performs any type of work for the benefit of another in
consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit.
      2.   Provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit
entity.
   B.   Includes every person described in subsection A of this definition,
regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor,
independent contractor, or volunteer or by any other designation or title.
EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation, or nonprofit
entity that employs one or more persons. Includes, without limitation, the
judicial branches of State government; any county, city and county, city, or
town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the
State, special district, authority, commission, or agency; or any other
separate corporate instrumentality or unit of State or local government.
ENTRYWAY: The fifteen foot (15') radius outside of the front or main doorway
leading into a building or facility that is not exempted under section
4-11-4 of this chapter.
ENVIRONMENTAL TOBACCO SMOKE (ETS) OR SECONDHAND SMOKE: The complex mixture
formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco product, also known as
"sidestream smoke", and smoke exhaled by the smoker.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any indoor area or portion thereof in which the
principal business is the sale of food for on premises consumption. Includes,
without limitation, restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich
shops, and short order cafes.
INDOOR AREA: Any enclosed area or portion thereof. The opening of windows or
doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area
into an outdoor area.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an
employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf
of, the employer.
PLAYFIELD: Any property set aside by the Town for baseball, softball, football
or other outdoor sports activities.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building owned or operated by:
   A.   The State, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches
of State government;
   B.   Any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof,
or any other political subdivision of the State, a special district, an
authority, a commission, or an agency; or
   C.   Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of the State or
local government.
PUBLIC MEETING: Any meeting open to the public pursuant to Colorado Revised
Statutes 24-6-402.
PUBLIC PARK: Any Town owned property designated by the Town for use as either a
passive or active park.
SMOKE FREE WORK AREA: An indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is
prohibited under this chapter.
SMOKING: The burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other matter
or substance that contains tobacco.
TOBACCO: Cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, and periques; granulated, plug
cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff and snuff flour;
cavendish, plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts,
refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds
and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or
for smoking in a cigarette, pipe, or otherwise, or both for chewing and
smoking. Includes cloves and any other plant matter or product that is packaged
for smoking.
TOBACCO BUSINESS: A sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other
enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco,
tobacco products, or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or
retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is
merely incidental.
TRAIL: A marked or established path, paved or unpaved.
WORK AREA: An area in a place of employment where one or more employees are
routinely assigned and perform services on behalf of their employer. (Ord. 425,
Series of 2009; amd. Ord. 513, Series of 2018)
4-11-3: GENERAL SMOKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in section
4-11-4 of this chapter and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to
environmental tobacco smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall
smoke in any indoor area, including, but not limited to:
Any place of employment that is not exempted; in the case of employers who own
facilities otherwise exempted from this subsection, each such employer shall
provide a smoke free work area for each employee requesting not to have to
breathe environmental tobacco smoke. Every employee shall have a right to work
in an area free of environmental tobacco smoke;
Auditoriums;
Bars;
Billiard or pool halls;
Bowling alleys;
Childcare facilities;
Common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities, and
nursing homes, not including any resident's private residential quarters;
Courtrooms;
Elevators;
Food service establishments;
Government owned or operated means of mass transportation, including, but not
limited to, buses, vans, and trains;
Grocery stores;
Gymnasiums;
Healthcare facilities including hospitals, healthcare clinics, doctors'
offices, and other healthcare related facilities;
Indoor sports arenas;
Jury waiting and deliberation rooms;
Libraries;
Museums;
Other educational and vocational institutions;
Public and nonpublic schools;
Public buildings;
Public meeting places;
Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in hotels and motels, and
in at least seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel
or motel that are rented to guests;
Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in public and private
buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities;
Taxicabs and limousines;
Theaters;
Town owned motor vehicles;
Entryways of all buildings and facilities listed herein.
   B.   Except as provided in section
4-11-4 of this chapter and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to
environmental tobacco smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall
smoke in any of the following public areas:
      1.   Anywhere within the boundaries of a public park.
      2.   Anywhere within the boundaries of a public playfield.
      3.   Anywhere within the boundaries of the town maintained trail system,
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Fraser River trail. (Ord. 425, Series of 2009)
4-11-4: EXCEPTIONS TO SMOKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The restrictions set forth in section
4-11-3 of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles; except
if any such home, residence, or vehicle is being used for childcare or daycare
or if a private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children
or as part of healthcare or daycare transportation;
      2.   Limousines under private hire;
      3.   A hotel or motel room rented to one or more guests if the total
percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed
twenty five percent (25%);
      4.   Any retail tobacco business;
      5.   The outdoor area of any business;
      6.   A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is
under the control of an employer that employs three (3) or fewer employees.
(Ord. 425, Series of 2009)
4-11-5: OPTIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in section
4-11-3 of this chapter, including a place otherwise exempted under section
4-11-4 of this chapter, may post signs prohibiting smoking or providing smoking
and nonsmoking areas. Such posting shall have the effect of including such
place, or the designated nonsmoking portion thereof, in the places where
smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in section
4-11-3 of this chapter, including a place otherwise exempted under this
subsection, is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a
smoke free work area as contemplated by subsection 4-11-3A of this chapter, the
owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke free work area as
provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 425, Series of 2009)
4-11-6: OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS OF SMOKING; LOCAL COUNTERPART REGULATIONS
AUTHORIZED:
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it
is otherwise restricted by any other applicable law. (Ord. 425, Series of 2009)
4-11-7: UNLAWFUL ACTS; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise
controls the use of a premises subject to this chapter to violate any provision
of this chapter. For the purposes of this subsection "or otherwise controls the
use of" shall include any person holding a special use permit or special event
permit pursuant to title 7 of this code.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in an area where smoking is
prohibited pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a first violation within a calendar year, a
fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a second violation
within a calendar year, and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each additional violation within a calendar year. Each day of a continuing
violation shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 425, Series of 2009)
4-11-8: NONRETALIATION:
No person shall retaliate in any manner against any person because such person
exercises any right to a smoke free environment afforded by this chapter. (Ord.
425, Series of 2009)
CHAPTER 12
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-12-1: Purpose
4-12-2: Definitions
4-12-3: Nuisances Prohibited
4-12-4: Liability Of Owner
4-12-5: Nuisances Declared
4-12-6: Complaints
4-12-7: Annual Tree Inspection And Removal
4-12-8: Inspections; Right Of Entry; Emergencies
4-12-9: Abatement Of Nuisances; Failure To Comply
4-12-10: Responsibility For Costs Of Abatement; Collection; Failure To Pay
4-12-11: Remedies Cumulative And Nonexclusive
4-12-12: Violations And Penalties
4-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by prohibiting the existence of nuisances in the town. (Ord. 455, Series of
2012)
4-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise required by context or usage, words and terms used in this
chapter shall be defined as follows:
DANGEROUS TREE: A. A dead or dying tree that either has no leaves or needles on
it, or has leaves or needles that are dry, wilted, browning or falling off the
tree;
   B.   A tree, alive or dead, which is, or has been, infested with a tree pest
(beetle or insect);
   C.   Any tree infested with a parasitic plant (i.e., mistletoe) that can
affect the growth and vigor of the tree and expose it to attacks by diseases
and insects;
   D.   A tree that has blown down or is leaning precariously toward a
structure;
   E.   Timber fuels that have accumulated on the urban forest floor as a
result of dead or diseased trees which may present a fire hazard to the
community (with exceptions for firewood piles and other appropriate tree
piles); and
   F.   Any tree stumps or root balls that are severely damaged or exposed more
than fifty percent (50%) due to falling trees.
EMERGENCY: Any situation where there is imminent danger of loss of life, limb
and/or property.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: A vehicle meeting the definition in section
4-4-1 of this title.
NUISANCE: Any substance, act, occupation, condition or use of property which
is:
   A.   Declared to be a nuisance by any provision of this code; any law of the
state, or by any court or agency thereof; or
   B.   Known as a nuisance at common law.
OCCUPANT: A person in physical possession of property who is not the owner of
such property.
OWNER: A person who owns property.
PROPERTY: Any lot, tract or parcel of real property located within the
corporate limits of the town, excluding easements and rights of way. (Ord. 455,
Series of 2012; amd. Ord. 467, Series of 2013)
4-12-3: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any owner, agent or occupant of any building, premises or
property within the limits of the town, or who has the same under such person's
control, to maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain on or in such
building, premises or property. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-4: LIABILITY OF OWNER:
The owner of real property shall be liable under this chapter for any nuisance
committed on the owner's property by a tenant or other person in lawful
possession of the property. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-5: NUISANCES DECLARED:
The following activities and uses are declared to be nuisances:
   A.   Junkyard And Dumping Grounds: All places used or maintained as junkyard
or dumping grounds for: 1) the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles,
trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind; 2) the storage of worn out, wrecked
or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, boats, house trailers,
manufactured housing or machinery of any kind or of any of the parts thereof;
or 3) the storage of any machinery or equipment which interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others.
   B.   Rubbish, Trash And Refuse: As defined in chapter 1 of this title.
   C.   Noxious Liquids: The discharge out of or from any place within the town
of fluid or noxious liquids or substances of any kind whatsoever into or upon
any adjacent ground or lot or upon any street, alley or public place.
   D.   Stale Matters: The accumulation of any stale, putrid or stinking fat,
grease or other matter, other than in approved containers or receptacles.
   E.   Sewage: Any materials accumulated in any sewer, sewer inlet or privy
vault that has a sewer connection, which cause or might cause such sewer, sewer
inlet or privy vault to become noxious or offensive to others or injurious to
public health.
   F.   Dead Animals: The body of any animal which has died and which is
undisposed of twenty four (24) hours or more after death.
   G.   Contaminated Or Impure Wells And Cisterns: A contaminated or impure
well or cistern when the water therein is used or intended for use for human
consumption.
   H.   Appliances: A refrigerator, icebox, deep freeze locker, stove, oven,
trunk or any self-latching container having a capacity of one and one-half (11/
2) cubic feet or more, which is no longer in use and which has not had the door
removed or the hinges and such portion of the latch mechanism removed as to
prevent latching or locking of the door. This subsection shall not apply to any
vendor of such appliances who keeps or stores them for sales purposes in a
showroom or salesroom which is ordinarily watched or attended by sales
personnel during business hours and which is locked to prevent entry when not
open for business, or if the vendor takes reasonable precautions to effectively
secure the door of any such appliance so as to prevent entrance by children
small enough to fit therein. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
   I.   Dangerous Buildings: (Rep. by Ord. 468, Series of 2013)
   J.   Transportation Of Garbage Or Manure: The transporting of manure,
garbage, swill or offal upon any street in the town in a vehicle which is not
fitted with a substantially tight enclosed box thereon allowing no portion of
such filth to be scattered or thrown into such street is hereby declared a
nuisance.
   K.   Inoperable Vehicles: Any inoperable vehicle, other than in an enclosed
structure.
   L.   Piles: Piles of dirt, sand, gravel, mulch, compost and the like, in
excess of two (2) cubic yards, except those:
      1.   Created and utilized in conjunction with a use by right, conditional
use, or special use;
      2.   Created and maintained temporarily in conjunction with construction
pursuant to a building permit, during the period from issuance of a building
permit until issuance of the occupancy permit or expiration of the permit
whichever occurs first;
      3.   Created and maintained temporarily in conjunction with approved
construction plans for a subdivision or PD, during the period from approval of
a development improvements agreement until its expiration;
      4.   Created and maintained in accordance with an approved grading permit
or other permit issued by the town for construction activities unrelated to a
building permit, subdivision or PD; or
      5.   Created and maintained in conjunction with a government building and
facility. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
   M.   Dangerous Trees: Any tree that constitutes a dangerous tree pursuant to
section
4-12-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 467, Series of 2013)
   N.   Slash Piles: Accumulated debris (limbs, trunk, needles) piled together
from cutting brush or trimming trees. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-6: COMPLAINTS:
Complaints concerning nuisances may be made to any town official. The complaint
shall state the nature of such nuisance, the location, including street
address, name of the owner, agent or occupant of the building or lot, if known,
and the name and address of the complainant. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-7: ANNUAL TREE INSPECTION AND REMOVAL:
   A.   An owner shall annually inspect its property to determine if there are
any dangerous trees on the property.
   B.   Not later than July 15 of each year, the owner shall remove all
dangerous trees from the property; provided that, upon request made prior to
July 15 of any year, and for good cause shown, the town manager may extend the
deadline for a specific property by a maximum of one year.
   C.   The owner of the property may submit to the town manager an acceptable
plan and schedule for removal of the dangerous trees if the trees cannot
reasonably be removed prior to the July 15 deadline.
   D.   The town manager may also extend the July 15 deadline on a townwide or
areawide basis if the town manager determines that such an extension is
required due to weather or other unanticipated conditions or circumstances that
make compliance with the July 15 deadline unreasonable. The length of the
extension shall be determined by the town manager based upon all relevant
facts. If the town manager exercises such authority, notice of the extended
deadline for removal shall be published on the town's website. (Ord. 467,
Series of 2013)
4-12-8: INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY; EMERGENCIES:
   A.   When necessary to make an inspection to enforce this chapter, or when
an authorized representative of the town has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists upon any premises any condition which constitutes a nuisance under
this chapter, the town manager or designee may enter such building or premises
at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed on
any of them. If such building or premises is occupied, such person shall first
present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises
is unoccupied, such person shall first locate the owner, occupant or other
person in control of the premises and, upon locating said owner, occupant or
person in control, shall present proper credentials and request entry.
If entry is refused, such person shall give the owner, occupant or person in
control (or, if said owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable
effort, leave at the building or premises) a twenty four (24) hour written
notice of intention to inspect. The notice given shall state that the property
owner, occupant or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in
the event that such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance
of a search warrant by a judge of a court having jurisdiction. When any of the
persons enumerated in this subsection has reasonable cause to believe that a
motor vehicle is an inoperable vehicle, such person may, upon the presentation
of proper credentials, lawfully request the owner or person having control of
such vehicle to demonstrate if the vehicle is capable of moving under its own
power. The owner or person having control of such vehicle may lawfully refuse
the request. If the request is refused, the person making the request shall
give the owner or person having control of the vehicle twenty four (24) hours
notice of intention to inspect in accordance with this subsection.
   B.   After the expiration of said twenty four (24) hour period from the
giving or leaving of the notice, the town manager or designee may appear before
the municipal judge and, upon a showing of probable cause, obtain a search
warrant entitling such person to enter the premises or motor vehicle. Upon
presentation of the search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of the
same in the case of an unoccupied building or premises, said person may enter
said premises or motor vehicle using such reasonable force as may be necessary
to gain entry. If the search warrant authorizes the entry into a motor vehicle
for the purpose of determining whether it is an inoperable vehicle, the person
executing such warrant may lawfully inspect the vehicle to determine if it is
capable of being operated under its own power.
   C.   For purposes of subsection B of this section, a determination of
probable cause shall be based upon reasonableness, and if a valid public
interest justifies the intrusion contemplated, then there is probable cause to
issue a search warrant. The person applying for such warrant shall not be
required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular
structure or premises in issue in order to obtain a search warrant.
   D.   When an emergency exists, the town manager or designee upon
presentation of proper credentials in the case of an occupied building or
premises, or possession of said credentials in the case of an unoccupied
building or premises, may enter into any building or go upon any premises
within the jurisdiction of the town. In an emergency, such persons may use such
reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry into said premises.
   E.   It is unlawful for any owner, occupant or person in charge or control
of said building or premises to resist reasonable force used by the town
manager or designee.
   F.   An owner or occupant whose property may have located on it one or more
dangerous trees shall grant permission to the town manager to enter such
property for the purpose of immediate inspection of the trees located on such
property when at least one of the following events has occurred, provided that
if the owner or occupant refuses to grant such permission, the town manager
shall not enter the property without a valid warrant, except in emergencies as
set forth in subsection D of this section.
      1.   The owner or occupant has requested the inspection;
      2.   A neighboring landowner or occupant has reported a suspected
dangerous tree(s) and requested an inspection; or
      3.   The town manager has made a visual observation from other property
or a public right of way and has reason to believe that a dangerous tree(s)
exists on the property. (Ord. 467, Series of 2013)
4-12-9: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   The chief of police or designee is hereby authorized, in his or her
discretion, to cause any nuisance which is found to exist on private property
within the town to be abated in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Any nuisance which presents such an imminent danger to life, limb,
property or health as to require immediate abatement, may be summarily abated
by action of the chief of police or designee. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
   C.   In the case of any nuisance not requiring summary abatement, the town
manager or designee may cause a notice to be served upon the person responsible
under this chapter for any nuisance.
      1.   The notice shall be in writing, signed by the town official issuing
the same, and shall be personally served upon the owner, occupant or person in
charge or control of the premises upon which said nuisance exists or, if not
occupied, then by posting the same prominently at some place on the premises
upon which said nuisance exists. If service is by posting, the property upon
which the nuisance exists shall be posted for a minimum of fourteen (14) days,
and a copy of the notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of such property as shown upon the tax rolls of Grand
County, Colorado, at the address of such owner as therein shown. The notice
shall specifically describe the property where the nuisance is alleged to exist
and shall state that if the nuisance is not abated within the time stated in
the notice, the costs of abatement may be assessed as a lien against the
property, with an additional fifteen percent (15%) assessment for
administrative costs and the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the town in
abating the nuisance, and that such sums may be collected in the same manner as
property taxes. If the owner of the property is not personally served with a
copy of such notice, then a true copy of such notice shall be mailed by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of such
property as shown upon the tax rolls of Grand County, Colorado, at the address
of such owner as therein shown.
      2.   The reasonable time for abatement shall not exceed fourteen (14)
days, unless: a) it appears from the facts and circumstances that compliance
could not reasonably be made within fourteen (14) days; or b) the nuisance
involves an inoperable vehicle which is dismantled or partially dismantled for
maintenance or repairs; or c) the nuisance involves a dangerous tree(s).
      3.   In the case of a nuisance involving an inoperable vehicle which is
dismantled or partially dismantled for maintenance or repairs, the reasonable
time for abatement shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
      4.   In the case of a nuisance involving a dangerous tree(s), the
reasonable time for abatement shall be extended to September 15 of the year in
which the notice is given, or if the notice is issued after August 15, to
September 15 of the following year. The notice for the abatement of dangerous
trees shall include town approved methods for the removal and destruction of
the dangerous trees. If the owner disputes that the property contains one or
more dangerous trees, the landowner shall notify the town manager of such
dispute within ten (10) days of receipt of the town manager's notice. If a
timely notice of dispute is given, the town shall not proceed with the
procedures in subsection D of this section until the town manager has met with
the owner in an effort to resolve the dispute. If the dispute cannot be
resolved at such meeting, or if the owner fails to appear at such meeting, the
town may proceed with the procedures in subsection D of this section. (Ord.
467, Series of 2013)
   D.   If, after notification as provided above, a nuisance is not voluntarily
abated, the following procedures shall apply:
      1.   When an owner fails to abate the nuisance within the time provided
in the notice, the town may institute proceedings in a court of competent
jurisdiction to obtain a judicial determination that such nuisance exists, to
abate such nuisance, to enjoin the nuisance and for such other and further
relief as necessary or proper, including, but not limited to, recovery of the
costs and expenses of abatement, including reasonable attorney fees.
      2.   Upon a judicial determination that a nuisance exists, the town
manager or designee is authorized to abate said nuisance, or cause the same to
be abated, employing such force as necessary to abate the nuisance.
      3.   The town shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and
incur the necessary expenses for abatement of any nuisance, and to charge such
expenses to the person responsible for the nuisance. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-10: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS OF ABATEMENT; COLLECTION; FAILURE TO PAY:
   A.   The person responsible for a nuisance shall be liable for all costs of
the abatement of such nuisance. Such costs may be collected by the town in any
action at law, in connection with any criminal proceeding, in connection with
any civil action to abate the nuisance, or they may be assessed against the
property.
   B.   If, after the expiration of the period of time provided for in said
notice, or as extended, costs or expenses are incurred by or on behalf of the
town in connection with the abatement of the nuisance, and such costs are not
otherwise collected, the finance director may thereafter certify to the town
clerk the legal description of the property upon which such work was done,
together with the name of the owner thereof as shown by the tax rolls of Grand
County, Colorado, and a statement of the work performed, the date of
performance and the costs thereof.
   C.   The town clerk shall mail a notice to the owner of said premises, at
the last known address of the owner, by first class mail, postage prepaid,
notifying such owner that work has been performed pursuant to this chapter,
stating the date of performance of the work, the nature of the work, and
demanding payment of the costs thereof (as certified by the finance director),
together with fifteen percent (15%) assessment for administrative expenses, and
the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the town in abating the nuisance. Such
notice shall state that if the total amount is not paid within thirty (30) days
after mailing the notice, it shall become an assessment on and lien against the
property, together with ten percent (10%) for costs of collection, and that the
whole amount will be collected in the same manner as property taxes.
   D.   If the clerk does not receive payment within thirty (30) days after
mailing the notice, the clerk shall inform the town council of such fact, and
the council shall thereupon assess the whole cost of such work, including a
charge of fifteen percent (15%) of said whole cost for administrative expenses
and the town's reasonable attorney fees incurred in the abatement of the
nuisance, upon the property, together with ten percent (10%) for costs of
collection.
   E.   Following such assessment, the clerk shall certify the same to the
county treasurer, who shall collect the assessment in the same manner as other
taxes are collected.
   F.   Each assessment shall be a lien against the property described in such
assessment until paid and shall have priority over other liens and assessments,
except general taxes and prior special assessments. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-11: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE AND NONEXCLUSIVE:
No remedy provided herein shall be exclusive, but the same shall be cumulative,
and the taking of any action hereunder, including charge or conviction of
violation of this chapter in the municipal court, shall not preclude or prevent
the taking of other action hereunder to abate or enjoin any nuisance found to
exist. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
4-12-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, and such person shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (Ord. 455, Series of 2012)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
MASTER STREET PLAN ADOPTED
SECTION:
5-1-1: 1985 Master Street Plan Repealed
5-1-2: 1991 Master Street Plan Adopted
5-1-1: 1985 MASTER STREET PLAN REPEALED:
The Town Council adopted Ordinance 187, Series of 1991 which repealed the
previous Master Street Plan (Ordinance 130, Series of 1985). (Ord. 187, Series
of 1991)
5-1-2: 1991 MASTER STREET PLAN ADOPTED:
The 1991 Master Street Plan was adopted by the Winter Park Planning and Zoning
Commission, Resolution 1, Series of 1991 and approved by the Town Council by
passage of Resolution 319, Series of 1991. (Res. 319, Series of 1991)
CHAPTER 2
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Construction Within Town Streets Or Right-Of-Way
5-2-2: Design And Construction Standards And Specifications
5-2-3: Insurance And Indemnification
5-2-4: Guarantee
5-2-5: Purpose Of Guarantee
5-2-6: Inspections
5-2-7: Public Safety And Nuisance
5-2-8: Time Of Completion
5-2-9: Relocation Of Facilities
5-2-10: Enforced Work Stoppage For Violation
5-2-11: Permit; Revocation, Notice
5-2-12: Additional Regulations
5-2-13: Connection To Town Roadways
5-2-14: Utility Providers
5-2-15: Appeal
5-2-16: Penalty
5-2-1: CONSTRUCTION WITHIN TOWN STREETS OR RIGHT-OF-WAY:
All work that occurs within Town streets or right-of-way shall require a
construction permit issued by the Town as described in the "Town of Winter Park
Standards and Specifications for Design and Construction," and an associated
right-of-way permit. All construction and right-of-way permit fees shall be
determined by Town Council as set forth by resolution. All such work shall
conform to the "Town of Winter Park Standards and Specifications for Design and
Construction" and, as applicable, any standards or specifications required by
special districts or utility companies or as stated in Title 7, Unified
Development Code. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-2: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The document entitled "Town of Winter Park Standards and Specifications for
Design and Construction" is hereby adopted by reference. A copy of the "Town of
Winter Park Standards and Specifications for Design and Construction" shall be
maintained in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be available for
inspection during business hours. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-3: INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.    Insurance. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter, every
applicant shall provide proof acceptable to the Town of an insurance policy or
certificate with coverage as follows:
      1.   The permittee shall be insured against personal injury and property
damage by insurers acceptable to the Town, but in no event less than the
coverages described as follows:
         a.   Workers' compensation insurance to cover obligations imposed by
applicable laws for any employee engaged in the performance of the work under
this chapter, and employers' liability insurance with minimum limits of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each accident. If any work on the
project is sublet, the permittee shall require each of its subcontractors to
provide similar coverage for all of the subcontractor's employees to be engaged
in such work, except as otherwise determined by the Public Works Director.
Evidence of qualified self-insured status may be substituted for the workers'
compensation requirements of this section.
         b.   Commercial general liability insurance to be written with a limit
of liability of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all
damages arising out of bodily injury, personal injury (including coverage for
employee and contractual acts), including death, at any time resulting
therefrom, arising out of any one (1) occurrence, and not less than two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) general aggregate for all damages arising out of bodily
injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, during the policy
period. This policy shall also include coverage for blanket contractual and
independent contractor risks.
      1.   The limits of commercial general liability insurance for broad-form
property damage (including products and completed operations) shall be not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all damages arising out of injury
to or destruction of property in any one (1) occurrence, and not less than two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for all damages arising out of injury to or
destruction of property, including the Town's property, during the policy
period.
      2.   The commercial general liability insurance policy shall include
coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazards. The policy shall
contain a severability of interests provision.
         a.   Protective liability and property damage insurance covering the
liability of the Town, including any employee, officer or agent of the Town,
with respect to all operations under the chapter by the permittee or its
subcontractors, shall be obtained and maintained during the life of the permit
issued under this chapter. The limits of the Town's protective liability
policy, to be provided by the permittee, as described in this section, shall be
increased to the same limits as described above for the permittee's commercial
general liability insurance.
         b.   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance with minimum
combined single limits for bodily injury and property damage of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) aggregate with respect to each of the permittee's owned, hired
and nonowned vehicles assigned to or used in performance of the services. The
policy shall contain a severability of interests provision.
         c.   All insurance policies and certificates of insurance issued for
this project shall name as additional insureds the Town, its officers and
employees, and any other person, company or entity deemed necessary by the
Town. The permittee shall be solely responsible for any deductible losses under
any policy required herein.
         d.   The insurance provided by the permittee shall be primary to
insurance carried by the Town and all other additional insureds, and the
principal defense of any claims resulting from the permittee's obligations
under the chapter shall rest with the permittee's insurer.
      2.   Certificate of Insurance:
         a.   The certificate of insurance provided by the permittee shall be
completed by the permittee's insurance agent as evidence that policies
providing the required coverages, conditions and minimum limits are in full
force and effect, and shall be reviewed and approved by the Town prior to the
issuance of a permit under this chapter. No other form of certificate shall be
used. The certificate shall identify the permit issued by the Town under this
chapter and the coverages afforded under the policies. The completed
certificate of insurance shall be sent to:
         Town of Winter Park
         Attn: Public Works Director
         P.O. Box 3327
         50 Vasquez Road
         Winter Park, Colorado 80482
         b.   It is the affirmative obligation of the permittee to notify the
Public Work's Director, within two (2) business days of the cancellation or
substantive change to any insurance policy required under this chapter, and
failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Failure on the
part of the permittee to procure or maintain policies providing the required
coverages, conditions and minimum limits shall constitute a violation of this
chapter upon which the Town may immediately revoke the permit issued under this
chapter. The Town reserves the right to request and receive a certified copy of
any policy and any endorsement thereto.
   B.   Indemnification. Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter,
every permittee shall, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its
officers, employees, agents and their insurers from and against all liability,
claims, costs, and demands on account of injury, loss or damage, including,
without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury,
sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any
kind whatsoever, which arise out of or are in any manner connected with the
permit issued under this chapter, to the extent such injury, loss or damage is
attributable to the act, omission, error, professional error, mistake,
negligence or other fault of the permittee, the permittee's employees,
subcontractors or anyone else employed directly or indirectly by any one (1) of
them or by anyone for those acts any of them may be liable. The acceptance of a
permit shall constitute such an agreement by the permittee. This requirement
shall not extend or expand the liability of any quasi-municipal corporation
beyond the liability limitations established by Colorado law.
   C.   The permittee shall defend, investigate, handle, respond to and provide
defense for and defend against any such liability, claims or demands at the
sole expense of the permittee or, at the option of the Town, agree to pay the
Town or reimburse the Town for defense costs incurred by the Town in connection
with any such liability, claims or demands. The permittee shall, to the fullest
extent permitted by law, defend and bear all other costs and expenses related
thereto, including court costs and attorney fees, whether or not any such
liability, claims or demands alleged are groundless, false or fraudulent.
   D.   This indemnification provision is intended to comply with Section 13-
21-111.5(6), C.R.S. as amended, and shall be read as broadly as permitted to
satisfy that intent. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-4: GUARANTEE:
   A.   Each permittee, before being issued a permit, shall provide the Town,
at the permittee's expense, a guarantee. This guarantee shall be in the form of
cash or an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution and in a
form acceptable to the Town; provided, however, that no letter of credit shall
be required for projects where the Town's estimated cost of restoration is less
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   B.   This guarantee shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the Town's estimate of the cost of restoration. The cost of
restoration shall include, without limitation, the removal of defective work,
material, recompaction of subgrade and base material and construction of
surface improvements, as well as related traffic control, testing and
management. The irrevocable letter of credit shall run for a period of time of
at least two (2) years beyond the anticipated initial acceptance date of the
work identified in the permit. Such guarantees shall be extended if requested
by the Town.
   C.   The Town may waive the guarantee requirements for any owner of a
single-family residence desiring to repair his or her driveway or sidewalk,
provided that the owner performs the work personally and upon satisfactory
evidence to the Town that the permittee is competent to perform the work.
   D.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section,
any contractor performing work pursuant to a contract directly with the Town
shall adhere to the performance payment requirements set forth in the contract
documents. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-5: PURPOSE OF GUARANTEE:
   A.   The guarantee made hereunder shall serve as security for the
performance of work necessary to repair the public right-of-way if the
permittee fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the work under the
permit.
   B.   The permittee, by receipt of the permit, expressly warrants and
guarantees complete performance of the work in a manner acceptable to the Town,
warrants and guarantees all work done by the permittee for a period of two (2)
years after the date of initial acceptance, and agrees to maintain upon demand
and to make all necessary repairs during the two (2)-year period. This
guarantee shall include, without limitation, all repairs and actions needed as
a result of:
      1.   Defects in the work, regardless of cause.
      2.   Defects in workmanship.
      3.   Settling of fills or excavations.
      4.   Any unauthorized deviations from the approved plans and
specifications.
      5.   Failure to barricade.
      6.   Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work.
      7.   Failure to complete the work within the time specified by the
permit.
      8.   Any other violation of this chapter or the ordinances of the Town.
   C.   The two (2)-year guarantee shall run from the date of the Town's
initial acceptance of the work. If repairs are required during the two (2)-year
period, those repairs need only be warranted until the end of the initial two
(2)-year period starting with the date of initial acceptance. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to obtain written notification from the Town of
final acceptance at the completion of the two (2)-year period.
   D.   The guarantee may be reduced to twenty percent (20%) of the Town's
estimate of the cost of restoration after the Town's initial acceptance of the
work.
   E.   At any time prior to completion of the two (2)-year guarantee period,
the Town may notify the permittee of any needed repairs. Such repairs shall be
completed within twenty-four (24) hours if the defects are determined by the
Town to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
Nonemergency repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) days after notice.
   F.   Letters of credit or cash deposited as a guarantee for individual
permits may be used by the Town to restore the right-of-way and adjacent
property. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-6: INSPECTIONS:
The permittee shall notify the Town prior to the commencement of the work. The
Town reserves the right to inspect the work at any time during construction and
excavation. In addition, after completion of work operations, the permittee
shall notify the Public Works Director, and an inspection shall occur. Initial
acceptance shall be made if all work meets Town and permit standards. Further,
approximately thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the two (2)-year
guarantee, the Town shall perform an additional inspection of the completed
work. The permittee shall be responsible for notifying the Town of the need for
the final inspection approximately thirty (30) days prior to the completion of
the two (2)-year period. If the work is still satisfactory, final acceptance
occurs, and the cash or letter of credit for individual permit holders shall be
returned, less any amounts needed to complete work not done by permittee. (Ord,
629, Series of 2025)
5-2-7: PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE:
A person who obtains a permit for construction, excavation or work in the
public right-of-way shall maintain a safe work area, free of nuisance
conditions. The Town may make any repair necessary to eliminate any hazards or
nuisances or work not performed as directed. Any such work performed by the
Town shall be completed and billed to the permittee at overtime rates. The
permittee shall pay all such charges within thirty (30) days of the statement
date. If the permittee fails to pay such charges within the prescribed time
period, the Town may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, seek
reimbursement through the guarantee. Furthermore, the permittee shall be barred
from performing any work in the public right-of-way, and under no circumstances
will the Town issue any further permits of any kind to said permittee, until
such time that all outstanding charges have been paid in full. (Ord, 629,
Series of 2025)
5-2-8: TIME OF COMPLETION:
All work covered by the permit shall be completed by the date stated on the
permit. A permit may be extended once for a period not longer than thirty (30)
days upon application submitted to the Public Works Director prior to the
deadline for completion stated on the permit. After the deadline for completion
and any approved period of extension the permit is void, and a new permit
application, including a new fee, must be filed and approved before completing
any remaining work. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-9: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
If at any time the Town requests the permittee to relocate its facilities in
order to allow the Town to make any public use of streets or rights-of-way, or
if at any time it shall become necessary because of a change in the grade or
for any other purpose by reason of the improving, repairing, constructing or
maintaining of any street or right-of-way, or by reason of traffic conditions,
public safety or by reason of installation of any type of structure or public
improvement by the Town or other public agency or special district, and any
general program for the undergrounding of such facilities, to move or change
the permittee's facilities within or adjacent to streets or rights-of-way in
any manner, either temporarily or permanently, the Town shall notify the
permittee, at least ninety (90) days in advance, except in the case of
emergencies, of the Town's intention to perform or have such work performed.
The permittee shall thereupon, at its sole cost and expense, accomplish the
necessary relocation, removal or change within a reasonable time from the date
of the notification, but in no event later than three (3) working days prior to
the date the Town has notified the permittee that it intends to commence its
work or immediately in the case of emergencies. Upon the permittee's failure to
accomplish such work, the Town or other public agencies or special district may
perform such work at the permittee's expense, and the permittee shall reimburse
the Town or other agency within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written
invoice. Following relocation, all affected property shall be restored to, at a
minimum, the condition which existed prior to construction by the permittee at
the permittee's expense. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-10: ENFORCED WORK STOPPAGE FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   In the event that any of the provisions of the approved plans or other
applicable criteria of the Town are violated by the permittee or by any of its
contractors or subcontractors, the Town may serve written notice of the Town's
intention to stop work on the project and the reasons therefor to the
permittee, the contractor and any surety. Unless the violations cease and
satisfactory arrangements for correction are made, the work will be stopped
forty-eight (48) hours after serving written notice. In the event of any such
termination, the Town shall immediately serve notice to the permittee, the
contractor and any surety. The surety shall have the right to take over and
finish the project, provided that, if the surety does not begin work within
thirty (30) days from the mailing date of the notice, the Town may, at its sole
discretion, take over the work and finish it at the expense of the permittee
and contractor. The permittee, contractor and the surety shall be liable to the
Town for all the costs caused by the termination of the work.
   B.   It may become necessary for the Town to immediately stop work on a
project to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town.
Such instances may include, without limitation, creation of a public safety
hazard, lack of required permits, inadequate traffic control or obstructing an
emergency access. The Public Works Director or other representative of the Town
has the authority to stop the work immediately after serving the permittee with
written notice. The permittee shall not resume work without written approval
from the Town. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-11: PERMIT; REVOCATION, NOTICE:
   A.   Any permit may be revoked or suspended by the Public Works Director
after notice to the permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
chapter.
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the Town or
State law relating to the work.
      3.   Existence of any condition or performance of any act which does
constitute or cause a condition endangering life or damage to property.
   B.   A suspension or revocation by the Public Works Director, and a stop
work order, shall take effect immediately upon notice to the person performing
the work in the public way.
   C.   A stop work order may be issued by the Public Works Director to any
person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way
without a permit, or in violation of any provision of this Chapter or any other
ordinance of the Town.
   D.   Any suspension, revocation or stop work order may be appealed by the
permittee to the Public Works Director by filing a written notice of appeal
within ten (10) days of the action. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-12: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
In granting any permit, the Town may attach such other conditions as reasonable
and necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to avoid
hazardous or nuisance conditions, including, without limitation:
   A.   Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
   B.   Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
   C.   The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
   D.   Requirements as to the cleaning of streets, the prevention of noise,
and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general
public, or any portion thereof;
   E.   Regulations as to the use of streets in the court of the work;
   F.   Minimum depth of any utility or service line shall be eighteen inches
(18") below grade; and
   G.   Temporary patches or other measures that may be necessary to protect
the public and the public way. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-13: CONNECTION TO TOWN ROADWAYS:
   A.   No new connection or modification of an existing connection shall be
made to any street, right-of-way or trail owned or under the jurisdiction of
the Town without the prior approval of the Town Council.
   B.   In considering whether to grant approval for a new connection or
modification of an existing connection to a street, right-of-way or trail owned
or under the jurisdiction of the Town, the Town Council shall consider the
following criteria:
      1.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection and projected traffic will alter the character of or negatively
impact a residential neighborhood.
      2.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection and projected traffic will negatively impact any park or open space.
      3.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection will create an undue burden on the existing Town street system.
      4.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection complies with the Town's Comprehensive Plan;
      5.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection meets all Town standards and regulations, including, without
limitation, the “Town of Winter Park Standards and Specifications for Design
and Construction;”
      6.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection would impact evacuation routes or emergency response times; and
      7.   Whether the proposed new connection or modification of an existing
connection is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
   C.   The Town Council's decision on whether to approve a new connection or
modification of an existing connection to any street, right-of-way or trail
owned or under the jurisdiction of the Town shall be final, subject only to
judicial review as provided by law. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
5-2-14: UTILITY PROVIDERS:
Utility providers, including any person, corporation, municipality, quasi-
governmental agency, special district and state or local government, providing
any utility, including water, sewer, electric, gas, cable or telecommunication
utility impacting the Town right-of-way, whether for access or to engage in
maintenance, temporary access and construction-related activities, shall be
subject to all regulations, procedures and fees imposed by this Chapter. (Ord,
629, Series of 2025)
5-2-15: APPEAL:
Any decision rendered by the Public Works Director shall be final. (Ord, 629,
Series of 2025)
5-2-16: PENALTY:
Every person who willfully violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor. Each and every day during any part of which any such violation
occurs shall be a separate offense. The penalty for a violation is set forth in
subsection 1-4-1C of this Code. (Ord, 629, Series of 2025)
CHAPTER 3
STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Title
5-3-2: Legislative Declarations
5-3-3: Street And Utility Improvement Projects
5-3-4: Design Standards, Specifications And Permits
5-3-5: Improvement Project Fees
5-3-6: Amount Of Estimated Fee
5-3-7: Notice Of Intent To Impose Fee
5-3-8: Protest Of Improvement Project Fee
5-3-9: Payment Of Fee Based On Actual Costs
5-3-10: No Building Permit Without Adequate Streets And/Or Utilities
5-3-11: Other Town Regulations And Improvements Applicable
5-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the WINTER PARK STREET AND UTILITY
IMPROVEMENTS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-2: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATIONS:
   A.   The town council of the town of Winter Park hereby finds and declares:
(Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
      1.   The health, safety and welfare of the people of the town of Winter
Park are, in part, dependent upon the construction and maintenance of adequate
streets, drainage, irrigation systems, sanitary sewer and water facilities
(utilities). (Ord. 354, Series of 2005; amd. Ord. 358, Series of 2005)
      2.   There are properties in the town with inadequate, substandard or
nonexistent street and/or utilities improvements.
      3.   Development of the properties without the construction of adequate
streets or utilities will negatively impact the general health and safety
within the town. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
      4.   The cost of constructing adequate streets, irrigation systems and
utilities to complete the street and utility networks, are properly borne by
the owners of the properties served and benefitted by such street, irrigation
systems and utilities. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005; amd. Ord. 358, Series of
2005)
   B.   It is therefore declared to be the policy of the town that no
development shall be allowed in town unless and until provision has been made
for the construction of adequate streets and utilities to serve the properties
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-3: STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The town council during a regularly scheduled council meeting can by motion
direct the town engineer to prepare construction documents and cost estimates
to implement a street and/or utility improvement project. A street and/or
utility improvement project defined by the council can include such items as
subgrade, alignment, right of way, paving, curb and gutters, sidewalks, street
lighting, drainage systems, irrigation systems including construction,
relocation and/or restoration and utility improvements. Other costs borne by
the town such as engineering, surveying, obtaining permits, soil and material
testing and construction management will be an integral part of the cost of
undertaking an improvement project. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005; amd. Ord. 358,
Series of 2005)
5-3-4: DESIGN STANDARDS, SPECIFICATIONS AND PERMITS:
   A.   All improvement design and construction shall meet the "town of Winter
Park standards and specifications for design and construction" or the
applicable water and sanitation district's standards and specifications for
design and construction. All street improvement work shall be approved by the
town engineer and/or water and sanitation district.
   B.   Colorado department of transportation access permits will be required
if the subdivision is to access U.S. Highway 40. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-5: IMPROVEMENT PROJECT FEES:
There is hereby created the Winter Park improvement project fee, which shall be
calculated in the manner set forth in section
5-3-6 of this chapter. The improvement project fee shall be estimated at such
time as the town receives construction bids and/or town engineer estimates of
an improvement project defined by the town council. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-6: AMOUNT OF ESTIMATED FEE:
The amount of the improvement project fee applicable to each lot or tract shall
be determined by the town manager and shall be calculated by dividing the
estimated cost to the town of installing and constructing the improvements pro
rata among the benefitted properties on a per lot, square footage or street
frontage basis, or any combination of such methods, which, in the discretion of
the town manager and town council, most fairly allocates the cost of the
improvements among the benefitted properties. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-7: NOTICE OF INTENT TO IMPOSE FEE:
Prior to the commencement of construction of any improvement project for which
the town will impose an improvement project fee, the town shall give written
notice to the owners of all properties upon which the improvement project fee
will be imposed of the town's intent to commence such construction and to
impose the improvement project fee. Such notice shall state the estimated
amount of the improvement project fee and the available methods of payment
thereof. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-8: PROTEST OF IMPROVEMENT PROJECT FEE:
   A.   Any owner of property to whom notice of intent to impose an improvement
project fee is given pursuant to section
5-3-7 of this chapter may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing of such
notice, submit a protest in writing to the town council.
   B.   Any written protest shall state, with particularity, the reasons why
the property owner contends that the imposition of the improvement project fee,
or the amount of the fee, is improper or inequitable.
   C.   The town council shall consider the protest at a regularly scheduled
council meeting. The town council may grant, deny, or grant in part and deny in
part, any protest. The town council's decision on the protest shall be made in
writing and shall be mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-9: PAYMENT OF FEE BASED ON ACTUAL COSTS:
   A.   Upon completion of the construction of the improvements, the town
manager shall calculate the final improvement project fee for each benefitted
property in the manner prescribed by section
5-3-6 of this chapter and shall send to each owner of benefitted property, by
certified mail, an invoice for the improvement project fee.
   B.   The improvement project fee shall be due and payable thirty (30) days
from the date the invoice is mailed provided, however, that the owner of any
benefitted property may delay payment of the improvement project fee until: 1)
such time as a building permit is requested for the construction or enlargement
of a structure on such owner's benefitted property, or 2) the eighth
anniversary of the mailing of the invoice described above, whichever event
comes first, at which time the owner shall pay the full amount of the
improvement project fee. If the property owner does not pay the full principle
amount within thirty (30) days of receiving the invoice described above,
interest will start accruing at seven percent (7%) per annum (compound
interest). The town manager shall notify property owners annually of the status
of their account.
   C.   The town shall have a lien placed upon the benefitted property as
security for the collection of all improvement project fees. The lien shall
become effective upon the mailing of the invoice described above and shall be
discharged upon payment of the improvement project fee and any accrued
interest. The town may, but is under no obligation to, record notice of such
lien in the records of the Grand County clerk and recorder so as to provide
notice to subsequent purchasers of the pendency of the lien.
   D.   Improvement project fees not paid when due may be collected by
foreclosure of the lien in the manner provided by law for mechanic's liens or
by submitting same to the Grand County treasurer for collection pursuant to
Colorado Revised Statutes sections 31-20-105 and 106. (Ord. 354, Series of
2005)
5-3-10: NO BUILDING PERMIT WITHOUT ADEQUATE STREETS AND/OR UTILITIES:
In no event shall the town issue a building permit for the construction or
enlargement of a structure on any property within the town's limits until
arrangements have been made, either pursuant to this chapter or by contract
approved by the town council, for the construction of adequate improvements to
serve such property. (Ord. 354, Series of 2005)
5-3-11: OTHER TOWN REGULATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS APPLICABLE:
The completion of an improvement project does not waive other town zoning,
subdivision, design review, and building regulations. A property owner may be
required to install other infrastructure improvements within or outside of a
right of way related to the development of the property. (Ord. 354, Series of
2005)
TITLE 6
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Codes Adopted By Reference
6-1-2: International Building Code Amendments
6-1-3: International Residential Code Amendments
6-1-4: Plumbing Code Amendments
6-1-5: International Mechanical Code Amendments
6-1-6: International Fuel Gas Code Amendments
6-1-7: Energy Conservation Code Amendments
6-1-8: Fire Code Amendments
6-1-9: Existing Building Code Amendments
6-1-10:    National Electrical Code
6-1-11:    Colorado Electric Ready And Solar Ready Code Amendments
6-1-12:    Violation And Penalty
6-1-1: CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   The following codes are adopted by reference:
   International Building Code, 2021 Edition
   International Residential Code, 2021 Edition
   International Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition
   International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition
   International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 Edition
   International Energy Conservation Code, 2021 Edition
   International Fire Code Including All Appendices, 2021 Edition
   International Existing Building Code, 2021 Edition
   National Electrical Code, 2020 Edition
   Colorado Electric Ready and Solar Ready Code, 2023 Edition
   B.   All International Codes are published by the International Code
Council, 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478, except the National
Electrical Code is published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1
Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269, and the Colorado Electric Ready and Solar
Ready Code is jointly published by the Colorado Energy Office and the Colorado
Department of Local Affairs, 1600 Broadway, Suite 1960, Denver, CO 80202. All
codes adopted by reference herein and all amendments to said codes are
available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk of Winter Park during
normal business hours. (Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of
2023; Ord. 619, Series of 2024)
6-1-2: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Building Code, adopted by
reference in Section 6-1-1 of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the
Town of Winter Park, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Section 101.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
   101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall
apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of plumbing
systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances,
and where connected to a water system or sewage system and all aspects of a
medical gas system.
Section 101.4.4 is repealed in its entirety.
Section 102.6 is amended to read as follows:
   102.6 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on
the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the International Fire
Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building or fire official for the
general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Building Official. The building official is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this code; however, a guaranty that
all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all the
provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied.
Section 103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a
deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan
examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by
the building official.
Section 104.1 is amended to read as follows:
   104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all provisions of this code, however, a guarantee that all buildings
and structures have been constructed in accordance with all the provisions of
this code is neither intended nor implied. The building official is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building
official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to
adopt policies and procedures to clarify the application of its provisions.
Interpretations, policies and procedures shall comply with the intent and
purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
Section 104.8 is amended to read as follows:
   104.8 Liability. The adoption of this code, and any previous building codes
adopted by the Town of Winter Park, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty
of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall
this code or any previous building codes be deemed to create any civil remedy
against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The building official,
member of board of appeals or employee charged with enforcement of the code,
while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or
ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby
relieved from personal liability for any damages accruing to persons or
property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful
discharge of duties under the provisions of this code shall be defended by
legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this code.
Sections 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 are repealed in their entirety.
Section 105.2 is amended to read as follows:
   105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this
code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Retaining walls, regardless of height, shall
require permit(s) and be designed by a licensed Colorado design professional.
Permits shall not be required for the following:
   Building:
   1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses, playground equipment and similar uses, provided the floor area does
not exceed 120 square feet (11 m2) and maximum height of 12 feet.
   2.   Fences not over 7 feet (2134 mm) high.
   3.   Oil derricks.
   4.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed
5,000 gallons (18 925 l) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 2:1.
   5.   Platforms, walks and driveways at grade and are not part of an
accessible route.
   6.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and
similar finish work.
   7.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
   8.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, which
are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 l)
and are installed entirely above ground.
   9.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
   10.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and
two-family dwellings.
   11.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more
than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support of groups R-3 and U occupancies.
   12.   Non fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters, and partitions
not over 5 feet, 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
   13.   Replacement or repair of nonstructural siding or siding which is not
part of a required fire rated assembly on buildings when the removal of the
siding is performed in accordance with state regulations regarding asbestos and
lead paint, pursuant to other Town regulations.
   14.   Gutters, downspouts, and storm windows (unless specified by design).
Section 105 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   105.2.8. Exemptions. Unless otherwise exempt by this code, separate
plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above
exempted items. Exemption from permit requirements of this Code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in a manner in violation of
the provisions of this code or any other laws or resolutions of the Town.
   105.8 Transfer of Permits. A building permit or application may be
transferred upon written request to the building official, provided there are
no changes to the plans and specifications and the transferee is in good
standing. The transferee must be licensed/registered in the appropriate
license/registration (business license) category and in good standing.
   105.8.1. Owner Assuming Role as Contractor. Provided that no change in
ownership has occurred since the permit was issued, the building official may
allow the property owner to assume the role of contractor at any time on an
active building permit. The building official shall be in receipt of a written
request from the application holder stating that the applicant is no longer the
contractor of record on the permit application. The letter shall list the
permit number, project address, and shall state that the original contractor is
no longer in the employ of the owner. No change shall be made to the expiration
date of the original building permit.
Section 107 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   107.1.1 Proof of Water and Sewer. The applicant shall provide documentation
from the water and sanitation district of an approved water and sewer utility
plan which may include paying the required water and sewer tap fees.
   107.1.2 Emergency Services Impact Fee. A developer requesting approval of a
development activity requiring additional emergency services shall pay the
impact fee to the emergency services provider prior to any issuance of a
building permit by the Town.
   107.3.1.1 Required Approvals. The application and documents for permit shall
be reviewed and approved for compliance with Town ordinances.
   107.3.1.2 Survey Requirements. An improvement location certificate (“ILC”)
and Setback and Elevation Certificate completed by a licensed Colorado surveyor
and shall be required for all new foundations within the Town. If a variance
has been granted for the property that allows for construction of a foundation
within the established setbacks or if a foundation is located within five feet
of the property line, an improvement survey plat (“ISP”) shall be required. The
ILC/ISP and Setback and Elevation Certificate shall be submitted to the Town
for review and approval by the Planning Division prior to beginning of framing.
Section 107.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
   107.3.3 Phased Approval. The Director of Community Development is authorized
to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a
building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building
or structure have been submitted, provide that adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirement of
this Code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a
building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be
granted.
Section 107.3.4 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   107.3.4.1 Construction Documents. The building official may require plans,
computations, and specifications to be prepared, designed, stamped, and sealed
by a licensed design professional by the Board of Licensure for Architects,
Engineers, and Land Surveyors of the State of Colorado when, without
limitation:
   1.   Foundations are constructed on caissons or other than spread footings
conforming to the requirements of Chapter 18.
   2.   Roof framing or wall framing is “other than standard or conventional
practices” not conforming to the requirements of Chapter 16 and 23 or site-
specific ground snow load exceeds 70 psf; or
   3.   Conformation of beam sizes and spans, loading or any structural element
affecting the integrity of the building.
Section 108.3 is repealed in its entirety.
Section R108.5 is amended to read as follows:
   R108.5 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund
policy. The building official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80
percent of the permit
   fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with
this code. The deposit paid for a permit application is non-refundable.
   The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except
on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 30 days
after the date of fee payment.
   The building official shall be permitted to authorize a refund of not more
than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
   The building official shall be permitted to authorize a refund of not more
than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee when an applicant for a permit
for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled provided
that no examination time has been expended.
   The building official shall not be permitted to authorize a refund of any
fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permit fee not
later than thirty (30) days after the date of fee payment.
Section R109 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R109.1. Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit
holder or their agent shall have posted an inspection record card in a
conspicuous place on the premises and in a position to allow the building
official to make the required entries conveniently thereon regarding inspection
of the work. The address of the building site must be posted in a conspicuous
place readily visible from the public road. This card shall be maintained in
such a position by the permit holder until all inspections have been made and
final approvals have been granted by the building official.
Section R109.1.1 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R109.1.1.1 Footing and foundation inspections. All new footing and
foundation inspections shall be performed by a Colorado licensed design
professional to include but not limited to reinforcing, concrete-encased
electrode (UFER ground), and when required damp-proofing and perimeter drain.
   R109.1.1.2 Drilled pier inspection. Inspection will be made while the piers
are being drilled. The licensed Colorado engineer of record or the authorized
representative shall be present during the drilling operations and be available
to the inspector during required inspections.
   R109.1.1.3 Lowest floor elevation. The elevation certificate required in
Section 1612.5 shall be submitted when required by the building official or as
required by Title 6 Chapter 7 of the Town of Winter Park Code.
   R109.1.1.4 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not limited to
inspections for: envelope insulation R and U - values, fenestration U- values,
duct system R - values, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. Energy
efficiency inspections, if required, shall be provided by and at the owner’s
expense to verify compliance with the provisions of this section.
Section 109.2 is amended to read as follows:
   109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas,
mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with Title 1 Chapter 11 of
the Town Code of Winter Park, Table 1- 11-2A.
Section 109 is amended by the addition of the following new subsections:
   109.2.1 Plan Review Fee. When submittal documents are required by Section
105.1, a Plan Review fee shall be paid. The plan review fees specified in this
section are separate from the permit fees specified in Section 108.2 and are in
addition to the permit fees.
   109.2.2 Expiration of Plan Review. Applications for which no permit is
issued within thirty (30) days following the date of last action of review
without a response or additional information submitted by the applicant shall
expire. Plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the
applicant or be destroyed by the building official. The building official may
extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding thirty
(30) days upon written request by the applicant demonstrating that
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from
being taken. To renew action on the application after expiration, the applicant
shall resubmit plans and review fee.
Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows:
   109.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any
work on a building, structure, electrical, mechanical, or plumbing system prior
to securing the required permit(s) shall be subject to a fee. which can equal
up to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The payment of such
fee shall not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of
either this code or other requirements nor from the penalty prescribed by law.
   109.4.1 Investigative Fee - Work Without a Permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has commenced without first obtaining
said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be
issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected whether a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee may be up to or equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this Code. The minimum investigation fee shall be set forth and
adopted by the Town Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
Section 109.5 is amended by the addition of the following new subsection:
   109.5.1 Affordable Housing Requirements. The Town shall collect affordable
housing fees as required by the Town Council, and in the sum of three dollars
($3.00) for every gross square foot of new construction or as established by
other development agreement(s).
   Exception: Parking garages and unenclosed decks/patios.
Section 109.6 is amended to read as follows:
   109.6 Refunds. The building official shall be permitted to authorize a
refund of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code.
   The building official shall be permitted to authorize a refund of not more
than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee when an applicant for a permit
for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled provided
that no examination time has been expended.
   The building official shall not be permitted to authorize a refund of any
fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permit fee not
later than thirty (30) days after the date of fee payment.
Section 110.2 is amended by the addition of the following new subsections:
   110.2.1 Re-inspections. A reinspection fee, amount per Title 1 Chapter 11 of
the Code, may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion
of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections
called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be assessed whenever a
reinspection is required as a result of a failure or omission of the applicant,
builder, or developer, when the inspection record card is not posted or
otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily
available to the inspector, for failing to provide access on the date for which
the inspection is requested or deviating from the approved plans. In instances
where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the
work will be performed until the reinspection fees have been received by the
building department. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-
inspection fees the first time the job is rejected for failure to comply with
the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection.
   110.2.2 Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address
numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a
position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the property. Numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. These
numbers shall be contrasting and reflective of their background. Address
numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of ½ inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the
building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or
other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure, in addition to the
number on the structure shall be mounted at least 36" above grade and not
affixed to vegetation.
   110.2.3 Inspection Record Card. Work requiring a building permit shall not
be commenced until the permit holder or his agent shall have posted an
inspection record card in a conspicuous place on the premises and in a position
as to allow the building official to make the required entries conveniently
thereon regarding inspection of the work. The address of the building site must
be posted in a conspicuous place readily visible from the public road, and
construction documents kept in an orderly manner. This card shall be maintained
in such a position by the permit holder until all inspections have been made
and final approvals have been granted by the building official.
   110.2.4 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work, the owner, contractor, or subcontractor to know that the building or
structure has a valid permit and to notify the building department when work is
ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the
owner, contractor, or subcontractor requesting any inspections required by this
code to provide access and means for inspection of such work. All inspections
requested prior to 4:00 pm the day requested will be performed the same
following working day. Such request for inspection may be made by calling the
24-hour automated telephone answering system or the automated inspection
portal.
Section 110.3.1 is amended by the addition of the following new subsection:
   110.3.1.1 Drilled pier inspection. Inspection will be made while the piers
are being drilled. The licensed Colorado engineer of record or the authorized
representative shall be present during the drilling operations and be available
to the inspector during required inspections.
Section 110.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
   110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In, upon completion of the footing and
foundation and placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior
to further vertical construction and prior to beginning framing, the elevation
certification required in Section 107.3 shall be submitted or as required by
Title 6 Chapter 7 of the Town of Winter Park Code for review and approval by
the Planning Division.
Section 110 is amended to read as follows:
   110.3.10 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in
Sections 110.3.1 thru 110.3.9, the building official is authorized to make or
require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with
provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the building
department. division. These inspections shall also be in accordance with
Chapter 17 of this code.
   All new footing and foundation systems shall be inspected by a design
professional licensed in the State of Colorado and shall include reinforcing,
concrete-encased electrode (UFER ground), and when required by design damp-
proofing and perimeter drain. These inspections shall also be in accordance
with Chapter 17 and 18 of this Code.
Section 110 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   Section 110.3.12. Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after
all work required by the building permit is completed. No final inspection
shall be performed, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all
required fees are paid and a sales tax audit has either been completed by the
sales tax administrator and all sales taxes due have been paid or arrangements
have been made with the sales tax administrator for such audit, or Town manager
or a designee has specifically waived such audit.
Section 111.1 is amended to read as follows:
   111.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied,
and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or
structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has
issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation
of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from
permits under Section 105.2.
      2.   Group U occupancy and permits not establishing a use or occupancy.
Section 111.2 is amended to read as follows:
   111.2 Certificate Issued. The issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be granted when all provisions of a permit are not complete,
provided all life safety requirements are met, and all fees associated with
permit are paid. Where occupancies are not determined at time of building
permit application, permits issued for no occupancy and core and shell
construction shall be issued a limited letter of completion or a letter of
completion.
Section 112 is repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
   112.1 Construction and Fire Code Board of Appeals. Pursuant to Section 113,
Chapter 1, 2021 International Building Code and Section 108 of International
Fire Code, there is hereby created by the Town Council, a construction and fire
code board of appeals, which board shall be composed of five (5) members who
shall determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
construction, and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the 2021
International Building Code, 2021 International Residential Code, 2021
International Fire Code, International Plumbing Code most current edition as
adopted by the State of Colorado, 2021 International Mechanical Code, 2021
International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 International Energy Conservation Code and
the 2021 International Existing Building Code.
   112.2 Membership and Terms.
   A.   The construction and fire code board of appeals shall consist of five
(5) members, three (3) of which are qualified by experience and training to
pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The building official or
fire code official when pertaining to fire code issues shall be an ex officio
member and shall act as secretary of the board. The board shall be appointed,
and their terms of office set by the Town Council which terms shall be of such
length and so arranged that the terms of at least one member will expire each
year.
   B.   Any member of the board may be removed, after public hearing, by the
mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, of malfeasance in office. The mayor
shall file a written statement of reasons for such removal.
   C.   Vacancies occurring otherwise and through the expiration of term shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   112.3 Organization and Procedures. The construction and fire code board of
appeals shall elect its chairman from among the members appointed by the Town
Council and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The
term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The
board will hold meetings when called by the chairman or building/fire code
official. The construction and fire code board of appeals shall transact
business according to the rules and regulations adopted herein and shall make
findings and determinations on each case considered. Such findings and
determinations shall become a public record and shall be kept in the office of
the Town clerk.
   112.4 Rules and Regulations. The following rules and regulations are adopted
for purposes of transacting the business of the construction and fire code
board of appeals:
   A.   The construction and fire code board of appeals shall meet at the call
of the chairman or when requested by the building or fire code official.
   B.   A chairman of the construction and fire code board of appeals shall be
elected by a majority of the entire regular membership at the first meeting of
each calendar year, to serve for a term of one year. A vice chairman shall be
elected in the same manner at the same time for a term of one year.
   C.   The chairman of the construction and fire code board of appeals shall
preside at all meetings, shall conduct all hearings, and exercise and perform
such other powers and duties as may be from time to time assigned to him by the
construction and fire code board of appeals or prescribed by the rules and
regulations herein. In presiding at meetings and hearings, the chairman shall
rule on procedure and on order of presentation.
   D.   The construction and fire code board of appeals shall be the judge of
the qualifications of persons appearing as expert witnesses and shall be
empowered to refuse to receive the testimony of any purported expert not so
qualified.
   E.   In the absence or the disability of the chairman, the vice chairman
shall perform all the duties of the chairman, and when so acting, shall have
all the powers of, and be subject to all restrictions upon the chairman.
   F.   In the absence of both the chairman and the vice chairman, a chairman
pro tempore shall be elected, among those regular members present, by a
majority vote of all the members present.
   G.   Should any member have knowledge of any fact which may constitute a
conflict of interest in his consideration of any appeal, he shall forthwith
notify the building official or the fire code official of said facts.
   H.   The secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, minutes of the
proceedings of the construction and fire code board of appeals, and shall
prepare an agenda for each meeting, which shall be furnished to members prior
to the actual hour of the meeting. The secretary shall, in addition, be
custodian of the records of the construction and fire code board of appeals and
shall, upon the filing of an appeal, furnish each regular member with a copy of
the letter of appeal.
   I.   Appeals from decisions of the building official or applicable
enforcement officer shall be in writing, shall be directed to a specific
decision of the building official or applicable enforcement officer, and
consideration of said appeal by the construction and fire code board of appeals
shall be limited to said specific decision.
   J.   Appeals will be heard at special meetings called pursuant to the
presiding officer or by a majority of the membership of the construction and
fire code board of appeals. Requests for hearings must be scheduled at least
ten (10) days prior to such a hearing.
   K.   If a party of an appeal intends to submit evidence, or a legal
argument, outside of the expertise of the construction and fire code board of
appeals, said party shall so inform the secretary of the construction and fire
code board of appeals in writing at the time of the filing of the appeal.
Failure to provide such information shall be the cause for the prohibition of
the presentation of such evidence or argument.
   L.   The decision of the construction and fire code board of appeals on an
appeal shall be final.
   M.   A decision shall require a majority vote of those members of the
construction and fire code board of appeals present, provided, however, that
there must be a quorum of at least three (3) members of said construction and
fire code board of appeals prior to transacting any business. A notice of
appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $250.00.
Section R113.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R113.2 Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a
notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of code, or
violation of permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code.
Such issuance shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
   R113.2.1 Service. A notice of violation pursuant to this code shall be
served upon owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the
condition or violation, either by the personal service, mail or by delivering
the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the
premises. For unattended or abandon locations, a copy of such notice shall be
posted on the premises in a conspicuous location at or near the entrance to
such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by US mail to the
last known address of the owner, occupant, or both.
   Additionally, posting of the property with a statement providing the
conditions under which work will be permitted to resume.
Section 114 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   114.2.1 Service. A notice of violation pursuant to this code shall be served
upon owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition
or violation, either by the personal service, mail or by delivering the same
to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For
unattended or abandon locations, a copy of such notice shall be posted on the
premises in a conspicuous location at or near the entrance to such premises and
the notice of violation shall be mailed by U.S. mail to the last known address
of the owner, occupant, or both.
Section 115.2 is amended to read as follows:
   115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the
person doing the work, or posted on the property. Upon issuance of a stop work
order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state
the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be
permitted to resume.
Section 202 is amended by the addition of the following definitions, to appear
in alphabetical order:
   Bedroom (Sleeping Room). Means any habitable room with no less than seventy
(70) square feet of floor area and no dimension less than seven (7) feet in a
dwelling unit other than bathroom(s), kitchen, living, and dining room. Unless
specifically designed to exclude its use as a bedroom (e.g., enlarged entry
ways without doors, no windows open to the exterior, etc.), any den, study, or
other room meeting the above definition of a bedroom shall be considered a
bedroom for the purpose of meeting the standards of the UDC.
   Building Height. Refer to Building Height definition established in Title 7
of this Code.
   Kitchen. Means any part of a room or dwelling unit that can be used for the
preparation of food that includes one (1) or more of the following: a
refrigerator, cooking device, and sink. The following do not constitute a
kitchen under this definition: (1) a wet bar; or (2) an ancillary refrigerator
that is used solely to store food that is prepared in the kitchen of a dwelling
unit.
   Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two three
or more attached units in which each unit resides on its own property/parcel
and each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on
not less than two sides.
   Unusable Crawlspaces. Is the area under the first story floor system which
has less than five feet (5') of head room and an unfinished floor.
   Utility Space (Room). Is a room designed or used to house general
maintenance equipment.
Section 311.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   311.2.1 Group S-1, Mini Storage. Buildings used for mini storage shall be
compartmentalized by not less than one hour fire resistive construction at each
floor/ceiling and at each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
Section 414.1.3 is amended by the addition of the language “and fire official”
following each occurrence of the term “building official.”
Section 718.2.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
   718.2.5.1 Factory-built chimneys and fireplaces. Factory-built chimneys and
fireplaces shall be fire blocked in accordance with manufacturer’s
specifications and UL 103 and UL 127.
   Factory-built chimneys shall be effectively fire blocked within such
enclosure at each floor-ceiling level and at the roof. The vertical distance
between fire blocking shall not exceed 10 feet.
Section 901.1 is amended by the addition of the following definition, to appear
in alphabetical order as follows:
   Fire Department. The chief officer of East Grand, Granby, Grand fire
protection district, Grand Lake, Hot Sulphur Springs and Kremmling fire
protection districts, or the chief officer’s authorized representative.
Section 901.2 is amended to read as follows:
   901.2 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall specify where fire
protection systems are required and shall apply to the design, installation,
and operation of fire protection systems. When the requirements of this code
and the adopted fire code are in conflict the more restrictive shall apply.
Section 901.5 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   901.5.1 Special Inspector Required. All fire protection systems required by
this code shall be inspected and approved by a special inspector. The special
inspector shall be an authorized representative of the fire department or
another qualified individual with prior approval of the building official.
Approvals of special inspectors and inspections, approvals and reports by
special inspectors shall be in accordance with Chapter 17 of this code.
Section 901.6 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   901.3.1 Key Box. Where a supervisory station is required by this section and
where access to or within a structure or area is restricted because of secured
openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or fire-fighting
purposes as determined by the fire chief, an approved rapid entry key lock box
shall be installed.
   901.6.4.1 Devices. Key lock boxes shall be Underwriters Laboratories
certified and approved by the fire chief.
   901.6.3.2 Location. The key lock box shall be located at or near the main
entrance to the building, mounted at a height of six (6) feet above final grade
at a location approved by the fire chief.
   901.6.3.4 Key Box Contents. The key box shall contain labeled keys to
provide access into the building.
Section 903.2.8 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire
area.
   Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not required in existing non-
sprinkled buildings, two stories or less, where a change of occupancy/
alteration creates no more than two dwelling units, provided that a manual and
automatic fire alarm system is installed in accordance with NFPA 72 throughout
the building and the residential occupancies are separated from other
occupancies per Section 508.4.
Section 1102.1 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   1102.1 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to
be accessible in accordance with this code and ICC ANSI A117.7, most current
edition, and C.R.S. § 9-5-101, et seq., as amended.
Section 1208.2 is amended to read as follows:
   1208.2 Minimum Ceiling Heights. Occupiable spaces, habitable spaces, and
corridors and unfinished basements shall have a ceiling height of not less than
seven (7) feet, 6 inches (2286 mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens, storage
rooms and laundry rooms shall be permitted to have a ceiling height of not less
than seven (7) feet (2134 mm).
   Exceptions:
      1.   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than four (4) feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six (6)
inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
      2.   If any room in a building has a sloped ceiling, the prescribed
ceiling height for the room is required in one-half the area thereof. Any
portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet (1524 mm) from the
finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not be included in any computation
of the minimum area thereof.
      3.   Mezzanines constructed in accordance with section 505.1.
      4.   Corridors contained within a dwelling unit or sleeping unit in a
Group R occupancy shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet
(2134 mm).
Section 1503.5 is amended by the addition of the following paragraph:
   On all metal roofs, all vent pipes or stacks shall terminate within three
(3) feet from the ridge or be equipped with a snow splitter/cricket to prevent
damage to vent pipe or stack.
Section 1503 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   1503.6 Snow-Shed Barriers. All roofs shall be designed to prevent
accumulation of snow from shedding onto exterior balconies, decks, pedestrian
and vehicular exits from buildings, stairways, sidewalks, streets, alleys,
areas directly above or in front of gas utility or electric utility meters, or
adjacent properties.
   Exception: Mechanical barriers installed to prevent snow shedding from the
roof which are secured to the roof framing members or to solid blocking secured
to framing members or in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions.
   1503.7 Valley Outlets. Each roof valley shall have access to an electrical
receptacle installed according to the electrical code.
Section 1507.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 1507.1.1 Underlayment. An ice barrier that consists of an approved
self- adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment on all sloped roofs. Roof(s) under 4:12 pitch shall have double
underlayment. Base layer to have total coverage of self-adhering polymer
modified bitumen sheet one hundred (100) percent of roof surface. The second
layer shall also be of self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet from eaves
to a point six (6) feet inside the exterior wall line of building, with the
remainder of roof may be synthetic or felt underlayment.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
Section 1507.2.8.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   1507.2.8.2.1 Ice Barrier. An ice barrier that consists of an approved self-
adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment on all sloped roofs. This ice dam protection underlayment shall be
installed from the eaves to a point six (6) feet inside the exterior wall line
of the building and twenty-four (24) inches from the center line of all
valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on all habitable structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   1507.2.8.2.2 Snow-Shed Barriers. Roofs shall be designed to prevent
accumulations of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or
electric utility meters.
Section 1507.2.8.3 is amended to read as follows:
   1507.2.8.3 Drip Edge. A drip edge shall be provided at eave and rake edges
of all pitched roofs. Adjacent segments of the drip edge shall be lapped not
less than one (1) inch (25.4 mm). The vertical leg of the drip edge shall be
not less than one (1) inch (25.4 mm) in width and shall extend below sheathing
and facia juncture no less than one-fourth (¼) inch. The drip edge shall also
extend shall extend back on the roof deck not less than two (2) inches (51 mm).
All shingle material extending past roof edge must be supported by a drip edge.
Underlayment shall be installed over the drip edges along eaves. Drip edges
shall be mechanically fastened at intervals not greater than eighteen (18)
inches (457 mm) on center.
Section 1507.4 is amended to read as follows:
   1507.4 Metal roof panels. The installation of metal roof panels shall comply
with the provisions of this section. Roofs with metal roof shingles or metal
roof panels shall be designed to prevent accumulations of snow from shedding
onto pedestrian and vehicular exits from buildings and on to sidewalks, streets
and alley ways. Mechanical barriers installed to prevent snow shedding from the
roof shall be secured to roof framing members or to solid blocking secured to
framing members or in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions. Individual devices installed in a group of devices to create a
barrier to prevent snow shedding shall be installed in at least two rows with
the first row no more than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the roof or
eave. The rows shall be parallel with the exterior wall line and the devices in
each row shall be staggered for a spacing of no more than twenty-four (24)
inches on center measured parallel with the exterior wall line. Continuous snow
barriers shall be secured to roof framing at no more than forty-eight (48)
inches on center. Continuous barriers shall be installed parallel with the
exterior wall line with a first row being no more than twenty-four (24) inches
from the edge of the roof or eave.
Section 1507.5 is amended to read as follows:
   1507.5 Metal roof shingles. The installation of metal roof shingles shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
   Roofs with metal roof shingles or metal roof panels shall be designed so as
to prevent accumulations of snow from shedding onto pedestrian and vehicular
exits from buildings and on to sidewalks, streets and alley ways. Mechanical
barriers installed to prevent snow shedding from the roof shall be secured to
roof framing members or to solid blocking secured to framing members or in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Individual
devices installed in a group of devices to create a barrier to prevent snow
shedding shall be installed in at least two (2) rows with the first row no more
than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the roof or eave. The rows shall
be parallel with the exterior wall line and the devices in each row shall be
staggered for a spacing of no more than twenty-four (24) inches on center
measured parallel with the exterior wall line. Continuous snow barriers shall
be secured to roof framing at no more than forty-eight (48) inches on center.
Continuous barriers shall be installed parallel with the exterior wall line
with a first row being no more than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of
the roof or eave.
Section 1507.5.4 is amended to read as follows.
   1507.5.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water, an ice barrier that consists of at
least two layers of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering
polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal underlayment and
extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches
(610 mm) 6 feet inside the exterior wall line of the building and 24 inches
from the center line of all valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on all
habitable structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   1507.5.4.1 Snow shed barriers. Roofs shall be designed to prevent
accumulation of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric
utility meters.
Section 1507.6.4 is amended to read as follows.
   1507.6.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water, an ice barrier that consists of at
least two layers of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering
polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal underlayment and
extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 6 feet
inside the exterior wall line of the building and 24 inches from the center
line of all valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on all habitable
structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   1507.6.4.1 Snow shed barriers. Roof shall be designed to prevent
accumulation of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric
utility meters.
Section 1507.7.4 is amended by adding a sentence and subsection as follows.
   1507.7.4 Ice barrier. In areas where the average daily temperature in
January is 25° (- 4) or less there is a possibility of ice forming along the
eaves causing a backup of water, an ice barrier that consists of at least two
layers of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering polymer-modified
bitumen sheet shall extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a
point at least 6 feet inside the exterior wall line of the building and 24
inches from the center line of all valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on
all habitable structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   1507.7.4.1 Snow shed barriers. Roof shall be designed to prevent
accumulation of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric
utility meters.
Section 1507.8.4 is amended by adding a sentence and subsection to read as
follows.
   1507.8.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water, an ice barrier that consists of at
least two layers of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering
polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal underlayment and
extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 6 feet
inside the exterior wall line of the building and 24 inches from the center
line of all valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on all habitable
structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   1507.8.4.1 Snow shed barriers. Roof shall be designed to prevent
accumulation of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric
utility meters.
Section 1507.9.4 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   1507.9.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water, an ice barrier that consists of at
least two layers of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering
polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal underlayment and
extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 6 feet
inside the exterior wall line of the building and 24 inches from the center
line of all valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on all habitable
structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   1507.9.4.1 Snow shed barriers. Roof shall be designed to prevent
accumulation of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric
utility meters.
Section 1605.2.2 is repealed in its entirety.
Section 1608 is amended to read as follows:
   1608. General. Design snow loads shall be determined in accordance with
Chapter 7 of ASCE7, but the design roof load shall not be less than that
determined by Section 1607 or as established by design by a licensed Colorado
design professional.
Section 1608.1 is amended to read as follows:
   1608.1 General. A licensed Colorado design professional may design the
structure using ground snow loads (pg) complying with the Colorado Design Snow
Loads Report and Map, published by the Structural Engineers Association of
Colorado (date May 6, 2015). The design roof snow load values shall be
determined from Section 1608 of the IBC, including all applicable factors, and
loading and drifting considerations of ASCE 7, Chapter 7.
   Additionally, the changing of roofing materials and roof coverings other
than like materials may require a roof evaluation from a licensed Colorado
design professional.
   https://seacolorado.org/publications/
Section 1609 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   1609.1 Applications. Buildings, structures, and parts thereof shall be
designed to withstand the minimum wind loads prescribed herein. Decreases in
wind loads shall not be made for the effect of shielding by other structures.
   Minimum design wind speed is 105 mph with exposure category determined by
Section 1609.4*
   *The Colorado licensed design professional of record of a project shall
designate exposure based on site-specific conditions, ASCE 7-10 Compatible,
published by the Structural Engineers Association of Colorado (dated 11/18/
2013).
Section 1611.1 is amended by adding the following to read as follows.
   60-minute duration, 100 -year event is 2.00 inches/hour; 0.0207 gpm/square
foot
Section 1612 is amended to read as follows.
   Section 1612 Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas. The Town of Winter Park
has adopted floodplain regulations within Title 6, Chapter 7 of the Municipal
Code.
Section 1613.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   Section 1613.2 Definitions. SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY “B”. **
   **except as noted, seismic design values shall be determined from Section
1613 of the 2021 International Building Code. Site specific design values shall
be determined from the USGS website and established by a licensed Colorado
design professional.
   http://earthquack.usgs.gov/designmaps/us/application.php
Section 1703.1 is amended to read as follows:
   1703.1 Approved Agency. An approved agency shall provide all information as
necessary for the building official to determine that the agency meets the
applicable requirements specified in Sections 1703.1.1 through 1703.1.3. The
fire department or the state of Colorado Division of Fire Safety, Prevention &
Control or their authorized representative shall be an approved agency for
special inspection of fire protection systems required by this code and the
international fire code.
Section 1704 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   1704.6.2 Fire protection systems. Fire protection systems shall have the
design plans approved by a special inspection agency and the systems inspected
and tested by a special inspector for compliance with the requirements of this
code and the international fire code.
   1704.6.3 Qualifications. Special inspectors for fire protection systems
shall have expertise in fire-protection. Special inspectors for fire
suppression systems shall be a certified fire suppression systems inspector by
the State of Colorado Division of Fire Safety.
   Exception: Special inspection by the fire department or the State of
Colorado Division of Fire Safety or their authorized representative of fire
protection systems.
Section 1705 is amended by renumbering two new subsections to read as follows:
   1705.21 Fire Protection Systems. Fire protection systems shall have the
design plans approved by a special inspection agency and the systems inspected
and tested by a special inspector for compliance with the requirements of this
code and the international fire code.
   1705.21.1 Qualifications. Special inspectors for fire protection systems
shall have expertise in fire protection. Special inspectors for fire
suppression systems shall be a certified fire suppression systems inspector by
the state of Colorado Division of Fire Safety, Prevention & Control.
   Exception: Special inspection by the fire department or the state of
Colorado Division of Fire Safety, Prevention & Control, or their authorized
representative of fire protection systems.
Sections 1804.4 and 1804.5 are repealed in their entirety.
Section 1805.1.2.1 is repealed in its entirety.
Section 1807.1 is amended to read as follows:
   1807.1 Foundation Walls. Foundation walls shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with sections 1807.1.1 through 1807.1.6. Foundation walls shall
be supported by footings designed in accordance with section 1808.
Section 1808 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 1808 FOOTING AND FOUNDATIONS
Section 1808.1 is amended to read as follows:
   1808.1 General. Footings and foundations shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with sections 1808.2 through 1808.9. Shallow footings and
foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of section 1809. Deep footings
and foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of section 1810.
   All footings and foundations systems for all occupancies shall be designed
by a licensed Colorado design professional.
Section 1808.2 is amended to read as follows:
   1808.2 Design for capacity and settlement. Footings and foundations shall be
so designed that the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is not exceeded,
and the differential settlement is minimized. Footings and foundations in areas
with expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of
section 1808.6.
Section 1808.3 is amended to read as follows:
   1808.3 Design Loads. Footings and foundations shall be designed for the most
unfavorable effects due to the combinations of loads specified in section
1605.2 or 1605.3. The dead load is permitted to include the weight of footings
and foundations and overlying fill. Reduced live loads, as specified in
Sections 1607.10 and 1607.12 shall be permitted to be used in the design of
foundations.
Section 1809 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 1809 SHALLOW FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATIONS
Section 1809.1 is amended to read as follows:
   1809.1 General. Shallow footings and foundations shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Sections 1809.2 through Section 1809.13.
   All shallow footing and foundation systems for all occupancies shall be
designed by a licensed Colorado design professional.
Section 1809.5 is amended to read as follows:
   1809.5 Frost Protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost,
foundations and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be
protected from frost by one or more of the following methods:
      1.   Extending below the frost line of the locality; 30 inches
      2.   Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or
      3.   Erecting on solid rock.
      4.   Per licensed Colorado design professional
   Exception: Free-standing buildings meeting all of the following conditions
shall not be required to be protected:
      1.   Assigned to Risk Category I, in accordance with Section 1604.5.
      2.   Area of 120 square feet or less for light-frame construction or 120
square feet or less for other than light-frame construction, and pursuant to
Section 105.2.
      3.   Eave height of 10 12eet or less. Shallow foundations shall not bear
on frozen soil.
Section 2301.2 is amended to read as follows:
   2301.2 General Design Requirements. The design of structural elements or
systems, constructed partially or wholly of wood or wood-based products, shall
be in accordance with one of the following methods. The use of load duration
factors for snow load shall not be permitted in any of these design methods.
Section 2303.1.11 is amended to read as follows:
   2303.1.11 Structural Log Members. Stress grading of structural log members
of nonrectangular shape, as typically used in log buildings, shall be in
accordance with ASTM D 3957. Such structural log members shall be identified by
the grade mark of an approved lumber grading or inspection agency. In lieu of a
grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade
issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of
this section shall be permitted.
   In log construction, all structural logs and wall logs shall be graded,
designed, and inspected by a licensed Colorado design professional certifying
to the building division that the logs are of the size, quality, and species of
the design and that they were installed to that design.
Section 2303.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
   2303.4.1 Design. Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with the
provisions of this code and accepted engineering practice as well as designed
by a licensed Colorado design professional. Members are permitted to be joined
by nails, glue, bolts, timber connectors, metal connector plates or other
approved framing devices. The use of load duration factors for snow load or
slope of roof shall not be permitted in any of these design methods.
   2304.2 Size of structural members. Computations to determine the required
sizes of members shall be based on the net dimensions (actual sizes). The use
of load duration factors for snow load or slope of roof shall not be permitted
in any of these computations.
Section 2304.4 is amended to read as follows:
   2304.8 Floor and roof framing. The framing of wood-joisted floors and wood
framed roofs shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in section
2308 unless a specific design is furnished. The use of load duration factors
for snow load or slope of roofs shall not be permitted.
Section 2304.8.2 is amended to read as follows:
   2304.8.2 Structural Roof Sheathing. Structural roof sheathing shall be
designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and the special
provisions in this section.
   Roof sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table 2304.7(1), 2304.7(2),
2304.7(3) or 2304.7(5) shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this
section. Wood structural panel roof sheathing shall be bonded by exterior glue.
   Exception: a minimum of 5/8-inch plywood, particle board or wafer wood shall
be used on roof rafters or roof trusses spaced 24 inches on center in any snow
load area.
Section 2901.1 is amended to read as follows:
   [P] 2901.2 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and the International
Plumbing Code shall govern the erection, installation, alternation, repairs,
relocation, replacement, addition to use or maintenance of plumbing equipment
and systems. Toilet and bathing rooms shall be constructed in accordance with
Section 1210. Plumbing systems and equipment shall be constructed, installed,
and maintained in accordance with the International Plumbing Code..
Section 2901 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   [P] 2901.2 Sanitation at Construction Sites. Toilet facilities shall be
provided for construction workers and such facilities shall be conveniently
located and maintained in a sanitary condition. The facilities shall be
available for use from the start of the project until the certificate of
occupancy is issued.
Section 3001.1 is amended to read as follows:
   3001.1 Scope. This chapter governs the design, construction, installation,
alteration, maintenance, and repair of new and existing installations of
elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, and moving walks, and conveying systems and
their components requiring permits therefor providing procedures for the
inspection and maintenance of such conveyances.
Section 3001 is amended to read as follows:
   Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to install any new elevator, moving
walk, escalator, or dumbwaiters or to make major alterations to any existing
elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or moving walk, as defined in part XII of ASME
A17.1, without first obtaining a permit for such installation from the building
official. Permits shall not be required for maintenance or minor alterations.
   Certificates of Inspection Required. It shall be unlawful to operate any
elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or moving walk without a current certificate of
inspection issued by the building official. Such a certificate shall be issued
upon payment of prescribed fees and the presentation of a valid inspection
report indicating that the conveyance is safe and that the inspections and
tests have been performed in accordance with part X of the ASME A17.1.
Certificates shall not be issued when the conveyance is posted as unsafe
pursuant to section 3010.
   Application for Permits. Application for a permit to install shall be made
on forms provided by the building official, and the permit shall be issued to
an owner upon payment of the permit fees specified in this section.
   Applications for Certificates of Inspection. Application for a certificate
of inspection shall be made by the owner of an elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator
or moving walk. Applications shall be accompanied by an inspection report as
described in Section 3009. Fees for certificates of inspection shall be as
specified in this section.
   Detailed Requirements. For detailed design, construction, and installation
requirements, see chapter 16 and the appropriate requirements of ASME A17.1.
Section 3009 is amended to read as follows:
   3009 General. The owner shall be responsible for safe operation and
maintenance of each elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator and moving walk
installation and shall cause periodic inspections to be made on such
conveyances as required in this section.
   3009.1 Periodic Inspections and Test. Routine and periodic inspections and
tests shall be made as required by part X of ASME A17.1.
   3009.2 Alterations, Repairs and Maintenance. Alternations, repairs, and
maintenance shall be made as required by part XII of ASME A17.1.
   3009.3 Inspection Costs. All costs of such inspections and test shall be
paid by the owner.
   3009.4 Inspection Reports. After each required inspection, a full and
correct report of such inspection shall be filed with the building official.
Section 3010 is amended to read as follows:
   3010 Unsafe Conditions. When an inspection reveals an unsafe condition of an
elevator, moving walk, escalator or dumbwaiter, the inspector shall immediately
file with the owner and the building official a full and true report of such
inspection and such unsafe condition. If the building official finds that an
unsafe condition endangers human life, the building official shall cause it to
be placed on such elevator, escalator or moving walk, in a conspicuous place, a
notice stating conveyance is unsafe. The owner shall see to it that such notice
of unsafe condition is legibly maintained where placed by the building
official. The building official shall also issue an order in writing to the
owner requiring the repairs or alterations to be made to such conveyance that
are necessary to render it safe and may order the operation thereof
discontinued until the repairs or alterations are made or the unsafe conditions
are removed. A posted notice of unsafe conditions shall be removed only by the
building official when satisfied that the unsafe conditions have been
corrected.
Section 3107 is repealed in its entirety.
Section 3109.1 is amended to read as follows:
   3109.1. General. The design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot
tubs shall comply with the requirements of this section and other applicable
sections of this code and per C.R.S. 25-5-801 et seq. Swimming pools shall be
completely enclosed by a fence at least 4 feet (1219.2 mm) in height or a
screen enclosure. Openings in the fence shall not permit the passage of a four-
inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. The fence or screen enclosure shall be equipped
with self-closing and self-latching gates.
   Exception: A swimming pool with a power safety cover or a spa with a safety
cover complying with ASTM F 1346.
Section 3309 is amended to read as follows:
   [F] 3309.1 Where required. All structures under construction, or demolition
shall be provided with not less than one portable fire extinguishers in
accordance with Section 906 and sized for not less than ordinary hazard as
follows and as required by the fire department as required by the fire
department:
      1.   At each stairway on all floor levels where combustible materials
have accumulated.
      2.   In every storage and construction shed.
      3.   Additional portable fire extinguishers shall be provided where
special hazards exist, such as the storage and use of flammable and combustible
liquids.
Section 3311.1 is amended to read as follows:
   [F] 3311.1 Where required.  In buildings required to have standpipes by
Section 905.3.1 and as required by the fire department shall have not less than
one standpipe shall be provided for use during construction. Such standpipes
shall be installed when the progress of construction is not more than 40 feet
(12 192 mm) in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Such standpipe shall be provided with fire department hose connections at
accessible locations adjacent to usable stairs. Such standpipes shall be
extended as construction progresses to within one floor of the highest point of
construction having secured decking or flooring.
Section 3311.2 is amended to read as follows:
   [F] 3311.2 Buildings Being Demolished. Where a building is being demolished
and a standpipe exists within such a building, such standpipe shall be
maintained in an operable condition so as to be available for use by the fire
department. Such standpipe shall be demolished with the building but shall not
be demolished more than one floor below the floor being demolished or as
approved by the fire department.
Section 3311.4 is amended to read as follows:
   3311.4 Water Supply. Water supply for fire protection, either temporary or
permanent shall be made available as soon as combustible material accumulates
or as required by the fire department.
The following appendices are repealed in their entirety:
   Appendix A, B, D, F, G, H, K and M.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 561, Series of 2021; Ord. 612, Series of
2023)
6-1-3: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Residential Code, adopted by
reference in Section 6-1-1 of this chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the residential code for
one- and two- family dwellings of the Town of Winter Park and shall be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
Section R102.7 is amended to read as follows:
   R102.7 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on
the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the International Fire
Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety
and welfare of the occupants and the public.
Section R103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R103.2 Building Official. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.2.
Section R103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   R103.3 Deputies. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.3.
Section R104.8 is amended to read as follows:
   R104.8 Liability. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 104.8.
Section R105.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the
following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction. Retaining walls, regardless of height shall require permit
(s) and be designed by a licensed Colorado design professional.
   Building:
      1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed
120 square feet, and maximum height of 12 feet.
      2.   Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
      4.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18 927 l) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2 to 1.
      5.   Sidewalks and driveways.
      6.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and
similar finish work.
      7.   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm)
deep.
      8.   Swings and other playground equipment.
      9.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
      10.   Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area, that are
not more than 30 inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a
dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.
      11.   Agricultural buildings as defined herein.
      12.   Replacement or repair of nonstructural siding or siding which is
not part of a required fire rated assembly on buildings when the removal of the
siding is performed in accordance with state regulations regarding asbestos and
lead paint, pursuant to other Town regulations for structures classified as
Group R-3 and U Occupancies.
      13.   Gutters, downspouts, and storm windows (unless specified through
design).
Section 901.1 is amended by the addition of the following definition, to appear
in alphabetical order:
   [F] Fire Department. The chief officer of East Grand, Granby, Grand Fire
Protection District, Grand Lake, Hot Sulphur Springs and Kremmling fire
protection districts, or the chief officer’s authorized representative.
Section 105.2.1.1. is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R105.2.1.1. Exemptions. Unless otherwise exempt by this code, separate
plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above
exempted items. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in a manner in violation of
the provisions of this code or any other laws or resolutions of the Town of
Winter Park.
Section R105.8 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R105.8.1. Transfer of permit. A building permit or application may be
transferred from one party to the other upon written request to the building
official, provided there are no changes to the plans and specifications and the
party to which the transfer is intended is in good standing. Additionally, the
party to which the permit is transferred must be licensed/registered (business
license) in the appropriate license/registration category and in good standing.
   R105.8.2. Owner assuming role as contractor. Provided that no change in
ownership has occurred since the permit was issued, the building official may
allow the property owner to assume the role of contractor at any time on an
active building permit provided the building official is in receipt of a
written request from the application holder stating that the applicant is no
longer the contractor of record on the permit application. Additionally, the
letter shall list the permit number, the address of the project and stating
that the original contractor is no longer in the employ of the owner. No change
will be made in the expiration date of the original building permit.
Section R106.1 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R106.1.6 Proof of Water and Sewer. The applicant shall provide documentation
from the water and sanitation district of an approved water and sewer utility
plan which may include paying the required water and sewer tap fees.
   R106.1.7 Emergency Services Impact Fee. A developer requesting approval of a
development activity requiring additional emergency services shall pay the
impact fee to the emergency services provided prior to any issuance of a
building permit by the Town.
   R106.1.8 Single Family and Duplex Development Improvements and Financial
Guarantees. Each building permit application for a new single-family dwelling
shall be accompanied by a signed deposit agreement and a total deposit of
$2,000.00.
   R106.1.9 Public and Private Improvements and Financial Guarantees. Each
building permit application submitted for developments requiring public and
private improvements shall be accompanied by a Town Council approved
subdivision or development improvements agreement (“agreement”) and a letter of
credit or cash deposit in the amount specified in the agreement.
Section R106.3 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R106.3.1.1 Required Approvals. The application and documents for permit
shall be reviewed and approved by the department of engineering and the
department of planning and zoning for compliance with Town ordinances.
   R106.3.1.2 Survey Requirements. An improvement location certificate (ILC)
and a Setback and Elevation Certificate completed by a licensed Colorado
Surveyor shall be required for all new foundations within the Town of Winter
Park. If a variance has been granted for the property that allows for
construction of a foundation within the established setbacks or if a foundation
is located within five feet (5') of the property line, an improvement survey
plat (ISP) shall be required. The ILC/ISP and a Setback & Elevation Certificate
shall be submitted to the Town of Winter Park for review and approval by the
Planning Division prior to beginning of framing.
Section R106.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
   R106.3.3 Phased Approval. The Community Development Director is authorized
to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a
building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building
or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirement of
this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a
building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be
granted.
Section R106 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R106.3.4 Responsibility for preparation of plans and specifications. In
accordance with this section, the building official may require plans,
computations, and specifications to be prepared, designed, and stamped and
signed by an engineer or architect licensed by the State of Colorado in certain
circumstances, including but limited to the following:
      1.   Foundations are constructed on caissons or any other method. The
building official may exempt this provision on additions to existing
residential and accessory structures constructed on spread footings conforming
to the requirements of Chapter 4.
      2.   Roof framing or wall framing is “other than standard or conventional
practices” not conforming to the requirements of Chapter 8 and 9 or site
specific ground snow load exceeds 70 psf or;
      3.   Confirmation of beam sizes and spans, loading, or any structural
element affecting the integrity of the building.
   R106.3.5 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section R106,
deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not
submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the
building official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items
shall have the prior approval of the building official. The licensed Colorado
design professional in responsible charge (if required), shall list the
deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building
official.
   Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the
licensed Colorado design professional in responsible charge (if required), who
shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation
indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that
they have been found to be in conformance with the design of the building or
structure. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design
and submittal documents have been approved by the building official.
Section R108.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, gas, mechanical
and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a, a fee for each permit shall be
paid as required, in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 11 of the Town Code of
Winter Park.
Section R108.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R108.2.1 Plan Review Fee. When submittal documents are required by Section
R105.1, a plan review fee shall be paid. The plan review fees specified in this
section are separate from the permit fees specified in Section 108.2 and are in
addition to the permit fees.
Section 108.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R108.2.2 Expiration of Plan Review. Applications for which no permit is
issued within thirty (30) days following the date of last action of review
without a response or additional information submitted by the applicant shall
expire. Plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the
applicant or be destroyed by the building official. The building official may
extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding thirty
(30) days upon written request by the applicant demonstrating that
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from
being taken. In order to renew action on the application after expiration, the
applicant shall resubmit plans and review fee.
Section R108.4 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R108.4.1 Investigative fee - Work without a permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee may be up to or equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be set forth and
adopted by the Town Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
Section R108.5 is amended to read as follows:
   R108.5 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund
policy. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80
percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued
in accordance with this code. The deposit paid for a permit application is non-
refundable.
   The building official shall be permitted to authorize a refund of not more
than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
   The building official shall be permitted to authorize a refund of not more
than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee when an applicant for a permit
for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled provided
that no examination time has been expended.
   The building official shall not be permitted to authorize a refund of any
fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permit fee not
later than thirty (30) days after the date of fee payment.
Section R108.6 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences work
requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a
fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition
to the required fees. The investigation fee shall be as set forth in Title 1,
Chapter 11 of the Town Code of Winter Park.
   R108.6.1 Investigative fee - Work without a permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued.
The investigation fee may be up to or equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be set forth and
adopted by the Town Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
Section R109.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R109.1 Types of inspections. For on-site construction, from time to time the
building official upon notification from the permit holder shall make or cause
to be made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that portion of
construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or their agent
wherein the same fails to comply with this code.
   Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or
their agent shall have posted an inspection record card in a conspicuous place
on the premises and in a position to allow the building official to make the
required entries conveniently thereon regarding inspection of the work. The
address of the building site must be posted in a conspicuous place readily
visible from the public road. This card shall be maintained in such a position
by the permit holder until all inspections have been made and final approvals
have been granted by the building official.
Section R109.1.1 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R109.1.1.1 Drilled pier inspection. Inspection will be made while the piers
are being drilled. The licensed Colorado engineer of record or the authorized
representative shall be present during the drilling operations and be available
to the inspector during required inspections.
   R109.1.1.2 Lowest floor elevation. The elevation certificate required in
Section 1612.5 shall be submitted when required by the building official or as
required by Title 6 Chapter 7 of the Town of Winter Park Code.
   R109.1.5.2 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not limited to
inspections for: envelope insulation R and U - values, fenestration U- values,
duct system R - values, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. Blower
door testing is not mandatory whereas mechanical ventilation is required.
   Energy efficiency inspections, if required, shall be provided by and at the
owner’s expense to verify compliance with the provisions of this section.
Section R109.1.3 is repealed in its entirety.
Section 109.1.6 is amended by the addition of the following language:
   Additionally, no final inspection shall be made by the Town building
inspector, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless a sales/use
tax audit has either been completed by the sales tax administrator and all
sales/use taxes due have been paid or arrangements therefor made with the
sales/use tax administrator for such audit or the Town manager, or the Town
manager has specifically waived such audit.
Section R109.3 is amended by the addition the following subsection:
   R109.3.1 Inspection record card. Work requiring a building permit shall not
be commenced until the permit holder or his agent shall have posted an
inspection record card in a conspicuous place on the premises and in a position
as to allow the building official to make the required entries conveniently
thereon regarding inspection of the work. The address of the building site must
be posted in a conspicuous place readily visible from the public road. This
card shall be maintained in such a position by the permit holder until all
inspections have been made and final approvals have been granted by the
building official.
Section R109 is amended to read as follows:
   R109.3.2 Reinspections. A reinspection fee, amount per Title 1, Chapter 11
of the Town Code, may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such
portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when
corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be assessed whenever
a reinspection is required as a result of a failure or omission of the
applicant, builder or developer, the inspection record card is not posted or
otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily
available to the inspector, for failing to provide access on the date for which
the inspection is requested or deviating from the approved plans. In instances
where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the
work will be performed until the reinspection fees have been received by the
building department. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-
inspection fees the first time the job is rejected for failure to comply with
the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection.
Section R110.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R110.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or
occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building
or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has
issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation
of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of
this code or other ordinances of the shall not be valid.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from
permits under section R105.2.
      2.   Accessory buildings of structures.
      3.   Group U occupancy and permits not establishing a use or occupancy.
Section R110.1 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R110.1.1 Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address
numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a
position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the property. Numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letter. These
numbers shall contrast and be reflective with their background. Address numbers
shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102mm) high with a minimum stroke width of ½
inch (12.7mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building
address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or
means shall be used to identify the structure, in addition to the numbers on
the structure, shall be mounted at least 36" above grade and not affixed on
vegetation.
Section R110.4 is amended to read as follows:
   R110.4 Temporary Occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work
covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied
safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the
temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.
   The issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or temporary letter of
completion may be granted when all provisions of a permit are not complete,
provided all life safety requirements are met and all fees associated with
permit are paid. Where occupancies are not determined at time of building
permit application, permits issued for no occupancy and a core and shall be
issued a limited letter of completion or a letter of completion.
Section R112 is amended to read as follows:
   R112 Construction and Fire Code Board of Appeals.
   R112.1 Board Established. Pursuant to Section 113, Chapter 1, 2021
International Building Code and Section 108 of International Fire Code, there
is hereby created by the Town Council, a construction and fire code board of
appeals, which board shall be composed of five (5) members who shall determine
the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, and to
provide for reasonable interpretation of the 2021 International Building Code,
2021 International Residential Code, 2021 International Fire Code,
International Plumbing Code most current edition as adopted by the State of
Colorado, 2021 International Mechanical Code, 2021 International Fuel Gas Code,
2021 International Energy Conservation Code and the 2021 International Existing
Building Code.
   R112.2 Membership and Terms.
   A.   The construction and fire code board of appeals shall consist of five
(5) members, three (3) of which are qualified by experience and training to
pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The building official or
fire code official when pertaining to fire code issues shall be an ex officio
member and shall act as secretary of the board. The board shall be appointed,
and their terms of office set by the Town Council which terms shall be of such
length and so arranged that the terms of at least one member will expire each
year.
   B.   Any member of the board may be removed, after public hearing, by the
mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, of malfeasance in office. The mayor
shall file a written statement of reasons for such removal.
   C.   Vacancies occurring otherwise and through the expiration of term shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   R112.3 Organization and Procedures. The construction and fire code board of
appeals shall elect its chairman from among the members appointed by the Town
Council and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The
term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The
board will hold meetings when called by the chairman or building/fire code
official. The construction and fire code board of appeals shall transact
business according to the rules and regulations adopted herein and shall make
findings and determinations on each case considered. Such findings and
determinations shall become a public record and shall be kept in the office of
the Town Clerk.
   R112.4 Rules and Regulations.
   The following rules and regulations are adopted for purposes of transacting
the business of the construction and fire code board of appeals:
      A.   The construction and fire code board of appeals shall meet at the
call of the chairman or when requested by the building or fire code official.
      B.   A chairman of the construction and fire code board of appeals shall
be elected by a majority of the entire regular membership at the first meeting
of each calendar year, to serve for a term of one year. A vice chairman shall
be elected in the same manner at the same time for a term of one year.
      C.   The chairman of the construction and fire code board of appeals
shall preside at all meetings, shall conduct all hearings, and exercise and
perform such other powers and duties as may be from time to time assigned to
him by the construction and fire code board of appeals, or prescribed by the
rules and regulations herein. In presiding at meetings and hearings, the
chairman shall rule on procedure and on order of presentation.
      D.   The construction and fire code board of appeals shall be the judge
of the qualifications of persons appearing as expert witnesses and shall be
empowered to refuse to receive the testimony of any purported expert not so
qualified.
      E.   In the absence or the disability of the chairman, the vice chairman
shall perform all the duties of the chairman, and when so acting, shall have
all the powers of, and be subject to all restrictions upon the chairman.
      F.   In the absence of both the chairman and the vice chairman, a
chairman pro tempore shall be elected, among those regular members present, by
a majority vote of all the members present.
      G.   Should any member have knowledge of any fact which may constitute a
conflict of interest in his consideration of any appeal, he shall forthwith
notify the building official or the fire code official of said facts.
      H.   The secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, minutes of the
proceedings of the construction and fire code board of appeals, and shall
prepare an agenda for each meeting, which shall be furnished to members prior
to the actual hour of the meeting. The secretary shall, in addition, be
custodian of the records of the construction and fire code board of appeals and
shall, upon the filing of an appeal, furnish each regular member with a copy of
the letter of appeal.
      I.   Appeals from decisions of the building official or applicable
enforcement officer shall be in writing, shall be directed to a specific
decision of the building official or applicable enforcement officer, and
consideration of said appeal by the construction and fire code board of appeals
shall be limited to said specific decision. (Ord. 140, Series of 1986.
      J.   Appeals will be heard at special meetings called pursuant to the
presiding officer or by a majority of the membership of the construction and
fire code board of appeals. Requests for hearings must be scheduled at least
ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
      K.   If a party of an appeal intends to submit evidence, or a legal
argument, outside of the expertise of the construction and fire code board of
appeals, said party shall so inform the secretary of the construction and fire
code board of appeals in writing at the time of the filing of the appeal.
Failure to provide such information shall be cause for the prohibition of the
presentation of such evidence or argument.
      L.   The decision of the construction and fire code board of appeals on
an appeal shall be final.
      M.   A decision shall require a majority vote of those members of the
construction and fire code board of appeals present, provided, however, that
there must be a quorum of at least three (3) members of said construction and
fire code board of appeals prior to transacting any business.
   A notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $250.00. Section R113.2
is amended to read as follows:
   R113.2 Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a
notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of code, or
violation of permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code.
Such issuance shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
   R113.2.1 Service. A notice of violation pursuant to this code shall be
served upon owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the
condition or violation, either by the personal service, mail or by delivering
the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the
premises. For unattended or abandon locations, a copy of such notice shall be
posted on the premises in a conspicuous location at or near the entrance to
such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by US mail to the
last known address of the owner, occupant, or both.
Section R114.2 is amended to add the following sentence:
   Additionally, posting of the property with a statement providing the
conditions under which work will be permitted to resume.
Section R202 is amended by adding the following definitions to appear in
alphabetical order:
   Accessory Dwelling Unit. An attached or detached dwelling unit subordinate
to the primary unit which may include a caretaker unit or an affordable housing
unit. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be subdivided and/or subsequently
sold as fee simple ownership. It shall remain as part of the property where the
primary unit is located.
   Agricultural Building. A structure located on real property classified as
agriculture by the Grand County assessor that is designed, constructed, and
used to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock, or other
horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation
or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated, or
packaged, nor shall it be a place used by the public.
   (Bedroom), Sleeping Room. A room which is designed as a sleeping room, a
loft, a mezzanine in group R occupancies or a room or area that can be used as
a sleeping room and contains a closet.
   Factory Built Building. A building which is assembled in a facility that has
been approved by the state of Colorado, built to the building, plumbing and
mechanical codes as adopted by the Colorado division of housing, with the work
performed at the facility inspected by and bearing the Colorado division of
housing identification label.
   Fire Department. The chief officer of East Grand, Granby, Grand Fire
Protection District, Grand Lake, Hot Sulphur Springs, and Kremmling Fire
Protection Districts, or the chief officer’s authorized representative.
   Height, Building. Refer to Building Height definition established in Title 7
of the Winter Park Town Code.
   Kitchen. Is a room or area in a residential unit that is designed to be used
primarily for the preparation of food.
   Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two three
or more attached units in which each unit resides on its own property and each
unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on not less
than two sides.
   Utility Space (Room). Is a room designed or used to house heating and
general maintenance equipment.
Table R301.2 (1) is amended to read as follows:
   Table R301.2 (1)
   Roof Snow Load
      A licensed Colorado design professional may design the structure using
ground snow loads (pg) complying with the Colorado Design Snow Loads Report and
Map, published by the Structural Engineers Association of Colorado (date May 6,
2015). The design roof snow load values shall be determined from Section 1608
of the IBC, including all applicable factors, and loading and drifting
considerations of ASCE 7, Chapter 7.
      Additionally, the changing of roofing materials and roof covering other
than like materials may require a roof evaluation from a licensed Colorado
engineer.
   https://seacolorado.org/publications/
   WIND SPEED IS ON HUNDRED AND FIVE (105) mph with exposure category
determined by Section 1609.4
   SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY IS “B”***
   WEATHERING PROBABILITY FOR CONCRETE IS SEVERE
   FROST LINE DEPTH IS THIRTY INCHES (30" (762 mm) below finished grade))
TERMITE INFESTATION PROBABILITY NONE TO SLIGHT
   DECAY PROBABILITY IS NONE TO SLIGHT
   WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURE IS -16 DEGREES FAHRENHEIT,
   MEAN AVE. TEMP. 40 F
   FLOOD HAZARDS, SEE FLOOD INSURANCE REFERENCE MAP
   ***except as noted, seismic design values shall be determined from Section
1613 of the 2015 International Building Code. Site specific design values shall
be determined from the USGS website.
   http://earthquack.usgs.gov/designmaps/us/application.php
Table R301.5 is amended to read as follows:
   Table R301.5
 
Balconies (exterior) and deckse  60
Sleeping rooms                   40
 
      Footnote e. Uncovered decks and balconies shall be designed to a
uniformly distributed live load of 60 lbs. per square foot minimum or the
design snow load whichever is greater.
Section R302.3 is amended to read as follows:
   R302.3 Two-Family Dwellings (Duplex). Dwelling units in two-family dwellings
(located on the same legal description) shall be separated from each other by
wall and/or floor assemblies having not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance
rating when tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 or Section 703.2.2
of the International Building Code. Such separation shall be provided
regardless of whether a lot line exists between the two dwelling units or not.
Fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be
tight against the exterior wall(s) and/or common wall(s), and wall assemblies
shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces when the
ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) type X gypsum board
and an attic draft stop constructed as specified in section R302.12.1 is
provided above and along the wall assembly separating the dwellings. The
structural framing supporting the ceiling shall also be protected by not less
than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board or equivalent.
Section R302.13 is amended by the addition of the following sentence:
   Fire protection of floors to be required for all crawlspaces greater than 5'
(feet) tall and for any application of fuel fire appliances or storage areas.
Section R303.4 is amended to read as follows:
   R303.4 Mechanical ventilation. Buildings and dwelling units complying with
section N1102.4.1 shall be provided with mechanical ventilation in accordance
with Section M1505, or with other approved means of ventilation. Mechanical
ventilation shall be required due to the air sealing nature of current standard
building practices.
   Exception:
      This requirement is waived if a blower door test is performed and shows
that the home has more than 5 Air Changes per Hour (ACH).
Section R305.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R305.1 Minimum Height. Habitable space, hallways, bathrooms, toilet rooms,
laundry rooms and portions of unfinished basements containing these spaces
shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm). The required
height shall be measured from the finished floor to the lowest projection from
the ceiling.
   Exceptions:
      1     For rooms with sloped ceilings, at least 50 percent of the required
floor area of the room must have a ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm)
and no portion of the required floor area may have a ceiling height of less
than 5 feet (1524 mm).
      2.   Bathrooms shall have a minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches
(2032 mm) at the center of the front clearance area for fixtures as shown in
figure R307.1. The ceiling height above fixtures shall be such that the fixture
is capable of being used for its intended purpose. A shower or tub equipped
with a showerhead shall have a minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches (2032
mm) above a minimum area 30 inches (762 mm) by 30 inches (762 mm) at the
showerhead.
Section R305.1.1 is repealed in its entirety.
Section R306 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R306.5 Sanitation at Construction Sites. Toilet facilities shall be provided
for construction workers and such facilities shall be conveniently located and
maintained in a sanitary condition. The facilities shall be available from the
time the first work is started until the letter of occupancy or certificate of
occupancy is issued.
Section R309.3 is repealed in its entirety.
Section R310.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Required. Basements, habitable attics and
every sleeping room, loft, mezzanine in group R occupancies, or a room or area
that can be used as a sleeping room and contains a closet shall have at least
one operable emergency escape and rescue opening. Where basements contain one
or more sleeping rooms, emergency egress and rescue openings shall be required
in each sleeping room. Where emergency escape and rescue openings are provided,
they shall have a sill height of not more than 44 inches (1118 mm) above the
floor. Where a door opening having a threshold below the adjacent ground
elevation serves as an emergency escape and rescue opening and is provided with
a bulkhead enclosure, the bulkhead enclosure shall comply with section R310.3.
The net clear opening dimensions required by this section shall be obtained by
the normal operation of the emergency escape and rescue opening from the
inside. Emergency escape and rescue openings with a finished sill height below
the adjacent ground elevation shall be provided with a window well in
accordance with section R310.2. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall open
directly into a public way, or to a yard or court that opens to a public way.
Window wells with a vertical depth greater than 44 inches (118 mm) shall be
equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in
the fully open position. If the window well is stepped and has a horizontal
dimension less than 36 inches, a ladder is required out of that said level
complying with requirements.
Section R313.2 and R313.2.1 are repealed in their entirety.
Section R315.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R315.1 General. Carbon monoxide alarms and detectors shall be installed and
comply with Section R315 and Title 38 of the Colorado Revised Statutes.
Section R320.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R320.1 Scope. Where four or more dwelling units or sleeping units are
constructed in a single structure or constructed as part of a planned
development containing a total of seven or more units, regardless of whether
such units are separated by fire-resistive rated assemblies and or property
lines, the applicable provisions of the Colorado Revised Statutes, federal
regulations, and the provisions of Chapter 11 of the adopted International
Building Code for Group R-2 shall apply.
   Exception: Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms are
not required to be accessible.
Section 322 is repealed in its entirety.
Section R327.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R326.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code as well as the requirements of this section and other
applicable sections of this code and per C.R.S. 25-5-801 et seq. Swimming pools
shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least 4 feet (1290 mm) in height or
a screen enclosure. Openings in the fence shall not permit the passage of a
four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
   The fence or screen enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-
latching gates.
   Exception: A swimming pool with a power safety cover or a spa with a safety
cover complying with ASTM F1346.
Section R403.1 is amended to read as follows:
   R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or
fully grouted masonry or concrete footings, crushed stone footings, wood
foundations, or other approved structural systems which shall be of sufficient
design to accommodate all loads according to section R301 and to transmit the
resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as determined from the
character of the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils
or engineered fill. Concrete footing shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of section R403 or in accordance with ACI 332.
   Exception: Unless designed and stamped by a licensed Colorado engineer.
Section R408.7 is repealed in its entirety.
Section R502.11 is amended to read as follows:
   R502.11.1 Design. Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with approved
engineering practice. The design and manufacture of metal plate connected wood
trusses shall comply with ANSI/TPI 1. The design drawings shall be prepared by
a registered professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in
which the project is to be constructed in accordance with section R106.1. The
use of load duration factors for snow load or slope of roof shall be
prohibited.
Section R602.1.4 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R602.1.4 Structural Log Members. Stress grading of structural log members of
nonrectangular shape, as typically used in log buildings, shall be in
accordance with ASTM D 3957. Such structural log members shall be identified by
the grade mark of an approved lumber grading or inspection agency. In lieu of a
grade on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade
issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of
this section shall be permitted.
   In log construction, all structural logs and wall logs shall be graded,
designed, and inspected by a licensed Colorado design professional certifying
to the building division that the logs are of the size, quality, and species of
the design and that they were installed to that design.
Section R602.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R602.2 Grade. Studs shall be a minimum no. 3, standard or stud grade lumber.
   Exception:
      1.   Bearing studs not supporting floors and nonbearing studs may be
utility grade lumber, provided the studs are spaced in accordance with table
R602.3(5).
      2.   In single family dwellings of log construction, wall logs need not
be graded.
      3.   In log construction, all structural logs and wall logs shall be
graded, designed, and inspected by a licensed Colorado design professional
certifying to the building division that the logs are of the size, quality, and
species of the design and that they were installed to that design.
Section R602.3 is amended to read as follows:
   R602.3 Design and Construction. Exterior walls of wood-frame construction
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and Figures R602.3(1) and R602.3(2) or in accordance with AF&PA’s NDS.
The use of load duration factors for snow load shall be prohibited. Components
of exterior walls shall be fastened in accordance with tables R602.3(1) through
R602.3(4). Structural wall sheathing shall be fastened directly to structural
framing members. Exterior wall coverings shall be capable of resisting the wind
pressures listed in table R301.2(2) adjusted for height and exposure using
table R301.2(3). Wood structural panel sheathing used for exterior walls shall
conform to the requirements of table R602.3(3).
   Studs shall be continuous from support at the sole plate to a support at the
top plate to resist loads perpendicular to the wall. The support shall be a
foundation of floor, ceiling or roof diaphragm or shall be designed in
accordance with accepted engineering practice.
   Exception: Jack studs, trimmer studs, and cripple studs at openings in wall
that comply with Table R502.5(1) and R502.5(2).
Section R802.2 is amended to read as follows:
   R802.2 Design and Construction. The framing details required in section R802
apply to roofs having a minimum slope of three units vertical in 12 units
horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater. Roof-ceilings shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and figures
R606.11 (1), R606.11 (2) and R606.11 (3) or in accordance with AFPA/NDS. The
use of load duration factors for snow load shall be prohibited. Components of
roof-ceilings shall be fastened in accordance with table R602.3 (1).
Section R802.10 is amended to read as follows:
   R802.10.2 Design. Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with accepted
engineering practice. The design and manufacture of metal-plate-connected wood
trusses shall comply with ANSI/TPI 1. The truss design drawings shall be
prepared by a registered professional where required by the statutes of the
jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed in accordance with
section R106.1. The use of load duration factors for snow load or slope of roof
shall be prohibited.
Section R803.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R803.2.1.3 Wood Structural Panel Sheathing Thickness. A minimum of 5/8 inch
plywood, particle board or wafer wood shall be used on roof rafters or roof
trusses spaced 24 inches on center in any snow load area. Wood structural panel
roof sheathing shall be bonded by exterior glue.
Section 901.1 is amended by the addition of the following definition:
   F] Fire Department. The chief officer of East Grand, Granby, Grand Fire
Protection District, Grand Lake, Hot Sulphur Springs and Kremmling Fire
Protection Districts, or the chief officer’s authorized representative.
Section R905 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   R905.1.2 Ice Barrier. An ice barrier that consists of an approved self-
adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment on all sloped roofs. Roof(s) under 4:12 pitch shall have double
underlayment. Base layer to have total coverage of self-adhering polymer
modified bitumen sheet 100 percent of roof surface. Second layer shall also be
of self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet from eaves to a point 6 feet
inside the exterior wall line of building, with the remainder of roof may be
synthetic or felt underlayment.
   This ice dam protection underlayment shall be installed from the eaves to a
point 6 feet inside the exterior wall line of the building and 24 inches from
the center line of all valleys, fully adhered to the substrate on all habitable
structures.
   Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain no conditioned floor
area.
   R905.1.3 Snow-Shed Barriers. Roofs shall be designed to prevent
accumulations of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or
electric utility meters.
Section R905.4 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R905.4.7 Mechanical Barriers. Mechanical barriers installed to prevent snow
shedding from the roof shall be secured to roof framing members or to solid
blocking secured to framing members or in accordance with the manufacturer’s
installation instructions.
   Individual devices installed in a group of devices to create a barrier to
prevent snow shedding shall be installed in at least two rows with the first
row no more than 24 inches from the edge of the roof or eave. The rows shall be
parallel with the exterior wall line and the devices in each row shall be
staggered for a spacing of no more than 24 inches on center measured parallel
with the exterior wall line.
   Continuous snow barriers shall be secured to roof framing at no more than 48
inches on center. Continuous barriers shall be installed parallel with the
exterior wall line with a first row being and no more than 24 inches from the
edge of the roof or eave.
Section R905.10 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R905.10.5.1 Mechanical Barriers for Metal Roof Shingles and Metal Roof
Panels. Roofs with metal roof shingles or metal roof panels shall be designed
so as to prevent accumulations of snow from shedding onto pedestrian and
vehicular exits from buildings and on to sidewalks, streets, and alley ways.
   Mechanical barriers installed to prevent snow shedding from the roof shall
be secured to roof framing members or to solid blocking secured to framing
members or in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   Individual devices installed in a group of devices to create a barrier to
prevent snow shedding shall be installed in at least two rows with the first
row no more than 24 inches from the edge of the roof or eave. The rows shall be
parallel with the exterior wall line and the devices in each row shall be
staggered for a spacing of no more than 24 inches on center measured parallel
with the exterior wall line.
   Continuous snow barriers shall be secured to roof framing at no more than 48
inches on center. Continuous barriers shall be installed parallel with the
exterior wall line with a first row being and no more than 24 inches from the
edge of the roof or eave.
Section R907.3 is amended to read as follows:
   R907.3 Recovering Versus Replacement. New roof coverings shall not be
installed without first removing all existing layers of roof coverings where
any of the following conditions exist:
      1.   Where the existing roof or roof covering is water-soaked or has
deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or roof covering is not
adequate as a base for additional roofing.
      2.   Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement
or asbestos- cement tile.
      3.   Where the existing roof has two or more than one application of any
type of roof covering.
Section R1001.1.1 is repealed in its entirety and moved to Title 7, Zoning Code
of the Town of Winter Park.
Section R1004.4 is amended to read as follows:
   R1004.4 Unvented Gas Log Heaters. Installation of unvented gas log heaters
is prohibited.
Section R1005 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   R1005.9 Factory-built chimneys. Factory-built chimneys shall be effectively
fire blocked within such enclosure at each floor-ceiling level and at the roof.
The vertical distance between adjacent fire blocking shall not exceed 10 feet.
Section M1410.1 is amended by the addition of the following sentence:
   Un-vented gas appliance(s) and room heaters are prohibited, except for
listed domestic gas range installations.
Section M1414 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   M1414.1 General. Fireplace stoves shall be listed, labeled, and installed in
accordance with the terms of the listing. Fireplace stoves shall be tested in
accordance with UL737. Detached one- and two-family dwellings may have no more
than one solid fuel burning device per property. Condominiums and apartment
houses may have one solid fuel burning device located in a lobby or other main
common area. Factory- built fireplaces and stoves shall meet E.P.A. phase II or
Colorado phase III air quality requirements.
Section G2404.7 is repealed in its entirety. Section G2406.2 is amended to read
as follows:
   G2406.2 (303.3) Prohibited Locations. Appliances shall not be located in
sleeping rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage closets or surgical rooms, or
in a space that opens only into such rooms or spaces, except where the
installation complies with one of the following:
      1.   The appliance is a direct-vent appliance installed in accordance
with the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.
      2.   Vented room heaters, wall furnaces, vented decorative appliances,
vented gas fireplaces, vented gas fireplace heaters and decorative appliances
for installation in vented solid fuel-burning fireplaces are installed in rooms
that meet the required volume criteria of section G2407.5.
      3.   The appliance is installed in a room or space that opens only into a
bedroom or bathroom, and such room or space is used for no other purpose and is
provided with a solid weather-stripped door equipped with an approved self-
closing device. All combustion air shall be taken directly from the outdoors in
accordance with section G2407.6.
      4.   A clothes dryer is installed in a residential bathroom or toilet
room having a permanent opening with an area of not less than 100 square inches
(0.06 sq. meters) that communicates with space outside of a sleeping room,
bathroom, toilet room or storage closet.
Section G2417.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
   G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test Pressure. The test pressure to be used shall not be
less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not
less than 3 10 psig, irrespective of design pressure. Where the test pressure
exceeds 125 psi (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value
that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the
specified minimum yield strength of the pipe.
Section G2425.8 is amended to read as follows:
   G2425.8 (501.8) Appliance Not Required to Be Vented. The following
appliances shall not be required to be vented provided appliance is listed and
tested and installed per manufacturers specifications:
      1.   Ranges.
      2.   Built-in domestic cooking units listed and marked for optional
venting.
      3.   Hot plates and laundry stoves.
      4.   Type 1 clothes dryers (type 1 clothes dryers shall be exhausted in
accordance with the requirements of section G2439).
      5.   Refrigerators.
      6.   Counter appliances.
      
Section G2433 (603.1) is amended to read as follows:
   G2433.1 (603.1) General. Installation of log lighters is prohibited.
Section G2445 is amended to read as follows:
   G2445.1 (621.1) Prohibited Installation. Installation of unvented room
heaters is prohibited.
Section P2501.1 is amended to read as follows:
   P2501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall establish the general
administrative requirements applicable to plumbing systems and inspection
requirements of this code. The intent of this code is to meet or exceed the
requirements of the state of Colorado plumbing code. When technical
requirements, specifications, or standards in the Colorado plumbing code
conflict with this code, the more restrictive shall apply.
Section P2603.6.1 is amended to read as follows:
   P2603.6.1 Sewer Depth. shall be as required by the local water and
sanitation district having jurisdiction.
Section 2904 is repealed in its entirety.
Section P3103.1 is amended to read as follows:
   P3103.1 Roof Extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be
terminated at 12 inches above the roof except that where a roof is to be used
for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extension shall be run
at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof and within twenty-four inches (24") of
the peak of the roof.
The following appendices are repealed in their entirety:
   Appendix AE, AF, AH, AI, AM, AO & AV.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 561, Series of 2021; Ord. 612, Series of
2023)
6-1-4: PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Plumbing Code, adopted by
reference in Section 6-1-1 of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the 2021 International
Plumbing Code of the Town of Winter Park, hereinafter referred to as this code.
Section 101.3 is amended to read as follows:
   101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation and maintenance or use of plumbing equipment and systems.
The intent of this code is to meet or exceed the requirements of the state of
Colorado plumbing code. When technical requirements, specifications, or
standards in the Colorado plumbing code conflict with this code, the more
restrictive shall apply. Additionally, the intent is when the State of Colorado
adopts the most current edition of the International Plumbing Code, the Town of
Winter Park concurrently adopts the most current edition.
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Building Official. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.2.
Section 103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   103.3 Deputies. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.3.
Section 103.4 is amended to read as follows:
   103.4 Liability. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 104.8.
Section 106.5.1 shall be amended by replacing the word with “REVIEWED FOR CODE
COMPLIANCE”
Section 106.5.3 is amended to read as follows:
   106.5.3 Expiration. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 105.5.
Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows:
   106.6.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for plumbing work shall be in accordance with
Title 1 Chapter 11 of the Town Code.
Section 106.6.3 is amended to read as follows:
   106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of
fees as follows:
      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid
or collected.
      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.
   The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
Section 106.6 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   106.6.4 Reinspections. Where any work or installation does not pass an
initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to achieve
compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted
to the code official for inspection and testing. A reinspection fee, amount per
Title 1 Chapter 11 of the Town Code, may be assessed for each inspection or
reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be
assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available
on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the
inspector, for failing to provide access on the date for which the inspection
is requested or deviating from the approved plans. In instances where
reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will
be performed until the reinspection fees have been received by the building
department.
   106.6.5 Investigative fee - Work without a permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee may be up to or equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be set forth and
adopted by the Town Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
   106.6.6 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work, the owner, contractor, or subcontractor to know that the building or
structure has a valid permit and to notify the building department when work is
ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the
owner, contractor, or subcontractor requesting any inspections required by this
code to provide access and means for inspection of such work.
   All inspections requested prior to 4:00 pm the day requested will be
performed the following working day. Such request for inspection may be made by
calling the 24-hour automated telephone answering system or the automated
inspection portal.
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
   108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
certification issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
violation, punishable by a fine of per Town Code or by imprisonment not
exceeding per Town Code or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. In accordance with Title 1 Chapter 4 of the Town Code of Winter Park.
Section 108.5 is amended to read as follows:
   108.5 Stop Work Orders. See Town Code 6-1-5, Section 108.5.
Section 109 is amended to read as follows:
   109 Means of Appeal. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 113.
Section 305.6.1 is amended to read as follows:
   305.6.1 Sewer Depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal
systems shall be a minimum of below finished grade at the point of septic tank
connection. Building sewers shall be as required by the local water and
sanitation district having jurisdiction.
Section 312.3 is amended to read as follows:
   312.3 Drainage and vent air testing. Plastic pipe tested with air is
permitted provided the individual and/or company responsible for performing the
work provide proper notification by posting the area where the work and test is
being performed.
Section 701.2 is repealed in its entirety and reenacted as follows:
   701.2 Sewer Required. Every building in which plumbing fixtures are
installed and all premises having drainage piping shall be connected to a
public sewer.
   Exception: When approved by Town Council.
Section 904.1 is amended to read as follows:
   904.1 Roof Extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall
be terminated at least12 inches (304.8 mm) above the roof, except that where a
roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent
extensions shall be run at least (NUMBER) 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-5: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Mechanical Code, adopted by
reference in Section 6-1-1 of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the
Town of Winter Park, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Building Official. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.2.
Section 103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   103.3 Deputies. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.3.
Section 104.8 is amended to read as follows:
   104.8 Liability. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 104.8.
Sections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 are repealed in their entirety.
Section 106.4.1 shall be amended by replacing with “REVIEWED FOR CODE
COMPLIANCE”
Section 106.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
   106.4.3 Expiration. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 105.5.
Section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows:
   106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be in accordance
with Title 1 Chapter 11 of the Town Code of Winter Park.
Section 106.5.3 is amended to read as follows:
   106.5.3 Fee Refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of
fees as follows:
      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid
or collected.
      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee when an application
for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled
before any plan review effort has been expended.
   The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
30 days after the date of fee payment.
Section 107.2.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsections:
   107.2.2.1 Reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass an
initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to achieve
compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted
to the code official for inspection and testing. A reinspection fee, amount per
Title 1 Chapter 11 of the Town Code, may be assessed for each inspection or
reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be
assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available
on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the
inspector, for failing to provide access on the date for which the inspection
is requested or deviating from the approved plans. In instances where
reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will
be performed until the reinspection fees have been received by the building
department.
   107.2.2.2 Investigative fee - Work without a permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee may be up to or equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be set forth and
adopted by the Town Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
   107.2.2.3 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work, the owner, contractor, or subcontractor to know that the building or
structure has a valid permit and to notify the building department when work is
ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the
owner, contractor, or subcontractor requesting any inspections required by this
code to provide access and means for inspection of such work.
   All inspections requested prior to 4:00 pm the day requested will be
performed the following working day. Such request for inspection may be made by
calling the 24-hour automated telephone answering system or the automated
inspection portal.
Section 113.1 is amended to read as follows:
   113.1 Stop Work Orders. See Town Code 6-1-5, Section 108.5.
Section 114.1 is amended to read as follows:
   114.1 Means of Appeal. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 113.
Section 115.4 is amended to read as follows:
   115.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code building official, or of a
permit or certification issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of per Town Code or by imprisonment
not exceeding per Town Code or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. In accordance with Title 1 Chapter 4 of the Town Code of Winter Park.
Section 903.3 is amended to read as follows:
   903.3 Unvented Gas Log Heaters. Unvented gas log heaters are prohibited.
Section 905.1 is amended to read as follows:
   905.1. Fireplace Stoves and room heaters. Fireplace stoves and solid-fuel-
type room heaters shall be listed & labeled and installed in accordance with
the conditions of the listing. Fireplace stoves shall be tested in accordance
with UL737. Solid-fuel-type room heaters shall be tested in accordance with UL
1482. Fireplace inserts intended for installation in fireplaces shall be listed
and labeled in accordance with the requirements of UL 1482 and shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Detached one- and
two-family dwellings may have no more than one solid fuel burning device per
property. Condominiums and apartment houses may have one solid fuel burning
device located in a lobby or other main common area. Factory-built fireplaces
and stoves shall meet E.P.A. phase II or Colorado phase III air quality
requirements. Solid fuel appliances shall be listed and tested and fully
complies with E.P.A. Phase II and/or Colorado Phase III air quality
requirements.
Section 1001 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   1001.2 Operations and maintenance of boilers and pressure vessels. Boilers
and pressure vessels shall be operated and maintained in conformity with
requirements for adequate protection of the public according to nationally
recognized standards. The State Boiler Inspector shall notify the owner or the
authorized representative of defects or deficiencies, which shall be properly
and promptly corrected.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-6: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code, adopted by
reference in Section 6-1-1 of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the
Town of Winter Park, herein referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Building Official. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.2.
Section 103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   103.3 Deputies. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.3.
Section 104.8 is amended to read as follows:
   104.8 Liability. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 104.8.
Section 106.1.1 & 106.1.2 shall be repealed in its entirety.
Section 106.5.1 shall be amended by replacing the word with “REVIEWED FOR CODE
COMPLIANCE”
Section 109.2 is amended to read as follows:
   109.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for work shall be in accordance with Title 1
Chapter 11 of the Town Code.
Section 109.6 is amended to read as follows:
   109.6 Fee Refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of
fees as follows:
      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid
or collected.
      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.
   The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 30 days after the date of fee payment.
Section 107.2.2 is amended by adding a new subsection to read as follows:
   107.2.2 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the
permit or his or her duly authorized agent to notify the code official when
work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
provide access to and means for inspection of such work that is required by
this code. All inspections requested prior to 4:00 pm the day requested will be
performed the following working day. Such request for inspection may be made by
calling the 24-hour automated telephone answering system or the automated
inspection portal.
   107.2.2.1 Reinspections. A reinspection fee, as specified in Title 1,
Chapter 11 of the Town Code, may be assessed for each inspection or
reinspection when such portion of work for which inspections is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be
assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available
on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the
inspector, for failing to provide access on the date for which the inspection
is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the
building official. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no
additional inspection of work will be performed until the reinspection fees
have been collected by the building department.
   107.2.2.2 Investigative fee - Work without a permit. Whenever any work for
which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee may be up to or equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be set forth and
adopted by the Town Council. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
   108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect,
install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
certification issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
violation, punishable by a fine of per Town Code or by imprisonment not
exceeding (NUMBER OF DAYS) per Town Code, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense. In accordance with Title 1 Chapter 4 of the Town
Code of Winter Park.
Section 108.5 is amended to read as follows:
   108.5 Stop Work Orders. See Town Code 6-1-5, Section 108.5. Section 109 is
repealed in its entirety and reenacted to read as follows: Section 109 Means of
Appeal. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 113.
Section 303.3 is amended to read as follows:
   303.3 Prohibited Locations. Appliances shall not be located in sleeping
rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage closets or surgical rooms, or in a
space that opens only into such rooms or spaces, except where the installation
complies with one of the following:
      1.   The appliance is a direct-vent appliance installed in accordance
with the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.
      2.   Vented room heaters, wall furnaces, vented decorative appliances,
vented gas fireplaces, vented gas fireplace heaters and decorative appliances
for installation in vented solid fuel-burning fireplaces are installed in rooms
that meet the required volume criteria of section 304.5.
      3.   The appliance is installed in a room or space that opens only into a
bedroom or bathroom, and such room or space is used for no other purpose and is
provided with a solid weather-stripped door equipped with an approved self-
closing device. All combustion air shall be taken directly from the outdoors in
accordance with section 304.6.
Section 406.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
   406.4.1 Test Pressure. The test pressure to be used shall not be no less 11/
2 times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 10 psig,
irrespective of design pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862
kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop
stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield
strength of the pipe.
Section 501.8 is amended to read as follows:
   501.8 Appliances Not Required to Be Vented. The following appliances shall
not be required to be vented provided appliance is listed and tested and
installed per manufacturers specifications:
      1.   Ranges.
      2.   Built-in domestic cooking units listed and marked for optional
venting.
      3.   Hot plates and laundry stoves.
      4.   Type 1 clothes dryers (type 1 clothes dryers shall be exhausted in
accordance with the requirements of section 614.).
      5.   A single booster type automatic instantaneous water heater, where
designed and used solely for the sanitizing rinse requirements of a dishwashing
machine, provided that the heater is installed in a commercial kitchen having a
mechanical exhaust system. Where installed in this manner, the draft hood, is
required, shall be in place and unaltered and the draft hood outlet shall be
not less than 36 inches (914 mm) vertically and 6 inches (152 mm) horizontally
from any surface other than the heater.
      6.   Refrigerators.
      7.   Counter appliances.
      8.   Direct-fired make-up air heaters.
      9.   Other equipment listed for unvented use and not provided with flue
collars.
      10.   Specialized equipment of limited input such as laboratory burners
and gas lights.
Section 603.1 is amended to read as follows:
   603.1 General. Log lighters are prohibited.
Section 621.1 is amended to read as follows:
   621.1 Prohibited Installation. Installation of unvented room heaters is
prohibited.
   (Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-7: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Energy Conservation Code,
adopted by reference in Section
6-1-1  of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the international energy
conservation code of the Town of Winter Park and shall be cited as such. It is
referred to herein as “this code.”
Section 109.3 is amended to read as follows:
   109.3 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official or building
official, or of a permit or certification used under the provisions of this
code, shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not more than
1,000 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. In accordance with Title 1 Chapter 4
of the Town Code of Winter Park.
   Blower door tests would not be mandatory, mechanical ventilation is
required.
Section 506.1 is amended to read as follows:
   506.1 General. The proposed design complies with this section provided that:
      1.   Sections 502.4, 502.5, 503.2, 504, 505.2, 505.3, 505.4, 505.6, 505.7
are each satisfied, and
      2.   Annual energy costs of the proposed design as determined in
accordance with section 506.3 do not exceed those of the standard design as
determined in accordance with section 506.4.
   B.   Exemptions: The following buildings are exempt from provisions of the
energy conservation code adopted herein:
      1.   Any building that is otherwise exempt from the provisions of the
building code adopted by the Town Council in which the Town is located and
buildings that do not contain a conditioned space.
      2.   Any building that does not use either electricity or fossil fuels
for comfort heating. A building will be presumed to be heated by electricity
even in the absence of equipment used for electric comfort heating if the
building is provided with electrical service in excess of one hundred (100)
amps, unless the code enforcement official of the Town determines that the
electrical service is necessary for a purpose other than for providing electric
comfort for heating.
      3.   Historic buildings that are listed on the national register of
historic places or Colorado state register of historic properties and buildings
that have been designated as historically significant or that have been deemed
eligible for designation by a local governing body that is authorized to make
such designations.
      4.   Any building that is exempt pursuant to the energy code.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-8: FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Fire Code, adopted by
reference in Section
6-1-1  of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the Town
of Winter Park and East Grand Fire Protection District, hereinafter referred to
as “this code.”
Section 101.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices are specifically adopted.
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Appointment. Building and/or fire code official. See Town Code 6-1-2,
Section 103.2.
Section 103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   103.3 Deputies. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.3.
Section 103.4 is amended to read as follows:
   103.4 Liability. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 104.8.
Section 105.3.1 is amended to read as follows:
   105.3.1 Expiration. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 105.5.
Section 105.5 is amended to read as follows:
   105.5.11. An operational permit is required to produce, transport on site
use, handle or dispense cryogenic fluids in any amount.
Section 105.5 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   105.5.53. Each and every listed permit may not be required by the district.
Section 105.6.3 is repealed in its entirety and reenacted to read as follows:
   105.6.3 Cryogenic Fluids. Cryogenic fluids storage is prohibited.
Section 106.2 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   106.2.1.1 Reinspections. A reinspection fee, as specified in Title 1,
Chapter 11 of the Town Code, may be assessed for each inspection or
reinspection when such portion of work for which inspections is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be
assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available
on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the
inspector, for failing to provide access on the date for which the inspection
is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the
building official and or fire code official. In instances where reinspection
fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of work will be performed
until the reinspection fees have been collected by the building department or
fire department. (Fire department - East Grand Fire Protection District No. 4,
plan review & inspection fee schedule)
Section 108 is repealed in its entirety and reenacted to read as follows:
   108.1 Board of Appeals Established. A person shall have the right to appeal
a decision of the building official and fire code official to the construction
and fire code board of appeals established pursuant to Section
6-1-2 , 113 of the Town Code of Winter Park.
Section 115 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   115 Water Flushing. The fire chief or fire code official shall be authorized
to witness, accept, or approve flushing and flow testing of a water system
supplying water for all fire protection systems.
Section 903.2.8 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire
area.
   Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not required in existing non-
sprinkled buildings, two stories or less, where a change of occupancy/
alteration creates no more than two dwelling units, provided that a manual and
automatic fire alarm system is installed in accordance with NFPA 72 throughout
the building and the residential occupancies are separated from other
occupancies per Section 508.4 of the international Building Code.
   That the limits referred to in certain sections of the 2021 International
Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
   Section 5504.3.1.1.3 Location. Any amount of storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids is prohibited.
   Section 3404.2.9.6.1 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks Are Prohibited.
Storage of class I and class II liquids in above ground tanks outside of
buildings is restricted to 250 gallons or less.
   Exception: When a permit has been issued by the fire chief.
   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks Are Prohibited.
Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above ground tanks is restricted to
250 gallons or less.
   Exception: When a permit has been issued by the fire chief.
   Section 5806.2 Limitations. Any amount of storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids is prohibited.
   Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. Within the limits
established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas the
aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of
2,000 gallons (7570L).
   Exception: When a permit has been issued by the fire chief.
Section A101.3 is repealed and reenacted to read as follows:
   A101.3 Membership. The membership of the appeals board shall consist of five
voting members, three of which having the qualifications established by this
section. Members shall be nominated by the building official, fire code
official or the chief administrative officer of the respective jurisdiction,
subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the governing body.
   Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience or an
electrical contractor with at least ten years’ experience, five of which shall
have been in responsible charge of work.
   A101.2.3 Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing
experience or a mechanical contractor with at least ten years’ experience, five
of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
Section D102.1 is amended to read as follows:
   D102.1 Access and Loading. Facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings
hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way
of an approved fire apparatus access road with asphalt, concrete, or other
approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire
apparatus weighing at least 84,000 75,000 pounds.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-9: EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2021 International Existing Building Code,
adopted by reference in Section
6-1-1  of this Chapter, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the existing building code
of the Town of Winter Park, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows:
   103.2 Building Official. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.2.
Section 103.3 is amended to read as follows:
   103.3 Deputies. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 103.3.
Section 104.1 is amended to read as follows:
   104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all of the provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all
buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all the
provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied. The building official
shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt
policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions.
Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall be in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have
the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
Section 104.8 is amended to read as follows:
   104.8 Liability. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 104.8.
Sections 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 are repealed in their entirety.
Section 105.5 is amended to read as follows:
   105.5 Expiration. See Town Code 6-1-2, Section 105.5.
Section 106.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
   106.3.3 Phased Approval. The Community Development Director is authorized to
issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a
building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building
or structure have been submitted, provide that adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirement of
this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a
building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be
granted.
Section 106.3.4 is repealed in its entirety.
   (1)   Provide documentation to the building official that a minimum of
$500,000 of errors and omissions insurance is in place and that the owner of
the residential or commercial structure upon which the architect/engineer is
working is a named beneficiary of such policy; and
   (2)   Place their professional stamp/seal on any and all plats/plans
submitted to the Town for review as a condition of the Town’s receipt and
review of such plans/plats.
   Any plan/plat submitted in connection with any residential or commercial
project/development that is not accompanied by the items identified herein
shall not be accepted, processed, or approved by the Town.
Section 107.3 is repealed in its entirety.
Section 108.2 is amended to read as follows:
   108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, gas, mechanical,
and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit
shall be paid as required in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 11 of the Town
Code of Winter Park.
Section 108 is amended by the addition of the following subsection:
   108.7 Re-Inspections Fees. A re-inspection fee amount per Title 1, Chapter
11 of the Town Code of Winter Park, may be assessed for each inspection or re-
inspection when such work for which inspection is called is not complete or
when corrections called for are not made. Re-inspection fees may be assessed
when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the
work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for
failing to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested or
deviating from the approved plans. In instances where re-inspection fees have
been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the
re-inspection fees have been received by the building department.
Section 109.5 is amended to read as follows:
   109.5 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work, the owner, contractor, or subcontractor to know that the building or
structure has a valid building permit and to notify the building department
when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person who
requests an inspection to provide access to and means for any inspections of
such work that are required by this code.
Section 112.1 is amended to read as follows:
   112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the building official or fire code official relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created the construction and fire code board of appeals established pursuant to
Title 6, Chapter 1, Section 2: building code amendments - Section 113 of the
Town Code of Winter Park. The building official or fire code official shall be
an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before
the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and
shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing
to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official or fire code
official.
Section 1301.2 is amended to read as follows:
   [B] 1301.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to December 21, 1978 in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy
shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter or the provisions
of Chapter 4 through 12. The provisions of sections 1301.2.1 through 1301.2.5
shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed
to be, in groups A, B, E, F, M, R, and S. These provisions shall not apply to
buildings with occupancies in group H or I.
(Ord. 507, Series of 2017; amd. Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-10: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
The National Electrical Code (NEC), most current edition, issued and published
by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch, Quincy, MA 02269,
and Title 12, Article 23 of the Colorado State Electrical Laws and Rules and
Regulations, are enacted and adopted by reference in Section 6-1-1 of this
Chapter as secondary codes and incorporated herein. A copy of said code,
certified as a true copy by the mayor and Town clerk, shall be on file in the
office of the Town clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours.
The intent and purpose of this Code is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction and installation, quality of materials,
location, operation and maintenance or use of electrical equipment, systems,
and methods. The intent of this Code is to meet or exceed the requirements of
the State of Colorado Electrical Code.
When technical requirements, specifications, or standards in the Colorado
Electrical Code conflict with this code, the more restrictive shall apply.
Additionally, the intent is when the State of Colorado adopts the most current
edition of the National Electrical Code, the Town of Winter Park concurrently
adopts the most current edition.
Permit fees shall be assessed as set forth by this code shall be established by
Town Council from time to time as amended and adopted by the Town of Winter
Park and shall be based on valuation of the work to be done.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip,
use, occupy or maintain and electrical system or equipment or cause or same to
be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the National
Electrical Code. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of the National Electrical Code shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and subject to penalties set forth of the Town of Winter Park.
(Ord. 612, Series of 2023)
6-1-11: COLORADO ELECTRIC READY AND SOLAR READY CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the 2023 Colorado Electric Ready and Solar Ready
Code, adopted by reference in Section 6-1-1 of this Chapter, are hereby amended
as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Electric Ready and Solar Ready
Code of the Town of Winter Park and shall be cited as such. It is referred to
herein as “this code.”
Section 102.1.2 is amended to read as follows:
   102.1.2 Buildings Impacted by a Natural Disaster. The Town of Winter Park is
permitted to authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a waiver from the
requirements of this code where, owing to a declared natural disaster that has
destroyed buildings or resulted in other exceptional and extraordinary
circumstances as determined by the Town of Winter Park, and the Town of Winter
Park determines enforcement of the provisions of this code will result in
unnecessary hardship.
Section 102.2 is amended to read as follows:
   102.2 Substantial Cost Differential Waiver. The Town of Winter Park shall be
permitted to authorize, upon appeal, a waiver from the requirements of this
code for an applicant that asserts that compliance with this code will result
in a substantial cost differential. The Town of Winter Park, when authorizing
such a waiver, shall be permitted to waive certain requirements of this code
only until the cost differential for compliance with the remaining requirements
reaches one percent or less. The burden of proof is upon the applicant to
provide substantiation of a cost differential, such as quotes or other licensed
design professional analyses as approved by the Town of Winter Park.
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
   108.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to fines
established by the Town of Winter Park.
Section 109.3 is amended to read as follows:
   109.2 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training and are not employees of the Town of
Winter Park.
Section 202 is amended by the addition of the following definition, to appear
in alphabetical order:
   Major Renovations and Additions.  A substantial change to a building’s
interior configuration, energy system, or major building system of an existing
building. (Ord. 619, Series of 2024)
6-1-12: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this Chapter.
   B.   Violations of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code. Each day of violation shall be a separate
offense. (Ord. 619, Series of 2024)
CHAPTER 2
SIGN CODE 1
SECTION:
6-2-1: Title, Authority, Purpose, Philosophy And Compliance
6-2-2: Construction Of Language And Definitions
6-2-3: Interpretation Of Provisions
6-2-4: Administrative Procedures
6-2-5: General Provisions
6-2-6: Inspections And Maintenance
6-2-7: Sign Regulations And Standards
6-2-7-1: Construction Signs
6-2-7-2: Convenience Signs
6-2-7-3: Special Event, Grand Opening, And Temporary Use
6-2-7-4: Window Signs
6-2-7-5: Signs Constructed Of Certain Materials
6-2-7-6: Residential Signs
6-2-7-7: Commercial Signs
6-2-7-8: Banners, Feather Flag, Teardrop Flag Or Wind Flag
6-2-7-9: Highway Median Banners
6-2-7-10: Murals
6-2-7-11: Real Estate Signs
6-2-8: Nonconforming Signs
6-2-9: Variances
6-2-10: Removal Of Illegal Signs
6-2-11: Reserved
6-2-12: Appeals
6-2-13: Violations And Penalties
6-2-14: Biennial Review Of Regulations
6-2-15: Conditional Use Permit
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 2A of this title.
6-2-1: TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, PHILOSOPHY AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the TOWN OF
WINTER PARK SIGN CODE.
   B.   Authority: The regulations herein are authorized by title 31, article
23 of the Colorado Revised Statutes and are hereby declared to be in accordance
with all provisions of these statutes.
   C.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish a set of standards
for the fabrication, erection and use of signs, symbols, markings or
advertising devices within the town of Winter Park. These standards are
designed to protect and promote the health and safety of persons within the
community and to promote commerce and community identity while improving the
quality of the visual environment.
   D.   Philosophy:
      1.   Small well designed signs can visually communicate as well as, or
better than large signs.
      2.   A large number of signs tend to detract from and be detrimental to
the area in which they occur. The continuity of well designed signs can
contribute to the promotion of an image for the town.
      3.   Signs can be desirable elements in the environment when designs are
guided by consideration for the human, be it a motorist or pedestrian.
      4.   Signs shall be of quality design, using quality materials and sound
construction methods.
   E.   Compliance: All signs shall conform to all regulations of this chapter
unless specifically exempted therefrom as part of the site plan approval or
special review approval procedure outlined in title 7, chapter 7 of this code
(planned developments). Said signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   Every sign shall have a good scale and proportion in its design and
visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
      2.   Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building and site to which it principally relates.
      3.   The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained
and harmonious with the building site to which it principally relates. Signs
and banners must have colored backgrounds, white or light colors that would
appear white from fifty feet (50') away are prohibited.
      4.   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face.
      5.   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and
shall not compete for attention or advertise product pricing.
      6.   Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos
shall conform to criteria for all other signs. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-2: CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Construction Of Language: The following rules of construction shall
apply to the text of this chapter:
      1.   The particular shall control the general.
      2.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative
table, the text shall control.
      3.   The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      5.   A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
      6.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"maintained for" or "occupied for".
      7.   The word "person" includes any person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
      8.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction "and, or, or either...or", the conjunction shall
be interpreted as follows:
"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events
shall apply.
"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply.
"Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      9.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified
examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
      10.   The word "free", other language or numerals advertising product
pricing is prohibited on permanent commercial signage as well as banners.
Businesses utilizing display cases, attraction boards, temporary window signs,
or changeable copy signs to present menus, specials, etc., will be exempt from
this prohibition.
   B.   Definitions:
    ABANDONED SIGN: A sign is considered abandoned if, the business or activity
advertised on that sign is no longer licensed, or is no longer doing business
or is no longer active at that location, and such inactivity exists for a
thirty (30) day or longer period of time.
   ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any balloon, flag, pennant, propeller, oscillating,
rotating, pulsating light or other contrivance except a sign, used to attract
attention for the purpose of promoting the sale of products.
   ADVERTISING SIGN: Any sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered, relative to the property
upon which it is located.
   ADVERTISING STATUARY: Any imitation, representation or similitude of a
person or thing which is sculptured, molded, modeled or cast in any solid or
plastic substance, material, or fabric and used for commercial purposes.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: Any structure erected for advertising purposes, with
or without any advertisement display thereon, situated upon or attached to real
property, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, device or other
advertisement may be placed, posted, painted, tacked, nailed or otherwise
fastened, affixed, or displayed, provided, however, that said term shall not
include buildings.
   ALTERATION: Any change of copy, color, size, shape, illumination, position,
location, construction or supporting structure.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign designed and constructed to give its message or
attract attention through a sequence of progressive or random changes of parts
or lights or degree of lighting through rotation, movement, fluctuation,
flashing, changing or blinking lights or similar devices.
   ATTRACTION BOARD: A sign used to advertise items such as, but not limited
to, restaurant menus and specials (i.e., sandwich board).
   AWNING SIGNS: Proportional words, letters, numbers, or other symbols which
are displayed in a high quality manner on the skirt portion of any valance or
awning.
   BALLOON: Any helium or air filled material to be displayed for advertising
purposes which can be in many shapes (i.e., party balloons, air puppets,
inflatable signs, etc.).
   BANNER: A professionally produced strip of cloth, plastic, or similar
material affixed to a building or railing which is located outdoors and
contains language for advertisement, greeting or similar messaging purposes.
   BANNER HIGHWAY MEDIAN: A professionally produced strip of cloth, plastic, or
similar material affixed to two (2) metal posts located within the Highway 40
medians with the purpose of informing the public about a civic event or a
special event held by the chamber of commerce or a nonprofit organization.
   BILLBOARDS: Any framework for signs advertising merchandise, services, or
entertainment sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at a place other than
the location of such structure.
   BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
   BUILDING FACE: The total area of the building elevation, excluding the area
of the roof.
   BULLETIN: A sign of permanent character, but with removable letters, words
or numerals, indicating the names of persons associated with, or events
conducted upon, or products or services offered upon, the premises upon which
such a sign is maintained. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
size and contain letters no larger than two inches (2") in height.
   BUSINESS: Any kind of vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise or
establishment, or any and all other kind of activity and matter, any of which
are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on
any premises within the town or anywhere else within its jurisdiction, and
shall have a current business license issued by the town of Winter Park.
   CANOPY: A fixed structure of any material and any length, projecting from
and connected to a building and/or columns and posts from the ground, or
supported by a frame extending from the building and/or posts from the ground.
   CANOPY SIGN: Any sign attached to the underside or constructed upon a
projecting canopy, protruding over a private sidewalk. A sign supported by a
canopy and in all cases mounted perpendicular to the building.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or
illustrations that can be manually changed or rearranged for the purpose of
advertising restaurant menus or specials (i.e., dry erase boards).
   COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS: Shall include all zoning classifications which are
consistent with the commercial designation of the town of Winter Park.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: Any sign stating the name of the future site occupant and
may include the name, address, e-mail and telephone number of businesses
directly related to the construction project.
   CONVENIENCE SIGN: Any sign which conveys information such as "Restrooms",
"No Parking", "Entrance", "Exit" and the like, but does not contain brand,
trade or business identification and is designed to be viewed on site or
adjacent to the site by pedestrians and/or motorists.
   DETACHED SIGN: See definition of Freestanding Sign.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign permanently or temporarily erected by or with
approval of the town or any authorized government agency, designed solely to
provide direction or guidance to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has light cast on its surface from
an interior source, including electric lights or luminous tubes.
   DISPLAY CASE: Any case, cabinet or other device, wall mounted having a
window of glass or other transparent material, or other opening, access to
which is made from other than within a structure or building. Items to be
displayed could include, but are not limited to, restaurant menus and specials.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN: Any sign displaying a variable message controlled
by either a computer or other electronic or digital components. Electronic
message signs are only permitted as a conditional use under section
6-2-15 of this chapter.
   FEATHER FLAG/TEARDROP FLAG/WIND FLAG: A professionally produced flag made of
cloth, plastic, or similar material affixed to a pole which is located outdoors
and contains language for advertisement, greeting or similar messaging
purposes.
   FLAG OR PENNANT: Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar material
used for advertising purposes attached to, or appended on or from any
structure, staff, pole, line, framing, or vehicle.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: Any detached sign which shall include any sign supported
by one or more uprights, braces, poles or posts placed upon or in or supported
by the ground and not a part of, or attached to, any building. This definition
includes "monument signs", "pylon signs", "ground signs" and "pole signs". A
freestanding sign shall have no more than two (2) sides back to back, each side
of which shall contain an area which shall not exceed the amount permitted in
other sections of this chapter.
   GRADE: The level of the public sidewalk or curb closest to the sign.
   GROUND SIGN: See definition of Freestanding Sign.
   IDEOLOGICAL MESSAGE SIGN: Any sign that is noncommercial in content and
purpose, and is primarily concerned with ideas or concepts of a social or
cultural nature.
   ILLEGAL SIGN: Any sign placed without proper government approval and/or
permits as required by the town code at the time said sign was placed. "Illegal
sign" shall also mean any nonconforming sign which has exceeded its authorized
amortization period.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which an artificial source of light is used in
order to make the message readable and shall include directly and indirectly
illuminated signs.
   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has light cast on its surface
from an exterior source, including electric lights, or luminous tubes.
   LOT: Is either a lot of record, as part of a land subdivision officially
recorded with Grand County and existing on the effective date of this chapter
or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto; or a tract of land, either
unsubdivided or consisting of two (2) or more contiguous lots of record,
located within a single block, which, on the effective date of this chapter or
any applicable subsequent amendment thereto, was in single ownership; or a
tract of land, located within a single block, which at the time of filing for a
building permit (or, if no building permit is required, at the time of filing
for a certificate of occupancy), is designated by its owner or developer as a
tract all of which is to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit under
single ownership; a lot therefore may or may not coincide with a lot as shown
on the official tax maps of Grand County, or on any recorded subdivision plat
or deed. For the purposes of this definition, ownership of a lot shall be
deemed to include a lease.
   LOT FRONTAGE: The shortest property line adjacent to a public street. The
frontage of a lot is also the front property line.
   LOT LINE: A boundary of a lot.
   MAJOR OCCUPANT: The primary tenant of a building or multiple use facility,
designated as such by the property owner.
   MARQUEE SIGN: A sign utilizing changeable or removable letters and numbers
secured in a reader board (track) used for advertisement of regularly changing
activities on the premises.
   MOBILE SIGNS: See definition of Vehicular Sign.
   MULTIPLE USE FACILITY: Any building which is occupied by three (3) or more
legal and distinct businesses. (See definition of Business.)
   MURAL: Any painted design which covers all or a major portion of a wall,
building facade, or other structure for the purpose of displaying an art piece;
not meant for the purpose of advertising.
   NEON SIGN: A sign in which a colorless, odorless, primarily inert gaseous
element known as "neon" is found and produces illumination.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign or advertising structure existing within the
incorporated area on the effective date of this chapter which, by its material,
background color, height, square foot area, location, use or structural support
does not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall hereafter be termed
nonconforming.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: See definition of Billboards.
   ON SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGNS: Directional signs on private property that do not
exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet. A maximum of four (4) signs per
property in addition to one sign per ten (10) parking spaces, will be allowed
without a permit. Directional signs on public property located adjacent to
streets, sidewalks or trails are not permitted.
   OUTLINE LIGHTING: Any arrangement or display of incandescent bulbs or
lighting tubes used to outline or call attention to the features of a building,
including the building's frame, shape, roofline or window dimensions. Outline
lighting includes both temporary and permanent arrangement of bulbs or lighting
tubing, whether located inside or outside of a building, if such bulbs or
tubing is visible to the public from a public right of way or from an outdoor
public area.
   PAINTED WALL SIGN: Any sign, permanent in nature, including windows painted
on any surface of any building, visible from any public right of way.
   PERMANENT SIGN: A sign constructed of durable material and affixed,
lettered, attached to or placed upon a fixed, nonmovable, nonportable
supporting structure.
   PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN: A sign or painted information upon or within three
feet (3') of a window for the purpose of viewing from outside of the premises.
This term excludes merchandise displayed and decorative borders.
   PERSON: Shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
   PLASTIC SIGN: Any sign, embellishment or sign area made of plastic, flat
sheet, corrugated panels, formed or molded, on one or more faces.
   POINT OF PURCHASE SIGN: Any structure, device, display board, screen surface
or wall with characters, letters or illustrations placed thereto, thereon or
thereunder by any method or means whatsoever where the matter displayed is used
for advertising on the premises a product actually or actively offered for sale
or rent thereon or therein or services rendered.
   POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGN: A sign indicating the name and/or picture of an
individual seeking election to a public office, or relating to a forthcoming
public election or referendum, or pertaining to the advocating by persons,
groups, or parties of the political views or policies.
   PRIMARY MULTIPLE USE FACILITY IDENTIFICATION SIGNS: Any sign identifying a
multiple use facility and the tenants therein.
   PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building, from the outside
wall or walls of any building, which is supported by only one rigid support,
irrespective of the number of guywires used in connection therewith. A sign
suspended from the underside of a canopy or floor overhang perpendicular to the
building surface which projects eight inches (8") or more shall be considered a
projecting sign for purpose of this chapter.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign indicating that the premises on which the
sign is located, or any portion thereof, is for sale, lease or rent.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which serves to identify
only the name of the occupant and the address of a residential dwelling unit.
   RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX SIGN: Any sign identifying a residential subdivision to
include single-family or multiple-family development.
   ROOF, MANSARD: A curb roof having the lower slope almost vertical and the
upper almost horizontal, with the same profile on all sides of the building.
   ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon, above
or over the roof of any building.
   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A sign with two (2) faces attached at the top and open
at the bottom so that the structure forms a wedge and is self-supporting with a
maximum height of three feet (3') above the ground or snowpack surface. See
definitions of Changeable Copy Sign and Two Sided Sign.
   SECONDARY MULTIPLE USE FACILITY IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Signs which may be
located at entrances to a multiple use facility where a primary identification
sign is not located. Secondary identification signs shall incorporate the name
and/or logo of the multiple use facility. Secondary identification signs are
limited to thirty (30) square feet of sign area.
   SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
   SIGN AREA: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of
squares or rectangles which enclose the extreme limits of writing,
representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any
frame, background area of sign, structural trim, or other material or color
forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from
the background against which it is placed. The supports or uprights on which
any such sign is supported shall not be included in determining the sign area
unless such supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an
integral background of the display. In the case of "skeleton letters" or other
signs placed on a wall without any border, the area shall be determined by
enclosing all of the letters in a common geometrical shape (e.g., square,
rectangle, circle).
   SIGN COPY: Any words, symbols, logos, figures, numbers or symbolic
representations incorporated into a sign with the purpose of attracting
attention to the subject matter.
   SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign, which exhibits changes in light or
color.
   SIGN HEIGHT: Shall be measured from average ground level at the base of the
supporting structure to the top of the sign.
   SITE: One or more parcels of land identified by the assessor's records and
for which an integrated building development exists or has been proposed.
   SNIPE SIGN: Any sign made of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood
and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise
attached to trees, poles, fences or other objects, and the advertising matter
appearing thereon is not applicable to the premises upon which said sign is
located.
   SPECIAL EVENT: An activity or occasion which occurs on premises and does not
exceed three (3) weeks in duration.
   TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE OPEN HOUSE SIGN: A temporary sign for the purpose of
allowing individual realtors to market property for sale, lease or rent via a
staffed open house event.
   TEMPORARY USE: An activity which is not part of a permanent use on the
premises and is temporary in nature; such activity shall not exceed six (6)
months in duration.
   TEMPORARY USE SIGN: A sign or painted information installed or applied on a
property in conjunction with a temporary use with the intent of displaying the
sign continuously for more than twenty four (24) hours, but which is not a part
of a permanent use on the property and is not intended to be displayed for more
than six (6) months.
   TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN: A sign advertising a sale, special, or a product or
activity that does not exceed three (3) months and applied upon or within three
feet (3') of a window for the purpose of viewing from outside of the premises.
   THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGN: A sign in which the lettering is on a different
plane than the sign face plane.
   TOURIST ORIENTED DIRECTIONAL SIGN (TODS): Signs defined by Colorado Revised
Statutes section 43-1-420(3) and regulated by the Colorado department of
transportation.
   TWO SIDED SIGN: A sign with no more than two (2) faces which are viewed
separately and must be constructed in a parallel fashion. Only one face of a
two (2) sided sign shall be considered in determining the sign area.
   VEHICULAR SIGN: A sign affixed to, or painted onto, or placed in the open
bed of a transportation vehicle or trailer for the purposes of business
advertising; however, not to include signs affixed to vehicles or trailers for
identification purposes or required by licensing ordinances.
   WALKING SIGN: Any sign, including sandwich board type signs, or lettering on
a costume, which is carried or worn by any person which is visible from a
public right of way, adjacent property, or a public area.
   WALL SIGN: Any sign attached or erected on the exterior wall of a building
with the exposed face of the sign parallel to said wall, and supported
throughout its length by the wall of the building. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-3: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provision Intent: The provisions of this chapter are not intended to
abrogate any other ordinance of the town which is more restrictive than the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Uncertainty Of Ordinance Provisions: Whenever the application of this
chapter is uncertain due to ambiguity of its provisions, the application shall
be referred to the planning commission for determination. The commission shall
then authorize signing which best fulfills the intent of this chapter.
   C.   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 440, Series of
2010)
6-2-4: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Sign Permit Required: No sign may be placed, erected, moved,
reconstructed, altered, redesigned or displayed within the incorporated limits
of the town until the owner of the property upon which such sign is to be
placed, erected, moved, reconstructed, altered, redesigned or displayed has
obtained a sign permit therefor as provided in this section.
Exception: Routine maintenance, repair and repainting which does not alter a
sign may be performed on previously permitted sign without first obtaining a
new permit.
   B.   Inspections For Permit:
      1.   All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by and approval of the building official.
      2.   Footing inspections may be required for all signs having footings.
      3.   All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the
provisions of the town's electrical code, and the electrical components used
shall bear the label of an approved testing agency.
   C.   Permit Application: Sign permit applications shall be obtained from the
town. A completed application shall be submitted to the town planner by the
owner or his authorized agent. The application shall contain, or have attached
thereto, at a minimum the following information:
      1.   The name, phone number and address of the owner or other person in
control of the real property upon which the sign or advertising structure is to
be constructed, erected, posted or displayed.
      2.   The name of the person erecting the sign or advertising structure.
      3.   The address and/or legal description of the property upon which the
proposed sign or advertising structure is to be located.
      4.   The type of sign or advertising structure.
      5.   The proposed location of the sign or advertising structure on the
property identified. The location and total surface area of all other permitted
signs existing on the property or buildings.
      6.   One detailed drawing, drawn to scale, containing complete plans and
specifications which indicate the method of construction and anchoring to the
building or ground. The total area of the proposed sign in square feet. The
height of the proposed advertising structure from ground level.
      7.   The sign elevation which must indicate overall and letter/figure
dimensions, colors, materials, proposed copy and illumination.
      8.   A site plan which shall indicate all signs existing or proposed for
the site with dimensions, colors, materials, copy, and/or illumination for each
sign.
      9.   Building elevations with signs depicted.
   D.   Permit Application Review: Within ten (10) days of filing a completed
application the town planner shall review the sign application. The town
planner shall determine if the proposed sign and application are in compliance
or noncompliance with this code. The town planner shall either approve the
application for issue or deny issuance of the permit due to noncompliance with
this or other town ordinances or regulations which may apply.
   E.   Permit Issuance: If the town planner has determined the sign and
application is in compliance with this code and other ordinances or regulations
which may apply, the town planner shall issue a permit for the proposed sign.
   F.   Permit Expiration: Every sign permit issued by the town planner shall
expire by limitation and become null and void if the work which has been
authorized by such sign permit is not completed within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the date of issuance of such permit. Additional time may be permitted
with authorization of the town planner.
   G.   Permit And Application Retention: The town planner shall retain one
copy of the sign permit and application. The permit and application shall be
retained at the office of the town planner until such time as the sign no
longer exists.
   H.   Permit Fees: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by
a permit fee as set forth by section
1-8-1 of this code.
   I.   Appeal From The Decision Of The Town Planner: Upon denial of a permit
by the town planner, the applicant may resubmit a modified application or file
an appeal to the planning commission. An appeal from the decision of the town
planner shall be filed with the town planner within thirty (30) days of denial
of a permit. The appeal shall contain ten (10) copies of detailed drawings,
drawn to scale, containing complete plan specifications which indicate the
method of construction and anchoring to the building or ground. The total area
of the proposed sign in square feet; the height of the proposed advertising
structure from ground level; the planning commission shall consider the appeal
at its next regularly scheduled meeting or as promptly as practicable at a
subsequent regularly scheduled meeting of which the applicant is given written
notice. The commission shall render a decision on the appeal within thirty (30)
days after the hearing. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Exempted Signs: The following signs, if nonilluminated and nonanimated,
shall be exempt from the application, permit and fee requirements of this
chapter:
      1.   Memorial Tablets And Plaques: Memorial tablets and plaques installed
and authorized by a duly constituted governmental agency or recognized
historical society.
      2.   Official And Legal Notices: Official and legal notices issued by any
court, public body, or officer in performance of a public duty or in giving any
legal notice.
      3.   Attraction Boards, Changeable Copy Signs, Sandwich Boards:
Attraction boards, changeable copy signs and sandwich boards as defined in
subsection
6-2-2B of this chapter must be located on private property. Such signs are
limited in size to six (6) square feet as defined in subsection 6-2-2B of this
chapter (two sided signs). The sign shall be placed in a location which will
not cause unreasonable annoyance or inconvenience to adjoining property owners
and/or the public. During winter months, the location of each sign must not
interfere with snow removal. The sign must be removed immediately if damaged or
in disrepair. Until October 31, 2021, sandwich boards are allowed to be located
on private property or public sidewalks, so long as the sandwich board does not
impede pedestrian traffic or snow removal operations and the sandwich board
complies with all other applicable regulations.
      4.   Directional, Warning, Informational, Pedestrian Signs Or Structures:
Directional, warning, informational, or pedestrian signs or structures required
or authorized by law, or by federal, state, county or town authority.
Illuminated signs are subject to planning commission approval for size, color
and material. Such signs shall promote the public good, health, safety, and
welfare.
      5.   Residential Building Identification Signs: Residential building
identification signs used to identify individual residences, which shall not
exceed two (2) square feet in size, shall be limited in content to the name of
the resident and address of the premises. Freestanding signs shall not exceed
five feet (5') above grade.
      6.   Flags: Official flags of the United States Of America, the state of
Colorado, and other states of the United States, counties, municipalities,
official flags of foreign nations recognized by the United States government.
No side of any flag may be greater than a maximum of six feet (6'), except
flags on poles over thirty five feet (35') high may have a flag which has a
width of not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the height of the pole. All
flags shall be displayed in a proper manner.
      7.   Real Estate Signs: Refer to section
6-2-7-11 of this chapter.
      8.   Prohibited Activities Signs: Prohibited activities signs located on
a property posting said property for warning or other prohibitions on
trespassing, hunting, fishing, swimming or other prohibited activities. Such
signs shall be no greater than one square foot in area and shall be spaced no
closer than fifty feet (50') apart, except as otherwise provided in other
applicable town ordinances. Setback requirements shall not apply to such signs.
      9.   Interior Signs: Interior signs located on the interior of a building
or structure and not visible under normal viewing conditions from outside the
building primarily designed for the information of persons within the subject
building or structure.
      10.   Open/Closed Hours: Door and window signs that designate hours and
"Open" and "Closed" shall not exceed four (4) square feet and not more than one
of each is allowed per business entrance.
      11.   Vacancy/No Vacancy: All "Vacancy" or "No Vacancy" signs are not to
exceed two (2) square feet, and not more than one of each per business is
permitted.
      12.   Seasonal Decorations: Temporary, noncommercial decorations or
displays, when such are clearly incidental to, and are customarily or commonly
associated with, any national, local or religious celebration; provided, that
such decorations or displays are maintained in an attractive condition and do
not constitute a fire hazard. Outline lighting, decorative strings of lights in
trees, holiday string lights or colored tree lights may be used for decorative
purposes to coincide with the Thanksgiving/Christmas holiday season (November
15 through January 15) and shall be exempt from permit requirements if
displayed for no more than sixty (60) days and removed following that time
period. Clear or white string lights may be used the remainder of the year only
for purposes of landscape decoration, window decoration, outline lighting and
display. Bulbs on such lights shall not exceed ten (10) watts and shall not
twinkle or flash and shall be installed according to the national electrical
code.
      13.   Signage On Motor Vehicles: Signs permanently or magnetically
attached to motor vehicles or trailers which are being operated or stored in
the normal course of business, such as signs on delivery trucks indicating the
name of the owner or business; provided, that the primary purpose of such
vehicles is not for the display of signs, and provided that such vehicles are
parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as vehicles. Signs painted
on trailers used on construction sites also are exempt provided that a building
permit has been issued for that site and the trailer is not stored in such a
way as to act as a sign.
      14.   Window Signs: Window signs that are more than three feet (3') back
from the window, except illuminated signs arranged for the purpose of viewing
outside the premises. The area of illuminated signs arranged for the purpose of
viewing outside the business is to be counted in the total allowable business
signage and a permit is required.
      15.   Signs Not Visible From Beyond Lot/Parcel Boundaries: Signs not
visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located
or from any public thoroughfare, right of way or outdoor public area.
      16.   Display Case: "Display case" as defined in subsection 6-2-2B of
this chapter shall not require a permit to change display items. Such cases are
limited in size to six (6) square feet.
      17.   Political Signs: Political signs having to do with any issue,
ballot measure, ballot proposition, candidate or group of candidates in any
district, municipality, community, state or federal election shall be permitted
subject to the following:
         a.   All political signs shall be placed no earlier than thirty (30)
days prior to the election and shall be removed not later than seven (7) days
following the date of the election. In the event all signs are not removed
within the specified time or are posted prior to the specified time period, the
town shall have the right to remove and dispose of same.
         b.   All political signs shall be in compliance with subsection B11 of
this section which prohibits the affixing of any sign on any public property or
within the public right of way. Signs located on public property shall be
removed immediately.
         c.   The town or its authorized personnel have the right to enter
private property and remove any sign posted in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
         d.   Political signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and
shall be limited to one sign per lot.
         e.   The candidate, or person(s), responsible for the placement of a
political sign shall be responsible for its removal.
         f.   Political signs shall not be affixed to any living plants, trees,
bushes or shrubs.
      18.   Individual Construction Signs: Individual construction signs posted
by contractors shall be no larger than six (6) square feet and valid for a
period of not more than six (6) months. All individual construction signs must
be removed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued.
      19.   On Site Directional Signs: On site directional signs.
      20.   Ideological Signs: Ideological signs not to exceed four (4) square
feet in area per sign when located on private property and not otherwise in a
public right of way, or on public property or structures.
      21.   Garage, Estate Or Yard Sale Sign: Signs which advertise a garage,
estate or yard sale on the lot on which the sign is located; such signs shall
be erected no sooner than two (2) days prior to the date of the sale and must
be removed within one day after the date of sale; such sign shall have the date
of the sale posted.
      22.   Tourist Oriented Directional Sign: Tourist oriented directional
sign (TODS) subject to resolution 303, series 1990.
      23.   Historic Plaques: Historic plaques erected by the town or historic
agencies designating an area of historical significance.
      24.   Bumper Stickers: Bumper stickers or similar expressions of
noncommercial speech affixed to motor vehicles.
      25.   Picket Signs: Picket signs used by persons engaged in lawful
picketing activities.
      26.   Residential Nameplates: Residential nameplates.
      27.   Community Event Signs: Banners, flags, signs, and other similar
devices erected on town controlled property to identify a point of interest or
landmark or to promote a temporary or seasonal community event subject to the
following:
         a.   Banners placed in Hideaway Park shall not be installed on the
fence along Highway 40 and shall only be placed on the pavilions, restroom
structure or stage.
      28.   Highway Banners: If the town council elects to erect temporary
highway banners, such signs shall be exempt from all provisions and regulations
of this chapter.
   B.   Prohibited Signs: The following signs shall not be permitted in the
town of Winter Park:
      1.   Signs Not Specifically Authorized By This Chapter: Any sign not
specifically authorized or permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter is prohibited.
      2.   Animated Or Moving Signs; Exception: Animated or moving signs,
including signs consisting of any moving, swinging, rotating, flashing,
blinking, scintillating, fluctuating or otherwise animated light, unless
specifically permitted as part of the allowable signage enumerated in this
chapter and as part of a conditional use permit for an electronic message sign
approved by the town of Winter Park planning commission and the town of Winter
Park town council pursuant to section
6-2-15, "Conditional Use Permit", of this chapter.
      3.   Advertising Devices/Statuary: Advertising devices, "advertising
statuary" as defined herein.
      4.   Flags, Pennants, Balloons, Inflatable Signs Used For Advertising;
Exception: Flags, pennants, balloons, inflatable signs used for advertising
purposes, except as provided in section
6-2-7-3 of this chapter. Decorative flags, banners or pennants or a combination
of same, constituting an architectural feature which is integral to the design
character of a project may be permitted if first approved by the planning
commission.
      5.   Light Bulb Strings And Exposed Tubing: Light bulb strings and
exposed tubing including external displays, which consist of unshielded light
bulbs, festoons and strings of open light bulbs, are prohibited. An exception
hereto may be granted by the planning commission based on the criteria
identified in subsection 6-2-1E of this chapter when the display is in keeping
with the overall design theme put forth for the multiple use facility and/or
for the business activity to which it relates except as provided in subsection
A12 of this section.
      6.   Off Premises Signs Or Billboards; Exception: Off premises signs or
billboards, including any sign, other than directional signs, installed for the
purpose of advertising a project, person or subject not related to the premises
upon which said sign is located, except to advertise a community event or
function inside or outside the town boundaries, not to exceed thirty (30) days
prior to said event, and with a special event permit (title 7, chapter 11 of
this code).
      7.   Hazardous Signs: Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing
clear view of pedestrian, bicyclists and vehicular traffic.
      8.   Signs Constituting A Traffic Hazard: No person shall install or
maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any sign which simulates or
imitates in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal, or
which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "danger" or any other words,
phrases, symbols, or characters in such a manner to interfere with, mislead or
confuse traffic.
      9.   Signs On Doors, Windows Or Fire Escapes: No sign shall be installed,
relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any
door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape, except those signs as required by other codes or
ordinances.
      10.   Signs In Proximity To Utility Lines: No permit shall be issued for
any sign, and no sign shall be constructed or maintained, which has less
horizontal or vertical clearance from authorized communication or energized
electrical power lines than that prescribed by the laws of the state of
Colorado, or rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof.
      11.   Signs On Public Property/Rights Of Way; Exception: Signs on public
property including streets, medians (except as outlined in section
6-2-7-9 of this chapter), islands, parkways, sidewalks, traffic control
signposts, utility poles, and trees. Signs are prohibited on any utility pole,
traffic signpost, traffic signal or any other official traffic control device.
Signs shall not project over or into a public right of way. No person except a
public officer in performance of a public duty shall affix, by any means, any
form of sign, on any public property or within the public right of way. An
exception hereto may be granted by the planning commission after being referred
to the public works director.
      12.   Vehicle Signs; Exception: Vehicle signs, including signs affixed to
automobiles, trucks, trailers or other transportation vehicles or signs placed
in the open bed of any such transportation vehicles which advertise, identify
or provide direction to a use or activity not related to its lawful making of
deliveries or sales of merchandise, or as required by licensing ordinances,
except as provided in subsection A13 of this section.
Provided however, an exemption may be granted by the planning commission for
advertising by public transportation systems, i.e., taxis and buses with PUC
licensing. A plan shall be submitted to the design review committee for review.
This signage may be internally illuminated, but not to exceed the wattage
listed in subsection D of this section.
      13.   Roof Signs: Roof signs as defined herein except those on mansard
roofs.
      14.   Audible Signs: Signs which produce audible noise or sounds.
      15.   Signs With Visible Emissions: Signs which emit visible smoke,
vapor, particles or odor.
      16.   Snipe Signs: Snipe signs as defined in subsection 6-2-2B of this
chapter.
      17.   Swinging Or Moving Signs: Signs intended to swing or otherwise
noticeably move as a result of wind pressure because of the nature of
suspension or attachment of such signs.
      18.   Lewd Or Immoral Signage: Words or pictures contained in a sign
which reflect lewd or immoral information or images as determined by standards
and values of the community.
      19.   Vending Machines Visible From Public Right Of Way: Vending machines
that are internally illuminated and visible from the public right of way.
      20.   Walking Signs: Walking signs.
      21.   Colored Backgrounds Required: All signs and banners must have
colored backgrounds. White or a light color that would appear white from fifty
feet (50') away are prohibited.
   C.   Abatement Of Signs Relating To Inoperative Activities: Signs pertaining
to activities or occupants that are no longer using a property or no longer
have a business license with the town shall be removed from the premises, or
sign copy on such signs shall be obliterated within thirty (30) days after the
associated enterprise or occupant has vacated the premises. Such sign shall be
replaced with an opaque colored blank sign or other type of material as to
conceal any exposed bulbs or frame. Any such sign not removed within the
required period shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement.
   D.   Lighting Regulations:
      1.   Shielded Lighting: Light bulbs or lighting tubes used for
illuminating a sign shall not be visible from the vehicular travel lanes of
adjacent public right of way. The use of adequate shielding, designed so that
light from sign illuminating devices does not shine directly into the eyes of
passing motorists without first being reflected off the sign or its background,
is required whenever sign lighting is used. This type of lighting is permitted
in all zoning districts.
      2.   Subdued Lighting: The intensity of sign lighting shall not exceed
that necessary to illuminate and make legible a sign from the adjacent
travelway or closest municipal street; and the illumination of a sign shall not
be noticeably brighter than other lighting in the vicinity.
      3.   Direction Of Lighting: All lighting fixtures shall be placed above
the sign and shall shine downward. Illumination of signs shall not be directed
toward adjacent properties.
      4.   Component Painting: All light fixtures, conduit and shielding shall
be painted a flat, dark color, or shall be painted to match either the building
or the supporting structure that serves as the background of the sign.
      5.   Searchlights: Beacons, lasers or searchlights shall not be permitted
for advertising purposes.
      6.   Interior Lit Signs, Commercial Signage: Signs which emit light
through the background or copy portion of the sign, exposed gaseous light
tubing and individual, precast or formed letters, individually illuminated and
backlit, with translucent or opaque faces shall be allowed in any zoning
district except R-1 and R-2 subject to the following criteria:
         a.   Every sign or architectural display shall have a good scale and
proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and
surroundings.
         b.   The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be
restrained and harmonious with the building site to which it principally
relates.
         c.   When used as a sign, the number of graphic elements on a sign
shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and
shall be composed in proportion to the sign face.
         d.   When used as a window sign, the restrictions of subsection A14 of
this section shall apply.
      7.   Interior Lit Signs, Residential Signage: Signs which emit light
through the precast or formed letters and graphic elements shall be permitted
in any zoning district subject to the following criteria:
         a.   Background area shall not be illuminated, only the individual
lettering and graphic elements may be illuminated.
         b.   Every sign or architectural display shall have a good scale and
proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and
surroundings.
         c.   The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be
restrained and harmonious with the building site to which it principally
relates.
         d.   When used as a sign, the number of graphic elements on a sign
shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and
shall be composed in proportion to the sign face.
      8.   Neon Signs: Neon signs are permitted in any zoning district except
R-1 and R-2 for commercial signage only subject to restrictions in subsection
6-2-7-7I of this chapter. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010; amd. Ord. 543, Series of
2020)
6-2-6: INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Inspections: All signs shall be subject to inspections by the town
planner and all other persons as may be authorized for such purposes under the
provisions of the ordinances for the town.
   B.   Maintenance: Every sign and sign structure, including those signs and
sign structures for which no permit or permit fees are required, shall be
maintained in good structural condition at all times. All such signs and sign
structures shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports
that are not galvanized or of rust resistant materials. The town planner shall
inspect and have the authority to order painting, repair, alteration or removal
of a sign or sign structure which shall constitute a nuisance or hazard to
safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, or which shall constitute a hazard
for any other reason. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7: SIGN REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
Sign permits may be issued for signs included under this section, provided the
signs are in compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord.
440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-1: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
Construction sites may display one construction sign, identifying or
advertising new construction, remodeling or development of any structure or
land area. Such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet. Construction
sign permits may not be issued until foundation permits for the project have
been issued. A construction sign shall be valid for a period of not more than
six (6) months and may be renewed for no more than three (3) successive periods
in the same location. Signs must be removed within one month after construction
is complete. Construction signs shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of all signs subject to a permit, with the exception that a
construction sign shall be allowed in addition to any other signs permitted.
For individual construction signs, refer to subsection 6-2-5A18 of this
chapter. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-2: CONVENIENCE SIGNS:
On site signs which are necessary for public convenience or safety but which
are nonexempt, may be approved by the planning commission. Signs containing
information such as "Open", "Closed", "No Vacancy", "Vacancy", "Entrance",
"Exit" and directional arrows, but not business or product identification,
shall be designed to be viewed from on site, or from an area adjacent to the
site, by pedestrians or by motorists. Such signs shall not exceed four (4)
square feet in area. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-3: SPECIAL EVENT, GRAND OPENING, AND TEMPORARY USE:
   A.   Special Event Signs: Special event signs on private property which do
not meet the criteria established by this chapter may be approved for a limited
period of time as a means of publicizing short term activities. Businesses
wishing to use banners, feather flags, window signs, flags, or pennants,
balloons or attraction boards may apply for a special event sign permit to be
approved by the town planner or his designee. Such permit shall be valid for no
more than one week prior to the special event and shall be removed within forty
eight (48) hours after the event has terminated. Such permit shall not exceed
three (3) weeks and limited to two (2) permits per year per business or
organization.
Small party balloons are permitted during special events without a permit with
the following conditions:
Balloons are permitted to be displayed twenty four (24) hours prior to the
special event and must be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the event
ending.
Balloons must remain inflated and shall be removed if drooping.
Balloons shall be properly disposed of and shall not be released into the
atmosphere.
   B.   Grand Opening Business Sign: Grand opening banners will be allowed to
be displayed for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days
and shall follow procedures outlined in section
6-2-7-8 of this chapter. If permanent signage has been ordered but not
installed, an automatic fourteen (14) day extension shall be granted by the
town planner upon presentation of a purchase receipt. Grand opening banners are
only allowed for a business that is new to the town of Winter Park or in a new
location in the town of Winter Park. Subsection 6-2-7-8A5 of this chapter shall
not apply to grand opening banners.
   C.   Temporary Use Sign: Temporary use signs are permitted with approval
contingent upon design concept, size, theme, color, material and quantity as it
relates to size and mass of a building. Approval shall follow procedures
outlined in subsections 6-2-4C and D of this chapter. Only one temporary use
sign shall be permitted per business. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-4: WINDOW SIGNS:
   A.   Temporary Window Signs: Temporary window signs shall be constructed of
quality material and shall be neat in appearance. Temporary and permanent
window signage in area shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the
display windows on any business or building face. Signage shall be arranged to
prevent individual windows from being covered totally as defined in section
6-2-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Permanent Window Sign: Window sign(s) may be approved following
procedures outlined in subsections 6-2-4C and D of this chapter. Window sign(s)
in area shall cover not more than fifty percent (50%) of the display window on
any business or building face. Permanent window signage shall be calculated as
part of the total signage allowed under subsection 6-2-7-7A of this chapter and
shall be located in accordance with the provisions applicable to permanent
signs. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-5: SIGNS CONSTRUCTED OF CERTAIN MATERIALS:
   A.   Metallic Signs: Signs with metallic surfaces shall be treated to reduce
reflection, from sunlight or artificial illumination, on residential properties
in the vicinity and on the vision of passing motorists.
   B.   Plastic Signs: Plastic signs, including signs made of fiberglass and
other synthetic materials, shall be treated to reduce reflection, from sunlight
or artificial illumination, on residential properties in the vicinity and on
the vision of passing motorists.
   C.   Wood Accent: It is recommended that all plastic and metal signs
incorporate wood or the appearance of wood as a border and/or background. (Ord.
440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-6: RESIDENTIAL SIGNS:
All residential signs shall be three-dimensional as defined herein. In
addition, the following provisions shall apply to all signs related to
residential uses:
   A.   Residential Complex Identification Signs: Residential developments
shall be permitted one residential complex identification sign per primary
street access. Such identification signs shall be limited in size to a maximum
of thirty (30) square feet of sign copy. Total sign area not to exceed forty
five (45) square feet. Residential complex identification signs shall be wall
mounted or freestanding. Freestanding residential complex identification signs
shall not exceed a height above grade of eighteen feet (18').
   B.   Nonresidential Signs: Signs identifying other activities which are
authorized in residential districts shall be limited to six (6) square feet and
placed under the direction of the planning commission. (Ord. 440, Series of
2010)
6-2-7-7: COMMERCIAL SIGNS:
   A.   Maximum Sign Area: Each business location (see definition of
"business") shall be allowed sign area of thirty (30) square feet for all signs
combined (i.e., commercial signs, freestanding signs, individual business
signs, hanging panels, permanent window signs, illuminated, neon, awning signs,
marquee signs). Exempt, convenience, temporary, special event, primary and
secondary multiple use facility identification signs and temporary window signs
shall not be included in this limitation. The following are restrictions on the
composition of sign area:
      1.   For interior lit signs which emit light through the background of
the signs, the entire illumination area of the sign shall be included in the
maximum sign area limitation of this subsection A and subsection E1 of this
section. Not more than two (2) signs are permitted per business and the area of
these signs shall be counted in the total allowable business signage area.
When interior lit signs which emit light through the background of the signs
are used for a freestanding sign or part of a freestanding sign, the entire
illumination area of the sign shall be included in the maximum sign area and
background limitation of this subsection A and subsection E1 of this section.
      2.   The area of interior lit signs that emits light only through the
sign copy (message portion) of the sign, and individual, precast or formed
illuminated letters shall be determined by measuring the sign area.
   B.   Height Of Signs: No sign shall be attached to a building at a height
above the third story unless the business which the sign advertises is located
above the third story, in which case the sign may be on the same story as the
business. In no event shall a sign be attached above the roofline. Freestanding
signs shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height, however, increases in
height may be allowed by the planning commission to compensate for
topographical features of said sign's location. All canopy, awning and
projecting signs shall allow a ground clearance of at least seven feet (7').
Projecting signs not to project more than six feet (6') from face of building,
and may not project beyond the applicant's property.
   C.   Compatibility Of Signage: All signage displayed by a business from a
single location, e.g., a single freestanding sign, shall be compatible in
design, color and materials.
   D.   Freestanding Signs:
      1.   Site Requirements: All signs shall be located on the property of the
person/business who owns the sign and which it advertises. The location may be
at any point which offers the best line of vision, subject to provisions in
subsections 6-2-5B7, B10, and B11 of this chapter.
      2.   Permitted Number Of Signs: A single activity, business or multiple
use facility shall be permitted no more than one freestanding sign which meets
the site requirements provided by subsection D1 of this section, provided,
however, the planning commission may allow an increase in the number of
freestanding signs (subject to the size limitations of subsections A and E1 of
this section) where site or visibility considerations make such an increase
appropriate.
      3.   Placement Of Signs: All new ground signs shall be placed in an
appropriately landscaped planter or area. No freestanding sign may be placed in
a location that will obstruct other legal conforming signs.
   E.   Multiple Use Facility:
      1.   Primary Multiple Use Facility Identification Signs: Each multiple
use facility shall be permitted signage related to the entire multiple use
facility:
         a.   Such signage may contain the name of the facility as well as the
names of tenants therein. If a multiple use facility has two (2) or more
separate entrances one additional primary multiple use facility identification
sign will be permitted.
         b.   Primary multiple use facility identification sign area shall not
exceed the following schedule:
 
Gross Square Footage Of Maximum Sign Area Of        Sign Area Of Individual
Facility                Primary Identification Sign Businesses (Tenants) Within
                        (Includes Tenants Signage)  Primary Identification Sign
1 - 20,000              40 square feet              15 square feet
20,000 - 40,000         80 square feet              15 square feet
40,000 - 60,000         120 square feet             15 square feet
60,000+                 160 square feet             15 square feet
 
An individual business (tenant) shall be allowed up to thirty (30) square feet
in the primary multiple use facility identification sign. Any square footage
above the permitted fifteen (15) square feet shall be subtracted from the
maximum sign area permitted in subsection A of this section.
         c.   "Secondary multiple use facility identification sign" (see
definition herein) area shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet and shall be
located at entrances for which primary identification is not provided.
      2.   Individual Business Signs In A Multiple Use Facility: Businesses or
activities in multiple use facilities shall be allowed signage pursuant to
subsection A of this section.
      3.   Sign Theme: In addition to the application procedures identified in
subsection 6-2-4C of this chapter, the owner or the duly authorized agent of
the multiple use facilities shall provide a plan which identifies the general
sign theme for the facility and shall make this information available to all
tenants in the facility.
      4.   Design Compatibility: All signs related to a multiple use facility
shall provide a continuity of design to the aggregate, shall be proportioned to
the building space allowed, and shall be compatible in design with each other.
Such continuity and proportion shall be subject to review by the planning
commission. This subsection should not be construed as requiring all signs to
be the same and individuality of business styles and objectives may be
considered by the planning commission.
   F.   Hanging Panels: Freestanding signs and projecting signs with the
exception of multiple use signs may include a maximum of two (2) additional
hanging panels per freestanding or projecting sign. All hanging panels
suspended from projecting signs shall clear grade by seven feet (7'). The
maximum area of a freestanding sign or a projecting sign together with the
hanging panels shall not exceed the maximum sign area as provided by subsection
A of this section.
   G.   Marquee Signs: Marquee signs are subject to the maximum sign area as
provided by subsection A of this section and are only permitted as a
conditional use permit approved by the town of Winter Park planning commission
and the town of Winter Park town council pursuant to section
6-2-15, "Conditional Use Permit", of this chapter.
   H.   Real Estate Signs: Refer to section
6-2-7-11 of this chapter.
   I.   Neon Signs:
      1.   Businesses are limited to fifteen (15) square feet of exterior neon
signs, which is included within the maximum sign area, if only letters and
numbers are displayed. However, the planning commission may vote to approve or
disapprove an increase in the sign square footage up to thirty (30) square feet
subject to the following criteria:
         a.   Signs shall comply and are subject to subsection 6-2-5D of this
chapter.
         b.   Thirty percent (30%) of the sign copy area shall contain artistic
sign copy that is either logos, symbols, figures or graphical elements.
         c.   Encouraged are neon signs with artistic merit which are visually
interesting.
   J.   Allowable Increase In Area: The planning commission may allow an
increase in the sign area up to one hundred percent (100%) in such instances
where there are two (2) separate fronts not visible from one location or when
the multiple use facility is accessible from two (2) or more streets. No more
than thirty (30) square feet of sign copy per business may be visible on any
building from any one location. This provision applies to all signs unless
specifically excluded elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-8: BANNERS, FEATHER FLAG, TEARDROP FLAG OR WIND FLAG:
   A.   Banners:
      1.   Maximum banner area is twenty four (24) square feet. Businesses may
display a maximum of two (2) banners with a combined total area of twenty four
(24) square feet. Flags are not permitted if two (2) banners are displayed or
the maximum square footage (24 square feet) is displayed. A business may elect
to install one banner and one flag equaling no more than twenty four (24)
square feet.
      2.   Banners must be displayed as a wall sign and may also be attached to
railings.
      3.   A banner must be securely fastened so that it may not be blown down,
in whole or in part.
      4.   Banners must be of professional quality construction and appearance.
      5.   Banners must conform to the color requirements established in
subsection 6-2-5B21 of this chapter and be located on private property.
   B.   Feather Flag, Teardrop Flag Or Wind Flag:
      1.   Flag material is limited to a maximum width of three feet (3') and a
maximum height of eight feet (8'). The maximum height of the flag shall not
exceed twelve feet (12') from the ground or snowpack.
      2.   Each business may display a maximum of two (2) flags with a combined
total area of twenty four (24) square feet. Banners are not permitted if two
(2) flags are displayed or the maximum square footage (24 square feet) is
displayed. A business may elect to install one flag and one banner equaling no
more than twenty four (24) square feet.
      3.   Must conform to the color requirements established in subsection 6-
2-5B21 of this chapter and be located on private property. (Ord. 487, Series of
2014)
6-2-7-9: HIGHWAY MEDIAN BANNERS:
   A.   Highway median banners shall only be displayed at designated locations
within the Highway 40 medians and shall conform to section
6-2-7-8 (except subsection 6-2-7-8A2) of this chapter.
   B.   Highway median banners require approval by the planning commission
prior to display.
      1.   Applications to display highway median banners may be submitted no
sooner than six (6) months prior to the date the applicant desires to display
the banner.
      2.   The town planner shall review the application within fourteen (14)
days of receiving such request for conformance with section
6-2-7-8 (except subsection 6-2-7-8A2) of this chapter and place the request on
the next regular meeting.
      3.   The planning commission shall review the application and determine
if such highway median banner is in conformance with this chapter.
   C.   Multiple highway median banners are prohibited in the Highway 40 median
and shall be displayed in the order received for approval by the planning
commission.
   D.   Highway median banners may not be displayed more than fourteen (14)
days prior to the commencement of the event and shall be removed from the
median within twenty four (24) hours after the conclusion of the event.
   E.   Highway median banners shall be installed by the public works
department to ensure proper placement for traffic safety.
   F.   If the highway median banners become a traffic hazard, the town shall
be permitted to remove the banners immediately. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-7-10: MURALS:
Artistic murals shall be in compliance with section
6-2-4 of this chapter prior to the creation of such murals. (Ord. 440, Series
of 2010)
6-2-7-11: REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
   A.   Exempt Signs:
      1.   One real estate sign shall be allowed per lot or per condominium or
multi-family development involving advertising said property for sale, lease or
rent, subject to the following:
         a.   Sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area.
         b.   Such signs shall be restricted to the following information:
            (1)   For sale, lease, rent or exchange by owner or agent;
            (2)   Owner's or agent's name;
            (3)   Owner's or agent's phone number, e-mail, website;
            (4)   Agent's logo may be incorporated into the real estate sign.
         c.   In the event that a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets,
a real estate sign shall be allowed on each frontage, and if frontage is
greater than one hundred (100) linear feet, an additional sign shall be allowed
per four hundred (400) linear feet.
         d.   Such signs shall be temporary in nature and shall be removed from
the subject property within thirty (30) days after the transaction has been
completed. The town or its authorized personnel have the right to enter private
property and remove any sign posted in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
         e.   All real estate signs must be located on private property.
      2.   Temporary real estate open house signs:
         a.   One on site open house sign, nonilluminated, not exceeding six
(6) square feet in area may be permitted on the premises that is for sale,
lease or rent.
         b.   All open house signs shall be limited to a maximum of three feet
(3') above the surface grade at the base of the sign measured from the ground
or snowpack, whichever is higher.
         c.   Balloons, feather flags, teardrop flags and wind flags are
prohibited.
         d.   One or more off site open house signs may also be permitted as
necessary to indicate changes of direction from U.S. Highway 40 to the subject
property location.
         e.   Such signs shall be limited to display on private property only.
         f.   Such signs shall not be displayed within public rights of way
including sidewalks and flowerbeds.
         g.   Such signs shall be displayed only when the unit is actually open
and in all cases shall be removed at night.
         h.   The town or its authorized personnel have the right to enter
private property and remove any sign posted in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Nonexempt Signs (Permit Required Per This Section
6-2-7):
      1.   One real estate sign is authorized per multiple-family or commercial
lot or per approved project and shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in
area. Copy shall be restricted to:
         a.   For sale, or lease, or for rent by owner or agent;
         b.   Owner's or agent's name;
         c.   Owner's or agent's phone number, e-mail, website; and
         d.   Agent's logo may be incorporated into the real estate sign.
      2.   In the event that a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets, a
real estate sign shall be allowed on each frontage, and if frontage is greater
than one hundred (100) linear feet, an additional sign shall be allowed per
four hundred (400) linear feet.
      3.   Such signs shall be temporary in nature and shall be removed from
the subject property within thirty (30) days after the transaction has been
completed. The town or its authorized personnel have the right to enter private
property and remove any sign posted in violation of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this section to recognize that the eventual
elimination, as expeditiously as possible, of existing signs that are not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is as much a subject of health,
safety and welfare as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate these
regulations. It is also the intent of this section that any elimination of
nonconforming signs shall be effected so as to avoid any unreasonable invasion
of established property rights.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   A nonconforming sign may not be:
         a.   Changed to another nonconforming sign.
         b.   Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life.
         c.   Expanded.
         d.   Reestablished after discontinuance for ninety (90) days or more.
         e.   Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its present replacement value.
      2.   An owner of an existing nonconforming sign may, with approval by the
planning commission, maintain said sign as required by ordinance and may bring
the sign more into compliance with the ordinance, with the understanding that
the sign is still nonconforming and subject to removal. (Ord. 440, Series of
2010)
6-2-9: VARIANCES:
   A.   Intent Of Variance Provision: Variance from the terms of this chapter
shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the
property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the
strict application of this chapter deprives such property privileges enjoyed by
other property in the vicinity, and under identical zoning classification and
other restrictions.
   B.   Authority Of Board Of Adjustment: The board of adjustment shall have
the authority to grant variances from the strict application of the rules,
regulations, and provisions of this chapter as follows:
      1.   Jurisdiction: Before the board of adjustment shall have jurisdiction
to grant a variance, the applicant must show that due to the peculiar shape,
size, location or topography of the property, there are unusual conditions
involved which would make the literal enforcement of the regulations of this
chapter result in the practical difficulties which are unnecessary for the
purpose of this chapter and which would deprive the subject property of
privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity in the same zoning
district classification and under the same sign ordinance restriction.
      2.   Limitations: Any variances which if granted, shall be subject to
such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not
constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the provisions
herein, and with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity in the
same zoning district and under the same ordinance restrictions in which the
subject property is located.
      3.   Minimum Adjustment: In granting the variance under the provisions of
this section, the amount of adjustment granted shall be the minimum necessary
to equalize the property rights. Conditions and safeguards shall be prescribed
in this chapter therewith as are necessary to protect the purpose and intent of
this chapter, the master plan of the town, and the general welfare of the
community.
      4.   Public Welfare: The granting of any variance shall not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property improvements in
the vicinity. The board of adjustment shall ensure that the granting of a
variance will be compatible with the purpose and intent of this chapter, and
the master plan of the town, and will not be injurious to the public health,
safety and general welfare. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-10: REMOVAL OF ILLEGAL SIGNS:
   A.   Any sign that is constructed or maintained in violation of this
chapter, or in violation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is
declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement and removal as
provided herein. The town planner or his designee may cause to be removed any
sign found in violation of this chapter.
      1.   The town planner or his designee shall prepare a notice describing
the sign, listing the location, specifying the violation, and stating the sign
must be removed or the violation must be corrected within ten (10) days of the
date of receipt or posting of said notice.
      2.   The notice shall be posted on the property or sent by regular mail
to the owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is
located at their last known addresses.
      3.   Any person having an interest in the sign may file a written appeal
about the notice to the town council within ten (10) days of posting the
property or receipt of the letter.
      4.   The town planner or his designee may immediately remove any sign
that is in violation for a second or subsequent time without prior notice being
sent.
      5.   The town planner or his designee may immediately remove any sign
that causes an imminent danger to the public safety without prior notice being
sent.
      6.   Any sign removed by the town planner or his designee pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall become the property of the town of Winter Park
and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the town planner or
his designee after being stored for a period of time not less than ninety (90)
days.
      7.   The cost of the removal and disposal of the sign shall be considered
a debt owed to the town of Winter Park by the owner of the sign and the owner
of the property. This debt may be recovered in an appropriate court action by
the town of Winter Park or by placing said debt on the tax rolls as provided by
state statute. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-12: APPEALS:
Appeals to the town council may be taken by any person aggrieved by any
decision of the planning commission. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
It is unlawful for any person(s) to erect, construct, alter, move, use or
maintain any sign, banner or structure, or cause or allow the same to be done,
in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, and for each
and every day that such violation continues, said violation shall be punishable
as set forth in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. Persons charged with a
violation may include:
   A.   The owner, lessee, tenant, contractor or any other person using the
land, building, or premises where such violation has been committed or shall
exist; or
   B.   Any person who knowingly commits, takes part, or assists in such
violation; or
   C.   Any person who maintains any land, building, or premises in which such
violation shall exist. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
6-2-14: BIENNIAL REVIEW OF REGULATIONS:
In keeping with the purpose and intent of this chapter and the master plan of
the town, the planning commission shall formally review this chapter every two
(2) years from the date of adoption. This review shall include an evaluation
report from the design review committee which shall be submitted to the
planning commission. A meeting shall then be held by the planning commission to
allow for public input after which a formal report of findings and
recommendations shall be made to the town council. A public hearing shall be
conducted prior to any amendments being made to this chapter deemed necessary
by the town council. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
6-2-15: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit Application: Any application for a conditional
use permit as allowed by subsection 6-2-5B2 of this chapter shall follow the
application procedures as defined in subsections 6-2-4A and C of this chapter.
The applicant shall also provide support information addressing the standards
for findings of fact as described below. The town planner shall have up to two
(2) weeks to determine if an application is complete.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit Review Procedure: Upon determination by the town
planner that an application is complete, the town planner shall schedule a
public hearing before the town of Winter Park planning commission. Public
notice is required to be mailed to property owners within three hundred feet
(300') of the property boundary where the sign is proposed indicating time and
place of the public hearing no less than two (2) weeks in advance of the public
hearing. At the regular meeting in which the public hearing is held, the
planning commission shall review the application in conformance with the
findings of fact noted below. The planning commission may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the conditional use permit application.
Following approval or approval with conditions by the town of Winter Park
planning commission, the town planner shall retain the conditional use permit
application and all of its supplemental documents for review by the town of
Winter Park town council at a public hearing within forty (40) days. At the
regular meeting in which the public hearing is held, the town council shall
review the application in conformance with the findings of fact noted below.
The town council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the conditional
use permit application. No conditional use permit shall be valid or may be
issued until the same is approved by the town council.
   C.   Permit Standards: Any conditional use permit shall only be permitted
after meeting the following standards, as determined by findings of fact
established by the town of Winter Park planning commission and the town of
Winter Park town council:
      1.   General Welfare: The establishment, maintenance or conducting of the
sign for which a use permit is sought will not, under the particular case, be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the general vicinity of the proposed site.
      2.   Nuisance: Any sign found to be objectionable or incompatible with
the town of Winter Park or the surrounding area due to light pollution,
visibility from public rights of way, aesthetic degradation, hours of
operation, or other undesirable characteristics as determined by the town of
Winter Park town council may be prohibited.
      3.   Zoning Consistency: To obtain a conditional use permit, the
applicant must generally show that the contemplated sign is compatible with the
policies in terms of the town code, and that such use would be essential or
desirable to the public convenience or welfare, and will not impair the
integrity and character of the underlying zone district or be detrimental to
the public health, safety, or welfare of the town of Winter Park.
   D.   Fees: Each application for a conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by a permit fee as set forth by section
1-8-1 of this code. (Ord. 440, Series of 2010)
CHAPTER 2A
VILLAGE CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD SIGNAGE CODE 1
SECTION:
6-2A-1: General Provisions
6-2A-2: Prohibited And Exempt Signs
6-2A-3: Signage Requiring Permit; Sign Types And Design Criteria
6-2A-4: Review And Permit Procedure
6-2A-5: Nonconforming Signs, Variances, And Enforcement
6-2A-6: Appendix
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 2 of this title.
6-2A-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Authority, Purpose, Intent, Philosophy: This chapter shall be known and
may be cited as THE VILLAGE AT WINTER PARK PARCELS 1-A, 1-B, AND 1-C, VILLAGE
CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD SIGNAGE CODE.
      1.   Authority:
         a.   The regulations herein are authorized by all or portions of the
town of Winter Park, Colorado, ordinances 521 Series of 1998, 530 Series of
1998, 534 Series of 1998, 266 Series of 1998, 267 Series of 1998, 268 Series of
1998, and 304 Series of 2000 which are on file in the town offices.
         b.   The village at Winter Park architectural review committee
(hereinafter "the committee") shall be the governing body for the conditional
interpretation and administration of this chapter.
         c.   The Winter Park Village Master Association (hereinafter "the
Master Association") shall be the first agency of appeal of rulings by the
committee.
         d.   The town of Winter Park planning and zoning commission
(hereinafter "P&Z") shall grant final approval and permits conditional upon the
recommendations of the committee.
      2.   Purpose And Intent:
         a.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a set of standards
for the fabrication, erection, and use of signs, symbols, markings, or
advertising devices on or adjacent to the buildings comprising the village at
Winter Park (hereinafter "village"; see definition of "village", in subsection
D of this section) parcels 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C, village center neighborhood that
are required by the buildings constructed therein (their owners, tenants,
occupants, patrons, etc.). These standards are designed to protect and promote
the health and safety of persons within the community and to promote commerce
and community identity while maintaining or improving the quality of the visual
environment.
         b.   This chapter shall not govern signage by and for Winter Park
recreational association (hereinafter "WPRA") or its parts, including all ski
area operations, except as it governs retail signage in the village.
         c.   This chapter shall not govern signage for traffic control and
other purposes such as are normally installed and maintained by municipal
authorities. Such signage shall be governed by existing municipal codes and
regulations.
         d.   Signage outside parcels 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C, village center
neighborhood shall be governed by the provisions of the sign code of the town
of Winter Park until such time as the village at Winter Park comprehensive sign
plan is submitted, approved, and adopted by the town of Winter Park.
         e.   The owner or the duly authorized agent of the village at Winter
Park shall provide a plan that identifies the general sign theme for the
village and shall make this information available to all tenants in the
village.
         f.   All signs related to the village at Winter Park shall provide a
continuity of design to the aggregate, shall be proportioned to the building
space allowed, and shall be compatible in design with each other. Such
continuity and proportion shall be subject to review by the committee. This
subsection A2f should not be construed as requiring all retail signs to be the
same. The individuality of business styles and objectives as expressed through
signage is encouraged by the committee.
      3.   Philosophy:
         a.   Signage is an integral part of creating a consistent visual
character for the village. The village is primarily a pedestrian environment,
intended to be experienced from a pedestrian point of view. Vehicles are used
only for service and for access to the village from elsewhere. It is integral
to the intent of this chapter to encourage signage to be designed with this in
mind.
         b.   The design of signage can make a positive contribution to the
resort atmosphere and can help tie the contemporary village to historical
precedents at the resort, in the valley, and throughout the Rocky Mountain
West.
         c.   Because the village is used by many new visitors as well as by
residents and employees, it is important that signs address the needs of
persons who are new to the village. In addition, signage must address the
changing conditions of use throughout the year, especially wintertime
conditions with inclement weather and a substantial buildup of snow.
         d.   Each type and piece of signage must be designed in recognition of
how it will be viewed and by whom. Signs for pedestrian recognition have
different requirements than those viewed from vehicles. In general, primary
complex and primary building identification signage will be viewed from
vehicles as well as by pedestrians, while individual retail identification
signage will be viewed by pedestrians and skiers.
         e.   Some signage has a decorative or marketing function, and some is
strictly functional and must meet specific code requirements. Despite these
differences, it is desirable to have visual continuity throughout the village.
Retail identification signs, however, add vitality if, within certain limits,
their design reflects the individual character of each business.
         f.   As a general rule, signage is most effective if it is simple and
direct, without excessive verbiage. Effective graphic design will promote
recognition and understanding of the purpose and content of each sign.
         g.   In order to fulfill these objectives, it is necessary to set
general guidelines for size, materials, and styles of all signage. This will
provide sufficient control for those types of signage (such as complex,
building, and retail identification signs) where individuality of design
character is desired.
         h.   Signs shall be of quality design using quality materials and
construction. They shall be designed to stand up to exposure in the mountain
environment.
   B.   Construction Of Language: The following rules of construction shall
apply to the text of this chapter:
      1.   The particular shall control the general.
      2.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative
table, the text shall control.
      3.   The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      5.   A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
      6.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"maintained for", or "occupied for".
      7.   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
      8.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunctions "and, or, or either...or", the conjunction shall
be interpreted as follows:
"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events
shall apply.
"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply.
"Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      9.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances
of like kind or character.
   C.   Interpretation Of Provisions:
      1.   Provision Intent: Within the approved parcels 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C,
village center neighborhood, the provisions of this chapter shall take
precedence over the sign code, chapter 2 of this title. The provisions of this
chapter shall not abrogate any ordinances of the town other than the sign code
that is more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Uncertainty Of Ordinance Provisions: Whenever the application of
this chapter is uncertain due to ambiguity of its provisions, the application
shall be referred to the committee for determination. The committee shall then
authorize signing which best fulfills the intent of this chapter. The
determination of the committee regarding any uncertainty shall be final for the
purposes of this chapter, subject to appeal as outlined herein.
      3.   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase
or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid, unconstitutional,
or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   D.   Definitions:
    ABANDONED SIGN: A sign is considered abandoned if the business or activity
advertised on that sign is no longer licensed, is no longer doing business, or
is no longer active at that location, and such inactivity exists for a thirty
(30) day or longer period of time.
   ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any balloon, flag, pennant, propeller, oscillating,
rotating, pulsating, light, or other contrivance except a sign used to attract
attention for the purpose of promoting a business or the sale of products or
services.
   ADVERTISING SIGN: Any sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered, relative to the property
upon which the sign is located.
   ADVERTISING STATUARY: Any imitation, representation or similitude of a
person or thing that is sculptured, molded, modeled in, or cast from any
substance, material, or fabric and used for commercial purposes.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: Any structure erected for advertising purposes, with
or without any advertisement display thereon.
   ALTERATION: Any change of copy, color, size, shape, illumination, position,
location, construction, or supporting structure.
   ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign designed and constructed to give its message or
attract attention through a sequence of progressive or random changes of parts
or lights or degree of lighting through rotation, movement, fluctuating,
flashing, changing, or blinking lights or similar devices.
   AREA OF SIGN OR BACKGROUND AREA: The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter composed of squares or rectangles which encloses the extreme limits
of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together
with any frame, background area of sign, structural trim, or other material or
color, forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such
sign from the background against which it is placed. In the case of a sign
designed with more than one exterior surface, the area shall be computed as
including only the maximum single display surface that is visible from any
ground position at one time. The supports or uprights on which any such sign is
supported shall not be included in determining the sign area unless such
supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an integral
background of the display. In the case of skeleton letters or other signs
placed on a wall, window, canopy, awning, or other surface without any border,
the area shall be determined by enclosing all of the letters in a common
geometrical shape (e.g., square, rectangle, circle). See definition of Sign
Copy Area.
   AWNING SIGNS: Proportional words, letters, numbers, or other symbols not
exceeding eight inches (8") in height that are displayed in a high quality
manner on any valance or awning.
   BACKLIT SIGNS: Any sign, awning, valance, window covering, or other device
that is translucent and is illuminated by lights within or behind the display
surface.
   BANNER, FLAG: Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, vinyl, canvas, or similar
pennant material used for advertising purposes attached to, or appended on or
from, any structure, staff, pole, line, framing, or vehicle.
   BILLBOARDS: Any framework for signs advertising merchandise, services, or
entertainment sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than
the location of such structure.
   BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
   BUILDING DIRECTORY: A sign of "permanent" character but with changeable or
replaceable copy or panels indicating the occupants of the building for which
the directory exists.
   BUILDING FACE: The total area of the building elevation, excluding the area
of the roof.
   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any identification sign that identifies the
name, address, logotype, and/or primary use or services offered within the
complex or building to which it is affixed.
      1.   Primary Building Identification Sign: Any identification sign
intended primarily for vehicular viewing from the nearest access road that
identifies the name, logotype, and/or primary use of the complex or building to
which it is affixed.
      2.   Secondary Building Identification Sign: Any identification sign
intended primarily for pedestrian viewing that identifies the name, address,
logotype, and/or primary use or services offered within the complex or building
to which it is affixed.
   BULLETIN SIGN: See definition of Changeable Copy Sign/Bulletin Sign/Reader/
Marquee.
   BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign which serves to identify only the name,
address, logotype, and lawful use or services offered on the premises upon
which it is located and which sets forth no other advertisement.
   BUSINESS, PRIMARY: A business that has a valid town of Winter Park business
license is enclosed by permanent walls and has its own entrances. It will
usually, but not always, have its own utilities, i.e., gas, water, electric,
and sanitary facilities.
   BUSINESS, SECONDARY: A business that has a valid town business license and
shares space and utilities with a primary business.
   CANOPY: A fixed structure of any material and any length projecting from and
connected to a building and/or columns and posts from the ground, or supported
by a frame extending from the building and/or posts from the ground.
   CANOPY SIGN: Any sign attached to, constructed upon, supported by, or
hanging from a canopy.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN/BULLETIN SIGN/READER/MARQUEE: Are equivalent terms that
shall mean a sign with easily and periodically changed copy. (Marquee intended
for changeable copy theater signage only.)
   COMMITTEE: Shall be used herein to refer to the village at Winter Park
architectural review committee or its appointee.
   COMPLEX: Any individual development, or phase of development, in the village
which, in the opinion of the committee, constitutes a separate entity, whether
a single building or multiple buildings with multiuse. In general, however, the
village is not considered a complex, and identification of the village shall
not be considered a complex identification sign for the purpose of this
chapter. The determination of a complex shall be at the sole discretion of the
committee with final approval from the planning and zoning commission.
   COMPLEX IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which identifies the name and the
primary purpose and/or occupants of a given complex of buildings and which is
intended primarily for vehicular viewing from the nearest access road.
      1.   Primary Complex Identification Sign: The primary complex
identification sign identifies the complex. The sign may contain the name,
primary use, and identifying graphic elements (i.e., logotype) of the complex.
      2.   Secondary Complex Identification Sign: The secondary sign(s) of the
primary complex identification sign identifies the names of the tenants of the
complex.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: Any sign stating the name of the building under
construction or the future site occupant and may include the name, address, and
telephone number of businesses directly related to the construction project.
   CONVENIENCE SIGN: Any sign which conveys information such as restrooms, no
parking, entrance, exit, and the like but does not contain brand, trade or
business identification and is designed to be viewed on site or adjacent to the
site by pedestrians and/or motorists.
   DETACHED SIGN: See definition of Freestanding Sign.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign permanently or temporarily erected by or with
approval of the town or any authorized government agency designed solely to
provide direction or guidance to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   DIRECTLY LIGHTED SIGN: Any sign that has light cast on its surface from a
source that is within the sign, including electric lights or luminous tubes.
   DISPLAY CASE: Any case, cabinet, or other similar device, wall mounted or
freestanding, having a window or other opening to be used in conjunction with
changeable, reader, bulletin signs.
   DISPLAY WINDOW: A window used primarily for the purpose of displaying
merchandise, products, or services offered by a business located within the
building and window does not offer views into the business' showroom.
   DOUBLE FACED SIGN: Any sign with two (2) faces that are usually parallel and
back to back.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN: Any sign displaying a variable message controlled
by either a computer or other electronic or digital components. Electronic
message signs are only permitted as a conditional use under subsection 6-2A-2A1
of this chapter.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: Any detached sign that shall include any sign supported
by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or posts placed upon, in, or supported
by the ground and not part of, or attached to, any building. This definition
includes monument signs and ground signs.
   GRADE: The level of the ground, paving, public sidewalk, or curb closest to
the sign.
   GROUND SIGN: See definition of Freestanding Sign.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which serves to identify only the name,
address, and lawful use of the activity to which it relates and which sets
forth no other advertisement.
   ILLEGAL SIGN: Any sign placed without proper approval and/or permits as
required by the Master Association at the time said sign was placed. Illegal
sign shall also mean any nonconforming sign that has exceeded its authorized
amortization period.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign for which an artificial source of light is used
in order to make the message readable and shall include directly and indirectly
lighted signs.
   INDIRECTLY LIGHTED SIGN: Any sign that has light cast on its surface from an
exterior source, including electric lights or luminous tubes.
   MAJOR OCCUPANTS: The primary tenant(s) of a building or complex of
buildings, designated as such by the property owner.
   MARQUEE: See definition of Changeable Copy Sign/Bulletin Sign/Reader/
Marquee.
   MASTER ASSOCIATION: Shall be used herein to refer to the Winter Park Village
Master Association or its appointee.
   MENU BOARD: Any display box, freestanding sign, wall sign, or permanent
window mounted sign used for the express purpose of displaying menus.
   MOBILE SIGN: See definition of Vehicular Sign.
   MONUMENT SIGN: Any freestanding sign that includes an architecturally
designed base or column that is constructed of stone, brick or timbers, or
other similar material, and is designed to be architecturally compatible with
the design of the project.
   MULTIPLE USE FACILITY: Any building that is occupied by more than one legal
and distinct business. (See definition of Business, Primary and Business,
Secondary.)
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign or advertising structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter that by its height, lighting, color, materials,
square foot area, location, use, or structural support, does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter shall hereafter be termed nonconforming.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN: See definition of Billboards.
   PAINTED WALL SIGN: Any sign whose copy is painted directly upon the surface
of a building.
   PEDESTRIAN INFORMATION SIGN: A sign posted adjacent to a business entrance
and providing detailed information about the business (such as a menu or
schedule) that is not provided by other signage on said business premises.
   PERMANENT SIGN: A sign constructed of durable material and affixed,
lettered, attached to, or placed upon a fixed, nonmovable, nonportable
supporting structure.
   PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN: A sign, banner, poster, or placard upon or within
three feet (3') of a window for the purpose of viewing from outside of the
premises. This term excludes merchandise displayed and decorative borders.
   PERSON: Shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
   PLASTIC SIGN: Any sign, embellishment, or sign area made of plastic, flat
sheet, corrugated panels, formed or molded, on one or more faces.
   POINT OF PURCHASE SIGN: Any structure, device, display board, screen
surface, or wall with characters, letters, or illustrations placed thereto,
thereon, or thereunder by any method or means whatsoever where the matter
displayed is used for advertising on the premises a product or service actually
or actively offered for sale or rent or services rendered thereon or therein
(such as street vendors and vending carts).
   PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to any part of a building,
projecting at an angle from the building, which is supported by any rigid
support, irrespective of the number of guy wires used in connection therewith.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign indicating that the premises on which the
sign is located, or any portion thereof, is for sale, lease, or rent.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which serves to identify
only the name and address of an occupant of a residential dwelling unit.
   ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon, above,
or over the roof or a canopy of any building.
   SIGN: Any writing (including letter, word, or numeral), pictorial
representation (including illustration or decoration), emblem (including
device, symbol, or trademark), flag (including banner or pennant), or any other
figure of similar character which is a structure or any part thereof, or is
attached, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or other
structure, and shall include any sign placed upon a vehicle used to announce,
direct attention to, or advertise, and is visible from outside a building. A
sign shall include writing, representation, or other figure of similar
character within a building and located in a window.
   SIGN COPY: Any words, symbols, logos, figures, numbers, or symbolic
representations incorporated into a sign with the purpose of attracting
attention to the subject matter.
   SIGN COPY AREA: Shall be measured by calculating the sum of the area covered
by each word, symbol, logo, figure, number, or symbolic representation.
Calculation of sign copy area by the committee or its appointee shall be deemed
final for the purposes of this chapter.
   SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign that exhibits changes in light or
color.
   SIGN GRAPHIC: Any painted design or other medium which covers all or a major
portion of a wall, building, facade, or other structure is considered a sign.
   SIGN HEIGHT; SIGN CLEARANCE: Sign height shall be measured from average
ground level at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the sign;
sign clearance shall be the minimum clearance from any walking or driving
surface beneath the sign.
   SNIPE SIGN: Any sign made of any material including paper, cardboard,
plastic, wood, or metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, pasted, taped, or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences, bridges, or other inappropriate
mountain locations, or left lying on the ground, and/or that the advertising
matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the premises upon which said sign
is located.
   SPECIAL EVENT: An activity or occasion that occurs on or off premises (for
the purpose of this definition "premises" shall be within the limits of the
parcels 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C, village center neighborhood) and does not exceed
fourteen (14) days in duration. Special events may require a special event
permit from the town of Winter Park and shall require the prior written
approval of the Master Association.
   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN: A sign or other information installed or applied on a
property in conjunction with a special event with the intent of displaying the
sign continuously for more than twenty four (24) hours, but which is not a part
of a permanent use on the premises (for the purpose of this definition
"premises" shall be within the limits of the parcels 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C, village
center neighborhood). Special event signs shall require the prior written
approval of the Master Association. Special event sign(s) shall not be
displayed for more than fourteen (14) days prior to the special event and shall
be removed within forty eight (48) hours of the conclusion of the special
event.
   TEMPORARY USE: An activity that is not part of a permanent use on the
premises (for the purpose of this definition "premises" shall be within the
limits of the respective building property line or associated easements) and is
temporary in nature; such an activity shall not exceed thirty (30) days in
duration. Temporary uses shall require the prior written approval of the Master
Association.
   TEMPORARY USE SIGN: A sign or other information installed or applied on a
property in conjunction with a temporary use with the intent of displaying the
sign continuously for more than twenty four (24) hours, but which is not a part
of a permanent use on the property. Temporary use signs shall require the prior
written approval of the Master Association.
   TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN: A "temporary use sign" as defined herein (and
governed by the time limits listed therefor) and applied upon or within three
feet (3') of a window for the purpose of viewing from outside of the premises.
   VEHICULAR SIGN: A sign affixed to, painted onto, or placed in the open bed
of a transportation vehicle or trailer for the purposes of business
advertising; however, not to include signs affixed to vehicles or trailers for
identification purposes or required by licensing ordinances.
   VILLAGE: The village at Winter Park (parcels 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C, village
center neighborhood), meaning all properties within the boundaries of the
Winter Park village final development plan, as accepted by the town of Winter
Park.
   WPRA: Shall be used herein to refer to Winter Park recreational association
or its appointee.
   WPV, INC.: Shall be used herein to refer to the Winter Park Village,
Incorporated or its appointee.
   WALL SIGN: Any sign attached or erected on the exterior wall of a building
with the exposed face of the sign parallel to said wall and supported
throughout its length by the wall of the building.
   WINDOW SIGN: Any sign attached to a window, or located within a building and
within three feet (3') of a window which, in the sole judgment of the
committee, is intended to be viewed from the outside of the building.
   WINTER PARK RESORT: Generic term for the land and facilities in and around
the Winter Park ski area. (Ord. 304, Series of 2000; amd. Ord. 388, Series of
2006)
6-2A-2: PROHIBITED AND EXEMPT SIGNS:
   A.   Prohibited Signs And Sign Components: Any sign or sign component not
specifically in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is prohibited,
including:
      1.   Animated or moving signs, including signs consisting of any moving,
swinging, rotating, flashing, blinking, scintillating, fluctuating, scrolling,
or otherwise animated light, lettering, numerals, or characters, unless
specifically permitted as part of the allowable signage enumerated in this
article and as part of a conditional use permit for an electronic message sign
approved by the town of Winter Park planning commission and the town of Winter
Park town council pursuant to the following procedures and subject to the
following criteria:
         a.   Conditional Use Permit Application: Any application for a
conditional use permit as allowed by this subsection A1 shall follow the
application procedures as defined in subsections 6-2A-4A and B of this article.
The applicant shall also provide support information addressing the standards
for findings of fact as described in this subsection A1. The town planner shall
have up to two (2) weeks to determine if an application is complete.
         b.   Conditional Use Permit Review Procedure: Upon determination by
the town planner that an application is complete, the town planner shall
schedule a public hearing before the town of Winter Park planning commission.
Public notice is required to be mailed to property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the property boundary where the sign is proposed indicating time
and place of the public hearing no less than two (2) weeks in advance of the
public hearing. At the regular meeting in which the public hearing is held, the
planning commission shall review the application in conformance with the
findings of fact noted below. The planning commission may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the conditional use permit application.
Following approval or approval with conditions by the town of Winter Park
planning commission, the town planner shall retain the conditional use permit
application and all of its supplemental documents for review by the town of
Winter Park town council at a public hearing within forty (40) days. At the
regular meeting in which the public hearing is held, the town council shall
review the application in conformance with the findings of fact noted below.
The town council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the conditional
use permit application. No conditional use permit shall be valid or may be
issued pursuant to the terms of this subsection until the same is approved by
the town council.
         c.   Permit Standards: Any conditional use permit shall only be
permitted after meeting the following standards, as determined by findings of
fact established by the town of Winter Park planning commission and the town of
Winter Park town council:
            (1)   General Welfare: The establishment, maintenance or conducting
of the sign for which a use permit is sought will not, under the particular
case, be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the general vicinity of the proposed site.
            (2)   Nuisance: Any sign found to be objectionable or incompatible
with the town of Winter Park or the surrounding area due to light pollution,
visibility from public rights of way, aesthetic degradation, hours of
operation, or other undesirable characteristics as determined by the town of
Winter Park town council may be prohibited.
            (3)   Zoning Consistency: To obtain a conditional use permit, the
applicant must generally show that the contemplated sign is compatible with the
policies in terms of the town code, and that such use would be essential or
desirable to the public convenience or welfare, and will not impair the
integrity and character of the underlying zone district or be detrimental to
the public health, safety, or welfare of the town of Winter Park. (Ord. 388,
Series of 2006)
      2.   Advertising devices except flags or banners or advertising statuary
used to identify the nature of a business as defined herein. Exceptions noted
shall require a permit as for other signs.
      3.   Decorative banners, flags, pennants, balloons, and sandwich type
signs used for advertising purposes, except as provided in subsection 6-2A-3D
of this article or submitted and permitted as part of other signage. Any system
of flags, banners or pennants, or a combination of the same, constituting an
architectural feature that is integral to the design character of the village,
a complex within the village or a comprehensive project may be permitted if
first approved by the committee as part of an overall review of the proposed
system.
      4.   Except as provided for in subsection B of this section, light bulb
strings including external displays, which consist of unshielded light bulbs,
festoons, and strings of open light bulbs, are prohibited. An exception hereto
may be granted by the committee when the display is in keeping with an approved
overall design theme put forth for the complex and/or for the business activity
to which it relates and is appropriate for the complex as a whole. (Examples:
decorative light strings in landscape trees throughout the complex; garlands on
retail shop facades as part of an overall seasonal or event lighting theme;
etc.)
      5.   Any sign, banner, poster, or other display other than directional
signs installed for the purpose of advertising a project, person, or subject
not related to the premises upon which said sign is located. An exception
hereto, may be granted by the committee for signs advertising a community event
or function inside or outside the boundaries of the complex; the installation
not to exceed fourteen (14) days prior to, or forty eight (48) hours after said
event. Such signs shall require the prior written approval of the committee.
Examples of qualifying community events include any sanctioned public event
such as an art fair, holiday celebration, food festival, historical
celebration, concert, or other similar cultural event, or competitive athletic
event, fair, or similar event, or function. Qualifying events may require a
special event permit from the town of Winter Park.
      6.   Signs that create a safety hazard by obstructing clear view of
pedestrian, skier, or vehicular traffic.
      7.   Signs constituting a traffic hazard. No person shall install or
maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any sign which simulates or
imitates in size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal, or
which makes use of the words, "Stop", "Look", "Danger", or any other words,
phrases, symbols, or characters in such a manner to interfere with, mislead, or
confuse pedestrian, skier, or vehicular traffic.
      8.   No signs on doors, windows, or fire escapes shall be installed,
relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any
door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape except those signs as required by other codes or
ordinances.
      9.   Signs in proximity to utility lines. No permit shall be issued for
any sign, and no sign shall be constructed or maintained which has less
horizontal or vertical clearance from authorized communication or energized
electrical power lines than that prescribed by the laws of the state of
Colorado or rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof. It
shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to ensure that all applicable
laws, codes, regulations, or ordinances are met.
      10.   Vehicle signs, including signs affixed to automobiles, trucks,
trailers or other transportation vehicles or signs placed in the open bed of
any such transportation vehicles which advertise, identify or provide direction
to a use or activity not related to its lawful making of deliveries or sales of
merchandise, or as required by licensing ordinances.
      11.   Roof signs as defined herein.
      12.   Signs that produce audible noise or sounds.
      13.   Signs that emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor.
      14.   Snipe signs as defined.
      15.   Signs intended to swing or otherwise noticeably move as a result of
wind pressure because of the nature of suspension or attachment of such signs.
      16.   Marquees except for movie theaters, playhouses, or other venues
requiring regular updates of shows, performances, or meetings. Marquees shall
be subject to review and approval for compatibility with the visual character
of the village and intent of this chapter by the committee prior to issuance of
a sign permit.
      17.   Words or pictures contained in a sign that, in the sole judgment of
the committee, reflect lewd or immoral information or images as determined by
standards and values of the community.
      18.   Real estate signs.
      19.   Political campaign signs.
      20.   No sign shall be affixed to any living plant, tree, bush, or shrub,
nor nailed, stapled, screwed, taped, or glued to any building, boulder,
retaining wall, bench, sign, bridge, post, lamp, banner, or other permanent
fixture, plant, shrub, or tree, or in any manner that damages or defaces any
surface or fixture of the village at Winter Park.
      21.   Exterior residential unit identification signs used to identify
individual residences.
      22.   Temporary paper window signs except printed posters advertising a
community event or function inside or outside the boundaries of the Zephyr
Mountain Lodge as stipulated herein.
   B.   Allowable Signs Exempt From Permit: All signs in this subsection B are
exempt from permit provided the signs are in compliance with all other
applicable laws and ordinances. Allowable signs exempt from permit shall
require the prior written approval of the Master Association.
      1.   Memorial tablets and plaques installed and authorized by a duly
constituted governmental agency or recognized historical society.
      2.   Official and legal notices issued by any court, public body, or
officer in performance of a public duty or in giving any legal notice.
      3.   Changeable copy sign as defined in subsection 6-2A-1D of this
chapter and meeting the provisions of subsection 6-2A-3B1e of this chapter
shall not require a permit to change copy.
      4.   Directional, warning, or informational signs or structures required
or authorized by law, or by federal, state, county, or town authority. Any
warning sign required to protect the health and safety of persons within or
adjacent to the buildings.
      5.   Official flags of the United States of America, the state of
Colorado, Grand County, and the town of Winter Park. No side of any flag may be
greater than a maximum of six feet (6'), except flags on poles over thirty five
feet (35') high may have a flag which has a width of not more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the height of the pole. All flags shall be displayed in a
proper manner.
      6.   Prohibited activities signs located on a property posting said
property for warning or other prohibitions on trespassing, hunting, fishing,
swimming, or other prohibited activities. Such signs shall be no greater than
one square foot in area and shall be spaced no closer than fifty feet (50')
apart, except as otherwise provided in other applicable town ordinances.
Setback requirements shall not apply to such signs.
      7.   Interior signs located on the interior of a building or structure
and not visible under normal viewing conditions from outside the building and
primarily designed for the information of persons within the subject building
or structure.
      8.   Convenience signs as defined in subsection 6-2A-1D of this chapter
and meeting the provisions of this chapter that are necessary for public
information, convenience or safety.
Information such as "Open", "Closed", "No Vacancy", "Vacancy", "Entrance",
"Exit", and directional arrows is allowed. Other necessary convenience type
signs such as "Lift Tickets", "Restrooms", "Telephones", "Ski School",
"Lockers", and similar messages may be approved by the committee.
Convenience signs meeting the provisions of this chapter are not counted toward
the total allowable sign area for the business or use with which they are
associated.
         a.   Open/Closed Convenience Sign:
Size:
One square foot allowable background area.
Number Of Signs:
One sign per public entrance is allowed.
Content:
Content shall be limited to the words "OPEN" and "CLOSED".
Maximum Letter Height:
Four inches (4").
Design:
Signs shall be neatly displayed. Signs shall be designed for pedestrian
viewing.
Illumination:
Signs constructed of letters made from lighted tubing are prohibited. Signs
shall follow the lighting standards set forth in subsection 6-2A-3E of this
chapter.
         b.   Credit Card Convenience Sign:
Size:
One square foot allowable aggregate background area per group of credit card
signs.
Number Of Signs:
One sign (group) per public entrance is allowed.
Content:
Content shall be limited to signs identifying credit cards accepted by the
merchant and organization membership medallions. These signs may include
corporate logos.
Design:
Decals are acceptable. The signs should be grouped together in an orderly
manner and may be applied to a window or door; or, if on a solid background,
may be applied to a wall or other surface. Signs shall be designed for
pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Illumination is prohibited, except as coincidentally illuminated.
         c.   Hours Of Operation Convenience Sign:
Size:
One square foot allowable background area.
Number Of Signs:
One sign per public entrance is allowed.
Content:
Content shall be limited to hours of operation or related information.
Maximum Letter Height:
Maximum letter height shall be four inches (4").
Design:
Decals are acceptable. The signs may be applied to a window or door; or, if on
a solid background, may be applied to a wall or other surface. Signs shall be
designed for pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Illumination is prohibited, except as coincidentally illuminated.
         d.   Vacancy; No Vacancy Convenience Sign:
Size:
Two (2) square feet allowable area.
Number Of Signs:
One sign per public entrance.
Content:
Content shall be limited to "NO" and "VACANCY".
Maximum Letter Height:
Maximum letter height is four inches (4").
Design:
Signs shall be designed for pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Signs shall follow the lighting standards set forth in subsection 6-2A-3E of
this chapter.
      9.   Holiday string lights or colored tree lights may be used for
decorative purposes to coincide with the Thanksgiving/Christmas holiday season
(November 15 through January 15) and shall be exempt from permit requirements
if displayed for no more than sixty (60) days and removed following that time
period. Clear string lights may be used the remainder of the year only for
purposes of landscape decoration, window decoration, and display. Bulbs on such
lights shall not exceed 10 watts and shall not twinkle or flash and shall be
installed according to the national electrical code.
      10.   Signage displayed on motor vehicles that are being operated or
stored in the normal course of business may display only the business name and
logo, the business address, business telephone number, a business slogan,
generic product identification (i.e., ski rental, lodging, restaurant, etc.),
or specific brand name product identification only if the primary purpose or
use of such vehicles will not be the display of signs, and only if such
vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as commercial
or delivery vehicles.
      11.   Window signs that are more than three feet (3') back from the
window, except illuminated signs that (in the sole judgment of the committee)
are arranged for the purpose of viewing outside the premises. The area of
illuminated signs thus arranged for the purpose of viewing outside the business
is to be counted in the total allowable business signage, and a permit is
required. (Ord. 304, Series of 2000)
6-2A-3: SIGNAGE REQUIRING PERMIT; SIGN TYPES AND DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Signs Not Governed By This Chapter: Signs in subsections A1 through A6
and subsection D of this section are not governed by this chapter, but require
review and approval by the committee.
      1.   Resort and neighborhood identification.
      2.   Vehicular guidance signs.
      3.   Interior road/street identification.
      4.   Vehicular regulatory and warning signs.
      5.   Parking area signs.
      6.   Bus stop identification and information.
Sign permits may be issued for signs included under this section, provided the
signs are in compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances.
   B.   Commercial/Facility Signage:
      1.   Size, Area, And Coverage Standards:
         a.   Allowable Sign Combination Incorporated In Total Sign Or Copy
Area: Each business activity shall be authorized to utilize, within the limits
established by this chapter, any one or a combination of any three (3) of the
following sign types on each building facade served by a public entrance. The
combined area of these signs shall not exceed the allowable individual or
aggregate sign areas shown in table 1 of this section.
            (1)   One wall sign.
            (2)   One canopy sign.
            (3)   One freestanding sign.
            (4)   One display case.
            (5)   One projecting sign.
            (6)   One permanent window sign (window sign greater than 2 square
feet or has a letter or logotype height greater than 4 inches).
            (7)   One awning sign per awning over a window, display window or
door.
         b.   Maximum Aggregate Sign Area:
            (1)   The maximum allowable commercial tenant sign area shall be
determined by the width of the storefront facade and the number of building
faces or frontages on which the tenant has exterior wall exposure with public
entrances. The definitions of "area of sign" and "sign copy" shall be used to
determine permitted sign area.
            (2)   No single tenant sign shall have an area greater than sixteen
(16) square feet and a copy area greater than twelve (12) square feet or copy
height greater than eight inches (8").
            (3)   Each individual sign allowed shall be complete. In no case
shall several individual signs be combined to create a single sign or message.
The following table shall determine the permitted aggregate sign area:
   TABLE 1
   Sign Aggregate Copy And Background Area Formula
            Permitted Sign Area Square Feet
Facade Width One Facade  Two Facades  
   Sign Aggregate Copy And Background Area Formula
                Permitted Sign Area Square Feet
Facade Width     One Facade       Two Facades      
(Feet)           Copy Background  Copy Background  
Less than 12     12   16          18   21          
>12 and <24      15   18          21   24          
>24 and <36      18   21          26   30          
>36 and <48      22   26          30   34          
>48 and <60      26   30          34   38          
>60 and <72      30   35          38   42          
>72 and <84      30   35          42   46          
>84 and <96      30   35          44   48          
>96 and <108     30   35          48   52          
>108 and <120    30   35          52   56          
>120 and <132    30   35          56   60          
>132 and <144    30   35          60   64          
>144 and <156    30   35          60   64          
>156 and <168    30   35          60   64          
Greater than 168 30   35          60   64          
 
Aggregate allowable area for more than 1 facade may not be allocated to a
single facade. In no case shall any single facade display a greater aggregate
sign area than allowed above.
         c.   Additional Signs Allowed: Each business activity shall be
authorized to utilize, within the limits established by this chapter, the
following additional convenience signs as defined herein, and such signs shall
not be included within the aggregate sign area.
            (1)   One open closed sign per public entrance.
            (2)   One hours sign per public entrance.
            (3)   One credit card sign per sign group per public entrance.
            (4)   One vacancy/no vacancy sign per public entrance.
            (5)   One convenience sign (approved wording) per awning over a
window, display window, or door.
            (6)   One convenience sign (approved wording) per window, display
window, or door. (Window sign less than 2 square feet in area or has a letter
or logotype height greater than 4 inches.)
         d.   Size, Area, And Coverage Limitations: The following signs which
are not incorporated into the total aggregate sign or sign copy area for an
individual retail tenant are, however, limited in size, area, and coverage by
the formula in table 2 of this section:
            (1)   Complex identification sign.
            (2)   Primary building identification sign.
            (3)   Secondary building identification sign.
            (4)   Building directory.
            (5)   Convenience signs.
            (6)   Marquee/changeable copy signs.
            (7)   Pedestrian information signs.
            (8)   Special event signs/banners.
            (9)   Temporary use signs.
            (10)   Construction signs.
Size and lettering limitations for these signs are:
         TABLE 2
         SIGN SIZE AND AREA LIMITATIONS
Type Of Sign Allowable Area Maximum Letter Height
             Square Feet    Inches
               Allowable
Type Of Sign   Area      Maximum Letter Height
               Square    Inches
               Feet
Marquee/
changeable        16           4
copy
Bulletin sign     6            2
Construction      40  Unrestricted
sign
Convenience       2            4
sign
Pedestrian        6            2
information
Special event     30           8
sign/banners
Temporary use     8            6
sign
Building          4            1
directory
Complex                           12
identification
 Primary         25    square feet copy/50 square feet background
 Secondary       3    square feet copy/5 square feet background and 20 square feet copy/30
               square feet background cumulative
Building
identification
 Primary         15           8
 Secondary       10           8
 
      2.   Commercial/Facility Signage In Parcels 1-A, 1-B, And 1-C, Village
Center Neighborhood: These signs are used to identify, advertise, and promote
individual businesses and facilities at the resort. They also reflect the
unique character of each business that adds color, vitality, and excitement to
the village.
         a.   Complex/Multiuse Facility Identification Sign:
Primary Sign:
Type: Wall sign or freestanding sign.
Sign Size:
That portion of a primary complex identification sign identifying the name of
the complex shall have a maximum size of twenty five (25) square feet of copy
and fifty (50) square feet of background area.
Sign Height:
A wall sign may be attached to a building at a height above the first story
when in the judgment of the committee, the sign is compatible and/or consistent
with the design or character of the facility. In no event shall a sign be
attached onto or above the roofline.
A freestanding sign shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height; however,
increases in height may be allowed by the committee to compensate for
topographical features of said sign's location.
Number Of Signs:
Each individual multiple use facility (complex) will be permitted primary
complex identification sign(s) related to that complex. A complex of buildings
(i.e., riverside building and slopeside building) shall be permitted one
primary complex identification per street access.
            (1)   If the complex has vehicular entrances from more than one
street, each street shall be treated separately and shall be permitted one
primary complex identification sign. Each primary sign shall be allowed the
maximum size permitted.
            (2)   Additionally, if the complex has two (2) or more vehicular
entrances from the same street, primary identification signs will be permitted
at each entrance provided that the total allowable signage permitted for each
primary sign be divided between these entrances.
Maximum Letter Height:
Maximum letter height of complex name and use shall be twelve inches (12").
Content:
Such signage shall contain the name and may contain the address, primary use,
and identifying graphic elements (i.e., logotype) of that complex (the primary
sign).
Design:
Sign design should be consistent with the village, neighborhood, and building
character. Signs shall be designed for vehicular as well as pedestrian viewing.
All freestanding complex identification signs shall be placed in an appropriate
landscaped area.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the standards set
forth in subsection E of this section.
Secondary Sign Panels:
Type: Individual panels attached to primary sign.
Sign Size:
That portion of a complex identification sign identifying the names of the
tenants (the secondary signs) shall have a maximum size of three (3) square
feet of copy and five (5) square feet of background area per commercial tenant.
Number Of Signs:
Each individual multiple use facility (complex) will be permitted sign(s)
identifying the commercial tenants within that complex (the secondary sign[s]).
The number of qualifying secondary signs attached to each primary sign shall be
unlimited, except that the businesses identified must occupy the building(s)
identified; and that portion of the primary sign that is allocated to secondary
signs shall not exceed an additional twenty (20) square feet of copy and thirty
(30) square feet of area; and no commercial tenant may have more than one
secondary sign per primary sign.
            (1)   If the complex has vehicular entrances from more than one
street, each street shall be treated separately and shall be permitted one
secondary identification sign. Each secondary sign shall be allowed the maximum
size permitted.
            (2)   Additionally, if the complex has two (2) or more vehicular
entrances from the same street, secondary identification signs will be
permitted at each entrance provided that the total allowable signage permitted
for each secondary sign be divided between these entrances.
Maximum Letter Height:
Maximum letter height of secondary signs shall be six inches (6").
Content:
Such signage may contain the name or primary use and/or identifying graphic
elements (i.e., logotype) of each commercial tenant within the complex.
Design:
That portion of a complex identification sign identifying the names of
individual retail or commercial tenants, or descriptions of the types of
businesses or services offered therein (the secondary sign[s]) shall be
proportional to the base sign and similar in design and materials. Such
secondary panels may utilize the typefaces, colors, and/or logotypes of the
individual commercial tenants within the complex except that the individual
panels shall all be of the same size, shape, and background color and shall be
integral to the primary sign. Such secondary panels may be placed upon, or
suspended from the primary sign in an orderly manner. Signs may be designed for
vehicular as well as pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the standards set
forth in subsection E of this section.
         b.   Building Identification Signs:
Primary Sign:
Type: Wall sign, freestanding sign or projecting sign.
Size:
Primary building identification signs shall have a maximum size of fifteen (15)
square feet.
Sign Height:
A wall sign may be attached to a building at a height above the first story
when in the judgment of the committee, the sign is compatible and/or consistent
with the design or character of the facility. In no event shall a sign be
attached onto or above the roofline.
A freestanding sign shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height; however,
increases in height may be allowed by the committee to compensate for
topographical features of said sign's location.
A projecting sign located in walking areas shall allow a ground clearance of at
least eight feet (8'). Projecting signs shall not project more than six feet
(6') from the face of a building.
Number Of Signs:
Each building in the village shall be allowed one primary building
identification sign located at the primary building entrance.
Maximum Letter Height:
Primary building identification sign maximum letter height shall be ten inches
(10").
Content:
Content shall be limited to the name and primary use of the building to which
the sign is affixed and shall set forth no other advertising.
Design:
Sign design should be consistent with the village, neighborhood and building
character. Primary building identification signs when adjacent to a vehicular
street may be designed for vehicular or pedestrian viewing. Any building
identification sign which, in the sole judgment of the committee, is not
adjacent to and/or visible from the nearest vehicular street shall be designed
for pedestrian viewing. All freestanding building identification signs shall be
placed in an appropriate landscaped area.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection F of this section.
Secondary Sign:
Type: Wall sign, projecting sign, awning sign, canopy sign.
Size:
Secondary building identification signs shall have a maximum size of ten (10)
square feet.
Sign Height:
A wall sign shall not be attached to a building at a height above the first
story unless the business that the sign advertises is located above the first
story, in which case, the sign may be on the same story as the business. In no
event shall a sign be attached onto or above the roofline.
Projecting sign located in walking areas shall allow a ground clearance of at
least eight feet (8'). Projecting signs shall not project more than six feet
(6') from the face of a building.
Awnings may contain signage. Awnings shall allow a ground clearance of at least
eight feet (8').
Canopies may contain signage attached to, constructed upon, supported by, or
hanging from it. Canopy signs shall allow a ground clearance of at least eight
feet (8').
Number Of Signs:
Each building in the village shall be allowed one secondary building
identification sign and be limited to first floor at each public entrance.
Maximum Letter Height:
Secondary building identification sign of any type shall have a maximum letter
height of eight inches (8").
Content:
Content shall be limited to the name and primary use of the building to which
the sign is affixed and shall set forth no other advertising.
Design:
Sign design should be consistent with the village, neighborhood, and building
character. Secondary building identification signs shall be designed for
pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
         c.   Building Directory:
Type: Wall sign.
Size:
Building directories shall have a maximum size of four (4) square feet.
Sign Height:
A building directory, when affixed to the exterior of a building, shall be wall
mounted no higher than the adjacent doorway.
Number Of Signs:
Each building in the village shall be permitted one building directory at each
public entrance.
Maximum Letter Height:
Maximum letter height for the building name shall be two inches (2"). Maximum
height for individual occupants or other information shall be one inch (1").
Content:
Content shall be limited to changeable or replaceable letters, numerals, or
panels indicating the names of businesses or persons occupying the building
upon which the directory is affixed.
Design:
Sign design should be consistent with the village, complex, neighborhood, and
building character. Letters shall be uniform in size and color. Signs shall be
wall mounted and designed for pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
         d.   Business Identification Signs:
Type: Wall sign, projecting sign, awning sign, canopy sign.
Size:
No single business identification sign shall have a copy area greater than
twelve (12) square feet or a background area greater than sixteen (16) square
feet. Aggregate area (background and/or copy) of all business identification
signs shall not exceed the limits shown in table 1 of this section.
Sign Height:
A wall sign shall not be attached to a building at a height above the first
story unless the business that the sign advertises is located above the first
story, in which case, the sign may be on the same story as the business. In no
event shall a sign be attached onto or above the roofline.
A projecting sign located in walking areas shall allow a ground clearance of at
least eight feet (8'). Projecting signs shall not project more than six feet
(6') from the face of a building.
Awnings may contain signage. Awnings shall allow a ground clearance of at least
eight feet (8').
Canopies may contain signage attached to, constructed upon, supported by, or
hanging from it. Canopy signs shall allow a ground clearance of at least eight
feet (8').
Number Of Signs:
Each primary business location (see "business" defined) shall be allowed a sign
or signs according to the provisions of this chapter and with the written
approval of the committee.
A secondary business (see "business" defined) shall not be allowed additional
sign area. A secondary business shall share sign area with the primary business
that it is a part of. If it is unclear whether or not the business is primary
or secondary, the committee shall have the final determination based on
evidence submitted, and their interpretive authority as defined in this
chapter.
Maximum Letter Height:
No single business identification sign shall have a copy height greater than
eight inches (8").
Content:
Content shall be limited to name, logotype, address, and lawful use of the
premises upon which the sign is located and shall set forth no other
advertising.
Design:
Sign design should be consistent with the character of the village,
neighborhood, building, and/or individual business. Signs shall be designed for
pedestrian viewing. All business identification signs displayed by a business
shall be compatible and coordinated in design, color, and materials.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
         e.   Marquee/Changeable Copy Sign/Bulletin Sign:
Type: Wall sign.
Size:
Marquee signs shall have a maximum background area of sixteen (16) square feet.
Copy may be displayed within that area.
Changeable copy/bulletin signs shall have a maximum area of four (4) square
feet. Copy may be displayed within that area.
Sign Height:
A wall sign shall not be attached to a building at a height above the first
story unless the business that the sign advertises is located above the first
story, in which case, the sign may be on the same story as the business. In no
event shall a sign be attached onto or above the roofline.
Number Of Signs:
One marquee or changeable copy sign per business is allowed.
Maximum Letter Height:
A four inch (4") maximum letter height is allowed on marquee signs. A two inch
(2") maximum letter height is allowed on changeable copy/bulletin signs.
Content:
The copy displayed upon marquee/changeable copy signs/bulletin signs may only
be used in conjunction with the normal activities of that business. "Sales",
"Closeouts", "Specials", or product names or types are not allowable uses of
this sign type.
Design:
Letters shall be uniform in size and color. Signs shall be designed for
pedestrian viewing.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
         f.   Pedestrian Information Sign:
Type: Wall sign, freestanding sign or projecting sign.
Size:
A pedestrian information sign shall be limited to six (6) square feet.
Sign Height:
A wall sign shall not be attached to a building at a height above the first
story unless the business that the sign advertises is located above the first
story, in which case, the sign may be on the same story as the business. In no
event shall a sign be attached onto or above the roofline.
A freestanding sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height; however,
increases in height may be allowed by the committee to compensate for
topographical features of said sign's location.
A projecting sign located in walking areas shall allow a ground clearance of at
least eight feet (8'). Projecting signs shall not project more than six feet
(6') from the face of a building.
Number Of Signs:
One sign per public entrance.
Maximum Letter Height:
Two inches (2").
Content:
Content shall be limited to information about the business (such as a menu,
schedule or public services offered) that is not provided by other signage on
said business property.
Design:
Signs shall be designed for pedestrian viewing. Pedestrian information signs
may be projecting, display case, freestanding, or wall mounted signs.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
         g.   Window Signage: Window signs (temporary or permanent) include any
sign that is located upon or within three feet (3') of a window, and is visible
from the outside.
Area Coverage:
Window signs in the aggregate (temporary and permanent) shall not cover more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of any individual window, display
window, display case, or door, or cover more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
total area of all windows, display windows, display cases, and doors on any
business facade or building face.
Height/Placement:
Permanent window signs are limited to the floor levels of a building occupied
by the commercial tenant.
Content:
Permanent window signs may identify the name or logotype of the tenant or the
nature of the goods sold. A menu may be displayed as a permanent window sign.
Temporary window signs may identify any special event or temporary use
otherwise permitted by this chapter and are not counted toward total allowable
sign area for the business or use with which they are associated.
Design:
Signs shall be designed for pedestrian viewing. A permanent window sign must be
permanently attached to the window face using vinyl, paint, metallic leaf,
stained glass, leaded glass, etching, or other similar construction methods.
The materials and colors should be compatible with the building face and/or the
overall tenant sign theme. Temporary window signs may be neatly mounted upon
the glass, inside or outside, the tenant's premises or within three feet (3')
of the window.
Illumination:
Illumination of window signs is prohibited except as coincidentally
illuminated.
   C.   Construction Signage: Construction sign permits may not be issued until
foundation permits for the projects have been issued. A construction sign shall
be valid for a period of not more than six (6) months or the duration of the
construction project and may be renewed for no more than three (3) successive
six (6) month periods in the same location.
Construction signs shall conform in all respects to the requirements of all
signs subject to a permit with the exception that a construction sign shall be
allowed in addition to any other sign permitted.
      1.   Project Identification Signs:
Size:
Construction signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
Number Of Signs:
Each construction site (the premises for which a single building permit has
been issued) may display one project identification sign.
Content:
Construction signs shall contain information identifying or advertising new
construction, remodeling, or development of any structure or land area. Signs
may also contain name of developer, architect, and other consultants.
Illumination:
Signs may be directly or indirectly illuminated following the lighting
standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
      2.   Construction Site Signs:
Size:
Construction signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
Number Of Signs:
Each construction site (the premises for which a single building permit has
been issued) may display one sign identifying the company occupying the
facility sign.
Content:
Signs mounted on temporary construction buildings and/or trailers shall be
limited to the name of the company only.
Illumination:
Signs within a construction site which are intended to convey information to
the workers on the site are exempt from this chapter with the provision that
they shall not be illuminated other than during the hours of work.
      3.   Construction Murals: Signs, murals, or other decorative treatment on
temporary construction barriers and enclosures shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter and shall be subject to review and approval by the
committee prior to issuance of a sign permit by P&Z.
   D.   Special Signs And Displays:
      1.   Special Event Signage:
         a.   Special event signs that do not otherwise meet the criteria
established by this chapter may be approved for a limited period of time as a
means of publicizing short term activities.
         b.   Businesses wishing to use decorative banners, temporary window
signs, flags, pennants, balloons, or sandwich type signs for a short term
special event may be required to obtain a sign permit.
         c.   Such permits shall not exceed sixteen (16) days. Such permits
shall be valid for no more than two (2) weeks prior to the special event.
Permitted sign(s) shall not be displayed for more than fourteen (14) days prior
to the special event and shall be removed within forty eight (48) hours of the
conclusion of the special event.
         d.   The size, number, content, design and placement of special event
signs and banners, etc., shall be reviewed and approved by the committee.
      2.   Decorative Banners: Decorative banners are permitted with approval
contingent upon design concept, theme, color, material and quantity as relates
to size and mass of building, premises or parcel. The size, number, content,
design, and placement of decorative banners shall be subject to review and
approval by the committee. Use of decorative banners shall require approval of
the Master Association.
      3.   Temporary Use Signs:
         a.   Temporary use signs are permitted with approval contingent upon
design concept, theme, color, material and quantity as relates to size and mass
of building, premises or parcel. The size, number, content, design and
placement of temporary use signs shall be reviewed and approved by the
committee.
         b.   Only one temporary use sign shall be permitted per business,
premises or parcel at a given time or in any period of ninety (90) days.
      4.   Vending Cart Signage: Vending cart signs are permitted as point of
purchase signage with approval contingent upon design concept, theme, color,
material and quantity as relates to size of the vending cart. The size, number,
content, design and placement of vending cart signs shall be reviewed and
approved by the committee. Use of vending carts shall require approval of the
Master Association.
   E.   Sign Illumination:
      1.   Allowable Lighting:
         a.   Illuminated signs are both permitted and encouraged. Signs may be
directly lighted or indirectly lighted, using incandescent, fluorescent, fiber
optic, laser, and/or cathode tube light sources.
         b.   Signs and/or portions of the sign, including any frame, bracing,
or support structure, shall be constructed of a nonreflecting surface.
      2.   Prohibited Lighting:
         a.   Unfrosted or unshielded light source, fluorescent light source,
or light source in excess of twenty five (25) watts directly visible to any
motor vehicle or pedestrian located in a public right of way or street or from
any residential area within a distance of three hundred feet (300') measured
from that light source.
         b.   Any directly lighted sign that exceeds twenty five (25) watts per
square foot of area.
         c.   Any indirectly lighted sign that exceeds seventy five (75) foot-
candles at any area of the sign face.
         d.   Signs constructed predominantly or entirely from lighted tubing
or arrays of lights.
         e.   Signs that display the names of products, manufacturers, or
companies other than the tenant and its services.
         f.   "OPEN" and "CLOSED" signs constructed of letters made from
lighted tubing. (Ord. 304, Series of 2000)
         g.   Animated, flashing, moving, alternating, blinking, or
automatically dimming and brightening lighting, unless specifically approved
under subsection 6-2A-2A1 of this article. (Ord. 388, Series of 2006)
         h.   Backlit and interior lit signs, awnings, canopies, or valances
that emit light through the background of the sign, or which cause a change in
background or lettering colors between a lighted and unlighted condition.
         i.   Illumination of window signs is prohibited except as
coincidentally illuminated.
   F.   Signs Constructed Of Certain Materials:
      1.   Metallic And Plastic Signs: Signs with metallic surfaces and/or
plastic signs made of fiberglass or other synthetic materials shall be treated
to reduce reflection from sunlight or artificial illumination on residential
properties in the vicinity and on the vision of passing motorists and
pedestrians. (Ord. 304, Series of 2000)
6-2A-4: REVIEW AND PERMIT PROCEDURE:
This article establishes a two (2) step process for the review and approval of
signs.
   A.   Sign Permits Required:
      1.   Permit Required: Except as may be specified in subsection 6-2A-2B of
this article, every person or business shall first obtain a sign permit prior
to the placing, erecting, moving, reconstructing, altering, redesigning, or
displaying of any sign regulated by this article.
      2.   Exception: Routine maintenance, repair and repainting which does not
alter a sign may be performed on a previously permitted sign without first
obtaining a new permit.
   B.   Permit Application:
      1.   Sign permit applications shall be obtained from the committee.
      2.   Applicants shall submit sign requests to the Winter Park village
architectural review committee (the committee) for preliminary review.
Applications meeting the provisions of this chapter and applicable
architectural design standards established by the committee will be
conditionally approved and a recommendation for approval by the town of Winter
Park planning and zoning board (P&Z) will be submitted by the committee to town
of Winter Park staff.
      3.   The application shall contain, or have attached thereto, the
following information:
         a.   The name and address of the owner, or the other person in control
of the real property, upon which the sign or advertising structure is to be
constructed, erected, posted, or displayed.
         b.   The name of the person erecting the sign or advertising
structure.
         c.   The address and/or legal description of the property upon which
the proposed sign or advertising structure is to be located, including, in the
case of a multiple use facility, the location or unit within the building.
         d.   The type of sign or advertising structure.
         e.   The proposed location of the sign or advertising structure on the
property identified. The location and total surface area of it and all other
permitted signs related to the business requesting the permit which exist and
will remain on the property or buildings.
         f.   Two (2) copies of detailed drawings, drawn to scale, containing
complete plans and specifications which indicate the location on the building
or property, method of construction and anchoring to the building or ground,
the total area of the proposed sign in square feet, and the height of the
proposed advertising structure from the ground level.
         g.   The sign plans which must indicate overall letter and figure
dimensions, colors, materials, proposed copy, and illumination.
         h.   The site plan that shall indicate all signs existing or proposed
for the site with dimensions, colors, materials, copy, and/or illumination for
each sign.
         i.   Building elevations with signs depicted.
         j.   Materials and color samples as may be reasonably requested by the
committee for their review.
   C.   Permit Application Review:
      1.   Within ten (10) days of receiving a completed application the
committee shall review the sign application.
      2.   The committee shall determine if the proposed sign and application
are in compliance or noncompliance with this chapter.
      3.   The committee shall either approve the application for use or deny
issuance of the permit due to noncompliance with this or other village codes,
covenants, or regulations that may apply.
   D.   Permit Issuance:
      1.   If the committee has determined the sign and application is in
compliance with this chapter and other ordinances or regulations that may
apply, the committee shall recommend issuance of a permit for the proposed sign
to P&Z for final approval.
   E.   Permit Expiration: Every sign permit issued by the committee shall
expire by limitation and become null and void if the work that has been
authorized by such sign permit is not completed within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the date of issuance of such permit.
   F.   Permit And Application Retention: The committee shall retain a copy of
the sign permit and application. The permit and application shall be retained
at the office of the committee until such time as the sign no longer exists.
   G.   Permit Fees: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by
a permit fee (in the form of a check or money order, made payable to the Winter
Park Village Company Master Association, Inc., to defray costs of reviewing
applications and administering this chapter) as set forth herein.
      1.   For each sign permit, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   For each special sign and display, a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00).
      3.   For amendment of an existing sign permit, a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00).
      4.   For a sign permit correcting an illegal sign or signs, a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   H.   Permit Denial And Appeal:
      1.   Upon denial of a permit by the committee, the applicant may resubmit
a modified application or file an appeal to the Master Association. An appeal
from the decision of the committee shall be filed with the Master Association
within thirty (30) days of denial of a permit.
      2.   The appeal shall contain four (4) copies of detailed drawings, drawn
to scale, containing complete plan specifications which indicate the method of
construction and anchoring to the building, or ground, the total area of the
proposed sign in square feet, and the height of the proposed advertising
structure from ground level.
      3.   This chapter further establishes that, in the case of appeal of any
ruling(s) by the committee, the Winter Park Village Master Association (the
Master Association) shall evaluate the appeal. The Master Association shall
consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting of which the
applicant is given written notice. The Master Association shall render a
decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days after the hearing. The Master
Association shall be the final arbiter of any appeals.
   I.   Sign And Banner Permit Application Forms: A form as provided by the
Winter Park Village Company Master Association shall be used to request a sign
or banner permit. (Ord. 304, Series of 2000)
6-2A-5: NONCONFORMING SIGNS, VARIANCES, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspections And Maintenance Of Existing Signs:
      1.   Inspections:
         a.   All signs shall be subject to inspections by the committee.
      2.   Maintenance:
         a.   Every sign and sign structure, including those signs and sign
structures for which no permit or permit fees are required, shall be maintained
in good structural condition at all times. All such signs and sign structures
shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports that are
not galvanized, or of rust resistant materials, or designated to be intended to
rust on the material submitted for approval of permit.
         b.   The committee shall inspect and have the authority to order
painting, repair, alteration, or removal of a sign or sign structure that shall
constitute a nuisance or hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, or which
shall constitute a hazard for any other reason.
   B.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Intent: It is the intent of this section to recognize that the
eventual elimination, as expeditiously as possible, of existing signs that are
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is as much a subject of
health, safety, and welfare as is the prohibition of new signs that would
violate these regulations. It is also the intent of this section that any
elimination of nonconforming signs shall be effected so as to avoid any
unreasonable invasion of established property rights.
      2.   General Provisions:
         a.   A nonconforming sign may not be:
            (1)   Changed to another nonconforming sign.
            (2)   Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life.
            (3)   Expanded.
            (4)   Reestablished after discontinuance for ninety (90) days or
more.
            (5)   Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its present replacement value.
         b.   An owner of an existing nonconforming sign may, with approval by
the committee, maintain said sign as required by this chapter and may bring the
sign more into compliance with the ordinance with the understanding that the
sign is still nonconforming and subject to removal as defined in subsection D
of this section.
      3.   Amortization Requirements:
         a.   Amortization Schedule: All nonconforming signs shall conform to
provisions of this chapter by October 1, 2000.
         b.   Extensions: Extensions to the amortization schedule may be
granted by the committee for a maximum period of one year provided the
applicant for the extension shall demonstrate to the committee a genuine and
substantial attempt to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and there
are unusual conditions involved which would make the literal enforcement of the
regulations of the amortization schedule hereinabove result in practical
difficulties which are unnecessary for the purpose of this chapter. The
applicant for an extension shall submit the following information to accompany
the application for extension:
            (1)   Conformance: Information demonstrating bona fide attempt by
the applicant to bring the sign into conformance.
            (2)   Cost Estimates; Inability To Conform: If the applicant is
requesting a stay on economic hardship grounds, a thorough cost estimate
delineating the costs to conform and a statement of finances showing
applicant's inability to correct the sign.
            (3)   Process Of Conformance: A statement of what the applicant
intends to do during the period of stay to bring signs into conformance. The
committee recommends reasonable interpretation of the provisions.
            (4)   Appeals: Appeals shall be in accordance with the provisions
of subsection F of this section.
   C.   Variances:
      1.   Intent Of Variance Provision: Variance from the terms of this
chapter shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable
to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings,
the strict application of this chapter deprives such property of privileges
enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning
classification and other restrictions by P&Z upon recommendation by the
committee.
      2.   Authority Of The Committee:
         a.   The committee shall have the authority to recommend variance
requests to P&Z for approval from the strict application of the rules,
regulations, and provisions of this chapter as follows:
            (1)   Jurisdiction: Before the committee shall have jurisdiction to
recommend variances to P&Z, the applicant must show that due to the peculiar
shape, size, location, or topography of the property, there are unusual
conditions involved which would make the literal enforcement of the regulations
of this chapter result in practical difficulties which are unnecessary for the
purpose of this chapter and which would deprive the subject property of
privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity in the same zoning
district classification and under the same sign code restriction.
            (2)   Limitations: Any variance which is granted shall be subject
to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall
not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the provisions
herein, and with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity in the
same zoning district and under the same ordinance restrictions in which the
subject property is located.
            (3)   Minimum Adjustment: In granting the variance under the
provisions of this section, the amount of adjustment granted shall be the
minimum necessary to equalize the property rights. Such conditions and
safeguards shall be prescribed in this variance as are necessary to protect the
purpose and intent of this chapter, the visual character of the village at
Winter Park and the general welfare of the community.
            (4)   Public Welfare: The granting of any variances shall not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property
improvements in the vicinity. The committee shall ensure that the granting of a
variance will be compatible with the purpose and intent of this chapter and
will not be injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare.
   D.   Abatement And Removal Of Illegal Signs:
      1.   Abatement Of Signs Relating To Inoperative Activities:
         a.   Signs pertaining to activities or occupants that are no longer
using a property shall be removed from the premises, or sign copy on such signs
shall be obliterated within thirty (30) days after the associated enterprise or
occupant has vacated the premises. Any such sign not removed within the
required period shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement.
         b.   The expense of such abatement shall be a lien against the
property on which the sign was maintained and a personal obligation against the
property owner. Said property owner shall first be served with a notice (sent
by the Master Association, via registered mail, to the applicant and address
listed on the permit application for said sign) to abate the nuisance and shall
be given the opportunity for a hearing. If, after such opportunity for hearing,
the committee directs its agents to remove the nuisance, they shall have
authority to enter upon the private property to remove the sign constituting
the nuisance.
         c.   New signs for building or property upon which an abandoned sign
is located shall not be approved until the abandoned sign is removed.
         d.   The provisions of this subsection may be utilized separately
from, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with any other remedy provided by
law.
      2.   Confiscation Of Illegal Signs:
         a.   Illegal signs may be confiscated by the committee if the property
owner does not remove the sign accordingly to this subsection D. The property
owner may retrieve said signs from the committee following the completion of
all legal actions.
   E.   Enforcement And Administration Of Provisions:
      1.   The Village At Winter Park Architectural Review Committee And The
Winter Park Village Master Association: The committee by itself or through the
Master Association shall adopt procedures for enforcement and administration of
this chapter and shall employ those persons necessary for such administration
and enforcement.
   F.   Appeals:
      1.   Appeals To The Master Association: Any person aggrieved by any
decision of the committee may take appeals to the Master Association. The
Master Association shall be the final arbiter of such appeals.
   G.   Violations And Penalties:
      1.   Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to erect,
construct, alter, move, use, or maintain any sign or structure or cause or
allow the same to be done contrary to, or in violation of, the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 304, Series of 2000)
      2.   Penalties: For each and every violation of the provisions of this
chapter, and for each and every day that such violation continues, said
violation shall be punishable as set forth in subsection 1-4-1C of this code.
Persons charged with a violation may include:
         a.   The owner, lessee, tenant, contractor, or any other persons using
the land, building, or premises where such violation has been committed or
exists.
         b.   Any person who knowingly commits, takes part, or assists in such
violation.
         c.   Any person who maintains any land, building, or premises in which
such violation exists. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
6-2A-6: APPENDIX:
   A.   Illustrations: Illustrations of various sign types are on file in the
offices of the Winter Park Village Company Master Association, Inc. (Ord. 304,
Series of 2000)
CHAPTER 3
RESERVED
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
(Reserved by Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
CHAPTER 5
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SECTION:
6-5-1: Affordable Housing Fees
6-5-2: Waiver Of Gross Square Foot Fee
6-5-3: Construction Of Affordable Housing In Lieu Of Fees
6-5-4: Individual Studies
6-5-1: AFFORDABLE HOUSING FEES:
The town shall collect the sum of three dollars ($3.00) for every gross square
foot of new construction (including applicable additions to existing
structures) that occurs within the town boundaries with the following
exceptions:
   A.   Parking garages and unenclosed decks/patios serving residential uses in
single-family, duplex, multi-family developments.
   B.   Parking garages and unenclosed decks/patios serving commercial uses.
These exempt areas are to be used to park vehicles and shall not be used for
storage, retail use or any other use.
All housing fees shall be paid in full with the application for a building
permit for new construction. All affordable housing fees collected by the Town
shall be maintained in a separate account and shall be used for the purpose of
providing affordable housing. (Ord. 333, Series of 2003; amd. Ord. 535, Series
of 2020)
6-5-2: WAIVER OF GROSS SQUARE FOOT FEE:
Certain individuals and/or families earning a low to moderate annual income may
not be subject to the three dollar ($3.00) per gross square foot fee.
Applicants seeking waiver of fees shall submit an application to the town
manager for the town of Winter Park or his designee for review and
recommendation to the Winter Park town council. The Winter Park town council
will make the final determination regarding the waiver of any or all of the
affordable housing fees. (Ord. 498, Series of 2016)
6-5-3: CONSTRUCTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN LIEU OF FEES:
The affordable housing mitigation/incentive agreement form (attached as exhibit
B to ordinance 379, series of 2006) is hereby adopted by the town council of
the town of Winter Park as the standard form of agreement to be entered into by
the town with each and every property owner/developer within the town who
chooses to participate in the affordable housing incentive program approved by
the town. The town's incentive program will allow the deduction of the gross
square footage of the affordable housing unit from the gross square footage of
the entire structure prior to calculating the three dollar ($3.00) per square
foot affordable housing fee, and in addition shall provide an incentive of up
to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per unit to any owner/developer who
constructs and leases an affordable housing unit within his project. However,
should the use of the affordable housing unit ever change, the incentive must
be repaid to the town as well as the affordable housing fees for the affordable
housing unit gross square footage which were waived as part of the affordable
housing mitigation/incentive agreement. (Ord. 498, Series of 2016)
6-5-4: INDIVIDUAL STUDIES:
   A.   Request Of Study Or Report: An owner/developer may request that an
individualized study or report be made relating solely to his property or
project in order to determine whether or not affordable housing dedications or
exactions shall be required, and, if so, to determine the extent or amount
thereof. Such study or report shall be individualized to the owner's/
developer's property or project, shall fairly and accurately delineate the
needs for affordable housing which will be generated by the owner's/developer's
proposed project or improvement, and shall include consideration of the
following criteria:
      1.   Whether additional affordable housing would be required but for the
owner's/developer's proposed project or improvement;
      2.   Whether existing affordable housing can adequately serve the
proposed project without the additional expense to construct, expand or improve
affordable housing; and
      3.   Whether the town has historically required, or will require by
ordinance, other owners/developers to dedicate similar property or pay an
exaction of a similar type or in a similar amount.
The conclusion of such study or report shall contain a recommendation as to the
number and location of affordable housing units to be required. In determining
any such affordable housing to be required of owner/developer, a proportion
shall be established between the total cost of providing or expanding
affordable housing, on the one hand, and the amount or extent of such total
cost which is attributable to, or is caused or generated by, the proposed
development or improvement, on the other hand. The extent of dedication or
amount of exaction due from owner/developer must bear roughly the same
proportion to the total cost of providing affordable housing as the need for
such housing generated by the owner/developer's proposed project or improvement
bears to the general population's need for affordable housing.
   B.   Deposit: Any owner/developer may prepare or cause to be prepared, at
his sole cost and expense, the study or report described in subsection A of
this section. Said report shall be in writing and, upon the submission of such
study or report, owner/developer shall make an initial two thousand dollar
($2,000.00) deposit with the town clerk. Such deposit shall be used by the town
to offset the hourly costs incurred by the town planner and town attorney to
review the study or report described in subsection A of this section. The
town's actual review costs shall be paid by the owner/developer and as a
result, the cost to the owner/developer may be more or less than the initial
two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) deposit.
The staff shall review said study or report, and shall comment thereon in
writing to the town council. Any disagreement by the staff with any of the
findings or conclusions of such study or report shall be delivered in writing
to the town council and shall be specific to the project in question. In the
event of disagreement between the staff and owner/developer as to what
affordable housing units are required, the town council shall, after public
hearing, decide the appropriate number of affordable housing units based upon
the owner/developer's and staff's separate studies or reports. The decision of
the town council shall be final, subject only to the right of owner/developer
to appeal the same to the Grand County district court.
   C.   Staff Report: Upon the express request of the owner/developer, which
request shall be made in writing, the Winter Park staff shall, upon the payment
of a fee to be determined by the town manager, undertake the study described in
subsection A of this section. The staff shall submit such written report to the
owner/developer as well as the town council.
The owner/developer may agree with the provisions thereof, in which case the
same shall be submitted to the town council as a joint finding and
recommendation. However, if the owner/developer disagrees with all or any part
of the staff's report, the owner/developer may, at his sole expense, submit a
written report detailing the owner/developer's findings with regard to the
criteria set forth in subsection A of this section, and shall submit the same
to the town council. The town council shall consider such reports at a public
hearing and shall ultimately decide whether an exaction or dedication is
required, and if so, the extent or amount of such exaction or dedication. The
decision of the town council shall be final, subject to the owner/developer's
right to appeal to the Grand County district court.
   D.   Criteria For Determination: In deciding whether to impose an affordable
housing dedication or exaction requirement, the town council shall consider
those questions and criteria identified in subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this
section, and shall be guided by the overriding principle that an exaction or
dedication requirement is unfair, disproportionate and unconstitutional if it
imposes a burden on an owner/developer which in equity and fairness should be
borne by the public in general. However, any exaction or dedication requirement
will be in compliance with all existing constitutional tests if the failure of
the owner/developer to provide the dedication or exaction would fail to remedy
a public problem created or exacerbated by the owner/developer's proposed
project to such an extent that the town council would be justified in denying
approval for the project altogether. (Ord. 297, Series of 2000)
   E.   Compliance With Ordinance A Condition Precedent To Rezoning Or Plat
Approval: No rezoning, subdivision approval, or planned unit development
approval shall be final unless and until the owner/developer has selected one
of the procedures outlined above and the report required has been provided to
the town council. No rezoning, subdivision approval, or planned unit
development approval shall be deemed final unless and until the town council
has made a determination as to whether or not an affordable housing dedication
or exaction requirement shall be imposed, and if so, the extent or amount
thereof. Any person, individual, or entity which commences development of a
property, or attempts to obtain a permit to develop property, prior to the
determination required in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
shall be punished as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. In addition to
said remedy, the town may seek and obtain either a stop work order or an
injunction against the continuation or completion of any construction or
preconstruction activity on a project or improvement until the determinations
required herein have been made. (Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
CHAPTER 6
EMERGENCY SERVICES IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Purpose
6-6-2: Definitions
6-6-3: Imposition Of Impact Fees
6-6-4: Fee Amount
6-6-5: Individual Study
6-6-6: Time For Payment Of Impact Fee
6-6-7: Compliance A Condition Precedent To Approval
6-6-8: Unpaid Impact Fees
6-6-9: Credit For Improvements
6-6-10: Use Of Impact Fees
6-6-11: Adjustment And Review Of Impact Fees
6-6-12: Liability And Indemnification
6-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Provide a rational system for identifying and mitigating growth related
costs associated with growth and development and the expansion of emergency
services and facilities made necessary by development activities, a growing
population and economic activity levels.
   B.   Ensure that the impact fees established by this chapter are based on,
and do not exceed, the cost of providing additional capital improvements
necessitated by new development.
   C.   Regulate new development projects to ensure that they bear a rough
proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide
adequate emergency services within the town.
   D.   Assure that the impact fees implemented in this chapter are linked to a
capital improvements program designed to provide the facilities and equipment
for which the impact fees are being imposed. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Includes:
      1.   Fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance service
planning, preliminary architectural and engineering services, architectural and
engineering design studies, land surveys, land acquisition, site improvements
and off site improvements associated with new or expanded facilities used for
fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance service.
      2.   Construction of buildings and facilities used for fire protection or
emergency medical, rescue and ambulance services.
      3.   Purchase of fire suppression or emergency medical, rescue and
ambulance apparatus and equipment, including communications equipment, with an
average useful life of at least five (5) years, necessary to adequately protect
and defend new development and its inhabitants.
   B.   Excludes: Periodic or routine maintenance of facilities and equipment,
personnel costs or operational expenses.
DEVELOPER: A person or entity that commences a development activity requiring
additional emergency services and development approval.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY REQUIRING ADDITIONAL EMERGENCY SERVICES: Any activity
requiring development approval that requires additional capital improvements as
identified in the fiscal impact study. When a change of use, redevelopment or
modification of an existing use requires development approval, the impact fee
shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as
compared to the previous use.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: The approval of any building permit for a development
activity requiring additional emergency services, for which an impact fee has
not been previously paid following the effective date hereof.
EMERGENCY SERVICES PROVIDER: A governmental entity providing public fire
protection, emergency medical, rescue and ambulance services or any combination
of such services. The emergency services provider of fire protection in the
town of Winter Park is East Grand fire protection district 4.
FIRE PROTECTION: The prevention and extinguishment of fire, protection of life
and property from fire, and enforcement of municipal, county, district, and
state fire prevention codes.
FISCAL IMPACT FEE STUDY: A study based on data relevant to the town that
mathematically calculates the fiscal impact of future demand for services on
existing facilities of the applicable emergency service provider, as approved
by ordinance of the town council.
IMPACT FEE: A fee for fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and
ambulance service established by section
6-6-4 or
6-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-3: IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Payment Of Fee Required: Any developer who seeks a building permit for
a development activity requiring additional emergency services is required to
pay an impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Exception: The town council, by resolution, may grant a waiver from all
or any part of the impact fee, upon a finding that such waiver is in the best
interest of the public by encouraging activities that provide significant
social, economic or cultural benefits. Such activities may include, but are not
limited to, affordable housing projects or other projects that are financially
assisted with town funds. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-4: FEE AMOUNT:
   A.   The amount of any impact fee to be charged shall be set and revised
from time to time by ordinance of the town council, based on a fiscal impact
fee study to be conducted by the applicable emergency services provider, or
through an individual study pursuant to section
6-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 353, Series of 2005)
   B.   Pursuant to the East Grand fire protection district 4 fire impact fee
analysis, prepared June 30, 2014, by Economic & Planning Systems, Inc., the
impact fees and formulas are as follows:
      FIRE IMPACT FEES
Description Factor Amount
Description                                   Factor            Amount
Proposed capital facilities:                                    
 Engines and vehicles                                         $ 816,000.00
 Station construction                                         1,200,000.00
 Total long term capital costs                                $2,016,000.00
Total forecasted development:                                   
 Residential (DU)                                             3,498
 Nonresidential (sq. ft.)                    1,213,741          
 Nonresidential (single-family equivalents)  1,800 sq. ft./SFE 674
  (SFE)1   
 Total DU/SFE                                                 4,172
Fee calculations:                                               
 Capital costs budget                                         $2,016,000.00
 Total DU/SFE                                              4,172    
 Fee per DU/SFE                                               $483.00
 SFE conversion to $/sq. ft.                 1,800 sq. ft./SFE 0.268
2014 - 2018 impact fees:                                        
 Fee per residential dwelling unit           3,498             $483.00
 Fee per 1,000 sq. ft. of nonresidential     1,000             268.00
  development
 
   Note:
       1.    Single-family equivalents (SFE) for nonresidential space are based
on an average of 1,800 square feet per commercial unit.
(Ord. 488, Series of 2014)
6-6-5: INDIVIDUAL STUDY:
In lieu of computation of the impact fee established by ordinance of the town
council, based on a fiscal impact fee study, the developer may provide an
individualized study or report as provided herein.
   A.   Study Or Report: An owner/developer may prepare or cause to be
prepared, at his sole cost and expense, an individualized study or report
relating solely to his property or project, in order to determine whether or
not an emergency services impact fee shall be required, and, if so, to
determine the extent or amount thereof. Such study or report shall be
individualized to the owner/developer's property or project, shall fairly and
accurately delineate the needs for emergency services which will be generated
by the owner/developer's proposed project or improvement, and shall include
consideration of the following criteria:
      1.   Whether additional emergency services would be required but for the
owner/developer's proposed project or improvement;
      2.   Whether existing emergency services can adequately serve the
proposed project without the additional expense to construct, expand or improve
emergency services; and
      3.   Whether the town has historically required, or will require by
ordinance, other owners/developers to pay an exaction of a similar type or in a
similar amount;
The conclusion of such study or report shall contain a recommendation as to the
emergency services required. In determining any such level of emergency
services to be provided to owner/developer, a proportion shall be established
between the total cost of providing or expanding emergency services, on the one
hand, and the amount or extent of such total cost which is attributable to, or
is caused or generated by, the proposed development or improvement, on the
other hand. The extent or the amount of exaction due from owner/developer must
bear roughly the same proportion to the total cost of providing emergency
services as the need for such services generated by the owner/developer's
proposed project or improvement bears to the general population's need for
emergency services.
   B.   Provider Review: The emergency services provider shall review said
study or report, and shall comment thereon in writing to the owner/developer.
Any disagreement by the emergency service provider with any of the findings or
conclusions of such study or report shall be delivered in writing to the owner/
developer and shall be specific to the project in question.
   C.   Public Hearing: In the event of disagreement between the emergency
service provider and owner/developer as to what emergency services are
required, the Winter Park town staff shall review the study or report and
provide the town council with a finding and recommendation. The town council,
after public hearing and review, shall decide the appropriate level of
emergency services based upon the emergency service provider's and owner/
developer's separate studies or reports. The decision of the town council shall
be final, subject only to the right of owner/developer to appeal the same
through legal action. Any such review by the Winter Park town staff may be
subject to review costs paid by the owner/developer for actual staff review
time. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-6: TIME FOR PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEE:
A developer requesting approval of a development activity requiring additional
emergency services shall pay the impact fee to the emergency services provider
prior to any issuance of a building permit by the town. (Ord. 316, Series of
2001)
6-6-7: COMPLIANCE A CONDITION PRECEDENT TO APPROVAL:
No approval of a development activity requiring additional emergency services
shall be deemed final unless and until the emergency services provider has made
a determination as to whether or not an emergency services impact fee shall be
imposed, and if so, the extent or amount thereof.
No building permit for a development activity requiring additional emergency
services shall be approved or issued by the town until written verification is
provided to the town from the emergency services provider indicating that the
impact fee has been paid or satisfied.
Any person, individual, or entity which commences a development activity
requiring additional emergency services, or attempts to obtain a development
approval, prior to the determination required in this chapter shall be punished
as provided in subsection 1-4-1C of this code. In addition to said remedy, the
town may seek and obtain either a stop work order or an injunction against the
continuation or completion of any construction or preconstruction activity on a
project or improvement until the determinations required herein have been made.
(Ord. 473, Series of 2013)
6-6-8: UNPAID IMPACT FEES:
The town reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates, or
other approvals for any land or building for which the payment of impact fees
is delinquent. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-9: CREDIT FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon approval by the town council, the applicable emergency service provider
shall calculate the amount of any credit that shall be granted to any developer
for the amounts due or to become due for capital improvements installed,
purchased, and paid for by such developer when such capital improvements offset
the need or amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be required. (Ord.
316, Series of 2001)
6-6-10: USE OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   All impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited
by the applicable emergency service provider, in an interest bearing account
which clearly identifies the category, account, or fund of capital expenditure
for which such charge was imposed. Each such category, account, or fund shall
be accounted for separately. The emergency service provider shall determine
whether the accounting requirement shall be by category, account, or fund and
by aggregate or individual land development. Any interest or other income
earned on monies deposited in said interest bearing account shall be credited
to the account.
   B.   Impact fees shall be used exclusively for capital improvements.
   C.   No impact fees shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance,
personnel costs, or operational expenses.
   D.   In the event bonds or similar debt instruments are used to fund capital
improvements prior to collecting the necessary impact fees, once collected,
impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt
instruments.
   E.   The town may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the
applicable emergency service providers regarding the method of collection and
administration of the impact fee program. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-11: ADJUSTMENT AND REVIEW OF IMPACT FEES:
The amount of the impact fee set by ordinance of the town council based on a
fiscal impact fee study shall be reviewed and adjusted as follows:
   A.   The emergency service provider may, in conjunction with an updated
fiscal impact fee study and following consultation with the town, present any
further adjustments to the impact fee during the town's annual budget process
that occurs every fall.
   B.   No less frequently than every five (5) years, the applicable emergency
service provider shall provide an updated fiscal impact fee study and shall
forward a copy of said update to the town. (Ord. 316, Series of 2001)
6-6-12: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
East Grand fire protection district shall indemnify, defend and hold the town
and its officers, agents and employees harmless from and against any and all
claims or liability arising from the town's enactment of this chapter pursuant
to requiring the payment of fire protection service impact fees, or the use by
East Grand fire protection district of any funds collected as fire protection
service impact fees pursuant to this chapter. This indemnification shall
include, but not limited to, any legal action by any party contesting this
chapter on the grounds of unconstitutionality, lack of authority, preemption by
state law, or an alleged violation of section 20 of article X of the Colorado
constitution.
East Grand fire protection district shall also indemnify, defend and hold the
town, and its officers, agents and employees, harmless from and against any and
all claims arising from any breach or default in the performance of the
obligations on East Grand fire protection district's part to be performed under
the provisions of this chapter, or arising from any intentional acts,
negligence or omissions of East Grand fire protection district or any of its
officers, agents, and employees. Such indemnification by East Grand fire
protection district, as provided in this section, shall include all costs,
attorney fees, expenses and liabilities incurred in the defense of any claim or
any action or proceeding brought on any such claim. Provided, however, nothing
contained herein waives or is intended to waive any protections that may be
applicable to East Grand fire protection district under the governmental
immunity act, section 24-10-101 et seq., Colorado Revised Statutes, or any
other rights, protections, immunities, defenses or limitations on liability
provided by law, and subject to any applicable provisions of the Colorado
constitution and applicable laws. In the event the town is named as a party in
any legal action, in consultation with the town, East Grand fire protection
district shall select legal counsel to represent the town in such action. (Ord.
316, Series of 2001)
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
6-7-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
6-7-2: Definitions
6-7-3: General Provisions
6-7-4: Administration
6-7-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
6-7-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Colorado has
in Colorado Revised Statutes 31-23-201 et seq., delegated the responsibility of
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the town council of the town of Winter Park, state of
Colorado, does ordain as follows.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the town of Winter Park are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human health and life;
      2.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area.
   D.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purpose,
this chapter uses the following methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 424, Series of 2009)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes or erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE, or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the original
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final grading or the pouring
of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as
floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion control ordinances), and
other applications of police power. This term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle, which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvement under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction"
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 424, Series of 2009)
6-7-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the town of Winter
Park.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study For The
Town Of Winter Park", dated January 2, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance
rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions
thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
   C.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A development permit
shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered,
or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the community or by any official or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 424, Series of 2009)
6-7-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Administrator: The town engineer is hereby
appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national
flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties and
responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Floodplain administrator will supply the town planner with originals
of all records pertaining to this chapter. Town planner shall serve as official
custodian of all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. Town
planner shall maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether a proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local government
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is Colorado water conservation board, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with subsection 6-7-3B of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to
administer the provisions of section
6-7-5 of this chapter.
      9.   When regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first applies for conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   C.   Permit Procedures:
      1.   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented
to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of the proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
         b.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
         c.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 6-7-5B2 of this chapter;
         d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection B1 of this section.
      2.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         f.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         i.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
         j.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area.
   D.   Variance Procedures:
      1.   Appeal Board To Hear Requests: The appeal board as established by
the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Appeal Board To Hear Appeals: The appeal board shall hear and render
judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      3.   Aggrieved By Decision Of Appeal Board: Any person or persons
aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   Records; Reports: The floodplain administrator shall maintain a
record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the
federal emergency management agency upon request.
      5.   Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   Lot Size: Variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in
subsection C2 of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justifications required
for issuing the variance increase.
      7.   Conditions Of Variance: Upon consideration of the factors noted
above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose and objectives of this chapter (subsection 6-7-1C of this chapter).
      8.   Within Designated Floodways: Variances shall not be issued within
any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      9.   Repair Or Rehabilitation Of Historic Structure: Variances may be
issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
      10.   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   Showing good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      11.   Functionally Dependent Use: Variances may be issued by a community
for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsections D1 through D9 of this
section are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 424, Series of 2009)
   E.   Penalties: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed,
located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions
of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in subsection 1-
4-1C of this code. Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 473,
Series of 2013)
6-7-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      8.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community; and
      9.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 1) subsection 6-7-3B of
this chapter, or 2) subsection 6-7-4B8 of this chapter, or 3) subsection C3 of
this section, the following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection 6-7-4C1a of this chapter is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base
flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for
the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this
subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to: use of over
the top, or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection B4 be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation, or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days,
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection 6-7-4C1 of this
chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes"
in subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
   C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections 6-7-1B, C and
D of this chapter.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of subsections 6-7-3C and 6-7-4C of this chapter and the
provisions of this section.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection 6-7-3B or 6-7-4B8 of this chapter.
      4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
   D.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones): Located within
the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 6-7-3B of this
chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (3') where
a clearly designed channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads or effects of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection 6-7-4C1a of this chapter, are satisfied.
      4.   Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   E.   Floodways: Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard
established in subsection 6-7-3B of this chapter are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply:
      1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      3.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodways that would result in an increase in
base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a
conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 424, Series of 2009)
TITLE 7
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Adoption Of Unified Development Code
7-1-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE:
The Town of Winter Park’s Unified Development Code can be located at http://
online.encodeplus.com/regs/winterpark-co/index.aspx.
(Ord. 575, Series of 2022; amd. Ord. 603, Series of 2023; Ord. 604, Series of
2023; Ord. 610, Series of 2023; Ord. 631, Series of 2025)
TITLE 8
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Collocation
8-1-3: Design Requirements For Wall-Mounted And Roof-Mounted Facilities
8-1-4: Location And Design Requirements For New Towers
8-1-5: Noise Restrictions
8-1-6: Operations
8-1-7: Eligible Telecommunications Facilities Requests
8-1-8: Small Wireless Facilities
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANTENNA: A device used to transmit or receive radio or electromagnetic waves
including without limitation panel antennas, reflecting discs, microwave
dishes, whip antennas, directional and non-directional antennas consisting of
one (1) or more elements, multiple antenna configurations, and other similar
devices and configurations, and exterior apparatus designed for telephone,
radio, or television communications through the sending or receiving of
wireless communications signals.
APPLICANT: A person that submits an application to the Town to site, install,
construct, collocate, modify or operate a WCF.
BASE STATION: A structure or equipment, other than a tower, at a fixed location
that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network, including equipment associated with
wireless communications services. The term does not encompass a tower as
defined in this subpart or any equipment associated with a tower. The term
includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as
private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless
services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
   B.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks).
   C.   Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the Town, supports or houses equipment described in
subsections (A) through (B) of this section that has been reviewed and approved
under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local
regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or
primary purpose of providing such support.
The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the Town, does not support or house equipment
described in subsections (A)-(B) of this section.
ELIGIBLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES REQUEST: A request for approval of the
modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially
change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station and involves the
collocation of new transmission equipment, the removal of transmission
equipment or the replacement of transmission equipment.
EQUIPMENT: Any antennas and other wireless communications equipment, including
without limitation equipment shelters and cabinets, nodes, antennas, fiber
optic cable, coaxial cable, wires, frequencies, technology, conduits and pipes,
poles, towers and associated and appurtenant equipment necessary to operate the
WCF.
EXISTING: A constructed tower or base station if it has been reviewed and
approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State
or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been
reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but
was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A WCF that is no larger in dimensions than twenty-four
inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12")
in height and that have an exterior antenna, if any, that is no more than
eleven inches (11") in length.
POLE-MOUNTED FACILITY: A WCF with antennas that are mounted and supported
entirely on a legally existing traffic signal, utility pole, streetlight,
flagpole, electric or transmission line support tower or other similar
structure.
ROOF-MOUNTED FACILITY: A WCF that is mounted and supported entirely on the roof
of a legally existing building.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A WCF where each antenna is located inside an
enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
that could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic
feet; and primary equipment enclosures are not larger than seventeen (17) cubic
feet in volume. A micro wireless facility is a type of small wireless facility.
STEALTH FACILITIES: A freestanding WCF designed to substantially conceal or
camouflage the antennas and associated equipment typified by bell towers,
flagpoles, parking lot light poles, clock towers, decorative architectural
features, and tree towers.
TOWER: A structure that is designed and constructed primarily built for the
sole or primary purpose of supporting one (1) or more any FCC-licensed or
authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including: structures that
are constructed for wireless communications services including without
limitation private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul; the associated site; and self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers
or monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and alternative tower
structures.
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT: Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-
licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including without
limitation radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and
regular and backup power supply, and including equipment associated with
wireless communication services including without limitation private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
WALL-MOUNTED FACILITY: Any WCF that is mounted and supported entirely on the
wall of a legally existing building, including the walls of architectural
features such as parapets, chimneys, and similar appurtenances.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or WCF: A facility for the provision of
wireless services, including a small cell facility, excluding coaxial or fiber-
optic cable that is not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a
particular antenna. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-2: COLLOCATION:
   A.   The intent of collocation is to have several providers of WCFs use the
same structure or site to keep the number of WCFs to a minimum as a means of
reducing the overall visual impacts throughout the community. If collocation is
a practical alternative to the construction of a new tower, then collocation is
required. Upon request by the Town, the owner or operator shall provide
evidence explaining why collocation is not possible.
   B.   If it is practical to attach WCFs to water towers, existing
transmission towers, or existing buildings, or light or utility poles, then
such locations shall be used instead of new towers. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021;
amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-3: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR WALL-MOUNTED AND ROOF-MOUNTED FACILITIES:
   A.   Wall-mounted WCFs shall be placed on or within a building or structure,
such as on the side of a building or parapet wall, architectural tower or
cupola, in an architecturally consistent manner. Wall-mounted WCFs that are not
concealed within a building or structure shall be of a neutral color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting building
or structure to which they are attached, so as to minimize their visual
impacts.
   B.   Where possible, wall-mounted, or roof-mounted WCF shall be disguised as
an architectural feature or design element of a building, provided that the
feature is compatible in terms of architectural style, height, mass, scale, and
color; and reasonably screens the facility from ground level view.
   C.   Wall-mounted WCFs may not extend above the parapet wall, or, in the
case of a pitched roof, above the fascia.
   D.   The maximum height of a roof-mounted WCF is the shorter of:
      1.   Twenty feet (20') taller than the building to which it is attached;
or
      2.   Ten feet (10') taller than the maximum height allowed in the
district for a principal building.
   E.   Rooftop antennas shall either be:
      1.   Mounted to a penthouse;
      2.   Set back such that they are not visible from ground level on
adjacent rights-of-way or residential uses or districts at a distance of one
hundred feet (100') or less; or
      3.   Reasonably screened from ground level view and designed in a manner
which is compatible with the materials, colors, and architectural details of
the existing building or structure.
   F.   Roof-mounted WCFs that extend more than ten feet (10') from the roof
location where they are mounted shall be set back from building walls no less
than one foot (1') per foot above the tenth foot that the facility extends
above the top of the building. This requirement may be waived only if the
applicant demonstrates that it materially impedes the function of the facility.
   G.   Equipment that does not depend upon an elevated location to operate
shall be located within a building, an underground enclosure, or an enclosure
at ground level that is screened from view from all abutting properties,
streets, and trails. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-4: LOCATION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW TOWERS:
   A.   Towers are not allowed:
      1.   Within, or closer than two hundred fifty feet (250') to residential
district boundaries; or
      2.   In the DC district.
   B.   The minimum setback of a tower from the property line shall be:
      1.   The setback applicable to principal structures in the district in
which the tower is located, plus one foot (1') per foot that a tower extends
above the maximum building height for the district; or
      2.   An alternative setback, approved by the Director for stealth
facilities where the facility replaces or proposes an accessory structure to an
established principal use, to include, without limitation, signs, light poles,
and flagpoles, where it is evidenced that the siting and location of the
stealth facility with the alternative setback substantially camouflages or
conceals the presence of the tower and antennas and has less visual impact than
would be achieved by applying the principal structure setback.
   C.   No tower shall be constructed within eight thousand feet (8,000') of
any pre-existing tower unless it is demonstrated that no additional
telecommunication providers can be accommodated on the existing tower or on any
other existing buildings or facilities. Tower separation shall be measured by
following a straight line from the base of the proposed tower, which is closest
to the base of any pre-existing tower. The Director may reduce the separation
requirements only if it is demonstrated that:
      1.   There are no available buildings, light or utility poles, or water
towers on which antennas may be located and still provide the approximate
coverage that the tower is intended to provide.
      2.   The pre-existing tower that is within eight thousand feet (8,000')
of the proposed tower cannot be modified to accommodate another provider; and
      3.   It is technologically impossible to locate the proposed tower on
available sites more than eight thousand feet (8,000') from a pre-existing
tower and still provide the approximate coverage the tower is intended to
provide.
   D.   All new towers shall be designed to accommodate the collocation of
additional providers and must comply with the following:
      1.   New towers of a height of eighty feet (80') or more shall be
designed to accommodate collocation of a minimum of two (2) additional
providers, either outright or through reasonable future modification to the
tower.
      2.   As a condition of issuing a permit to construct or operate a tower,
the owner/operator of the tower shall be required to allow collocation until
said tower has reached full capacity. The number of allowable additional users
shall only be limited by site parameters.
      3.   Towers constructed or approved prior to the adoption of this Chapter
may be modified to accommodate additional providers consistent with provisions
for collocation in this Section.
      4.   If an owner/operator chooses not to collocate and thus, erect a
stand-alone tower, the applicant must specifically demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town the reasons why collocation is not possible.
      5.   The owner/operator of the potential tower will be required to enter
into an agreement with each provider locating on the tower, which states that
all disputes with future providers concerning collocation and the terms and
conditions of collocation shall be submitted to arbitration.
      6.   Towers shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with the
surrounding area and to camouflage or conceal the tower and its attached
facilities. Illustrative structures include, without limitation: artificial
rocks and trees, freestanding clock towers and bell steeples, light poles,
flagpoles, and artistic structures. This requirement may be waived only if it
is demonstrated that a stealth design would interfere with the provision of
adequate service.
      7.   Color: If not designed as stealth facilities, towers shall be
nonreflective, unpainted galvanized steel or painted neutral colors or such
shades that are appropriate and compatible with the surrounding environment.
      8.   No lighting shall be permitted on towers except that required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
      9.   No signs, striping, graphics, or other attention-getting devices are
permitted on towers or ancillary facilities except for warning and safety
signage with a surface area of no more than three (3) square feet. Such signage
shall be affixed to a fence or ancillary facility. Not more than two (2) signs
are allowed. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-5: NOISE RESTRICTIONS:
If the parcel proposed for development for placement of a WCF abuts property
used for any residential dwelling units or overnight accommodations or for
public service facilities, places of assembly, schools (any type), assisted
living, group homes, or hospitals, then noise generating equipment shall be
sound-buffered by means of baffling, barriers, other suitable means to reduce
the sound level measured at the property line to not more than forty-five (45)
dBA. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-6: OPERATIONS:
   A.   WCFs shall remain operable. WCFs that become inoperable or otherwise
cease to transmit, receive, or relay voice or data signals for a continuous
period of six (6) months or more are prohibited and shall be removed.
   B.   Providers shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of their systems in a safe condition.
      2.   Install and maintain systems in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices.
      3.   Conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code
and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws or regulations,
including without limitation, all applicable FCC regulations.
      4.   At all reasonable times, permit examination of the system by any
duly authorized representative of the Town. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021; amd.
Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-7: ELIGIBLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES REQUESTS:
   A.   Approval:
      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the Town shall
approve any eligible telecommunications facility request that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of a tower or base station.
      2.   The Town may condition the approval of any eligible
telecommunications facilities request on compliance with generally applicable
building, structural, electrical, and safety codes or with other laws codifying
objective standards reasonably related to health and safety.
      3.   The Town may approve an eligible telecommunication facilities
request for a modification of an existing tower or base station which
substantially changes the physical dimensions of such tower or base station if
it complies with this Section.
   B.   A substantial change in the height of an existing tower or base station
occurs where any of the following criteria are found:
      1.   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent (10%) or by the
height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater; for
other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by
more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater;
         a.   Changes in height should be measured from the original support
structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally,
such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height
should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive
of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved
prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.
      2.   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude
from the edge of the tower more than twenty feet (20'), or more than the width
of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater;
for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to
the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by
more than six feet (6');
      3.   For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more
than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved,
but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way
and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on
the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the
structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than
ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground
cabinets associated with the structure;
      4.   It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
      5.   It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure; or
      6.   It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting
approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure
or base station equipment, provided however, that this limitation does not
apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not
exceed the thresholds identified in subsection (1) through (4) of this
definition.
   C.   Expedited Review:
      1.   The Town shall act upon an eligible telecommunications facility
request within sixty (60) days of the date of the Town's receipt of the
completed application. This time period may be tolled only by mutual agreement
or where an application is incomplete.
      2.   If the Town fails to act upon an eligible telecommunications
facility request within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling),
the request shall be deemed granted; provided that this automatic approval
shall become effective only upon the Town's receipt of written notification
from the applicant after the review period has expired (accounting for any
tolling) indicating that the application has been deemed granted. (Ord. 558,
Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
8-1-8: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   A telecommunication provider or broadband provider may locate or co-
locate small wireless facilities on light poles, light standards, traffic
signals, or utility poles in the right-of-way owned by the Town, subject to
execution of a license agreement and subject to the following:
      1.   A small wireless facility or small cell network shall not be located
or mounted on an apparatus, pole, or signal with tolling collection or
enforcement equipment attached.
      2.   The construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of a
small wireless facility must comply with applicable federal and state law and
the provisions of this Section. If upon inspection, the Town concludes that a
small wireless facility fails to comply with such laws and constitutes a danger
to persons or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner
of the small wireless facility, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the
date of the notice to bring such facility into compliance. Upon good cause
shown by the owner, the Town may extend such compliance period not to exceed
ninety (90) days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such
facility into compliance within said time period, the Town may remove such
facility at owner's expense or prohibit future, noncompliant use of the light
pole, light standard, traffic signal or utility.
   B.   Micro Wireless Facility: Unless otherwise required pursuant to
subsection (B) herein, no application or permit shall be required for the
installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cable operator-owned cables or lines
that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with the National
Safety Code, subject to the following:
      1.   The Town may require a permit for installation, placement,
operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities where the
installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities does any of the following, upon determination by the Town:
         a.   Involves working with a travel lane or requires the closure of a
travel lane with the public right-of-way;
         b.   Disturbs the pavement or a shoulder, roadway, or ditch line;
         c.   Includes placement on limited access rights-of-way; or
         d.   Requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the
traveling public; the protection of public infrastructure; or the operation of
public infrastructure; and such activities either were not authorized in, or
will be conducted in a time, place, or manner that is inconsistent with, the
approval terms of the existing permit for the facility or structure upon which
the micro wireless facility is attached.
   C.   Time Limitations:
      1.   For a small wireless facility using a new structure, subject to the
tolling provisions of subsection (C), within ninety (90) days of the date on
which an applicant submits an application under this subsection, the Town shall
act on the application. The ninety (90)-day review period begins to run when
the application is filed and may be tolled only by mutual agreement of the Town
and the applicant, or in cases where the Director determines that the
application is incomplete. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the Town
must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or
information required in this application. The timeframe for review begins
running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in
response to the Town's notice of incompleteness. Within ten (10) days of a
supplemental submission, the Town will notify the applicant if the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice
delineating missing information. In case of a second or subsequent notice of
incompleteness, the Town may not specify missing information or documents that
were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
      2.    For a small wireless facility using a preexisting structure,
subject to the tolling provisions of subsection (C), within sixty (60) days of
the date on which an applicant submits an application under this subsection,
the Town shall act on the application. The sixty (60)-day review period begins
to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by mutual agreement
of the Town and the applicant, or in cases where the Director determines that
the application is incomplete. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the
Town must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or
information required in this application. The timeframe for review begins
running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in
response to the Town's notice of incompleteness. Within ten (10) days of a
supplemental submission, the Town will notify the applicant if the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice
delineating missing information. In case of a second or subsequent notice of
incompleteness, the Town may not specify missing information or documents that
were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
      3.   If the Town fails to act on an application under this subsection
within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the application
shall be deemed approved, effective on the date when the applicant notifies the
Town in writing that the review period has expired and that the application has
been deemed approved. (Ord. 558, Series of 2021; amd. Ord. 575, Series of 2022)
TITLE 9
DEVELOPER FINANCIAL GUARANTEE, PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT COST RECOVERY AND COST
SHARING
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL ASSURANCES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Multi-Family And Commercial Development Improvement Agreement And
Required Financial Guarantees
9-1-2: Single-Family And Duplex Development Improvements And Financial
Guarantees
9-1-3: Public And Private Improvements And Financial Guarantees For
Subdivisions
9-1-1: MULTI-FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT AND
REQUIRED FINANCIAL GUARANTEES:
   A.   Each building permit issued for a multi-family or commercial
development shall be accompanied by a signed development improvement agreement.
The form of the agreement shall be approved by the town attorney and provided
to applicants by the town planning department.
   B.   The development improvement agreement shall be approved by the town
council by resolution. The town engineer and/or town planner shall make
recommendations to the town council to either accept or reject the terms of a
development improvement agreement.
   C.   No planning or building plans shall receive final approval from the
town unless the property owner/developer meets the following requirements:
      1.   A development improvement agreement is executed whereby a property
owner/developer agrees to construct any required public and/or private
improvements shown on planning or building documents together with collateral
which is sufficient, in the judgment of the town council, to make reasonable
provision for the completion of said improvements in accordance with design
standards and specific dates for completion.
      2.   The property owner/developer shall deposit cash or execute a letter
of credit in a sum sufficient to cover the estimated costs of the public
improvements that will need to be constructed on the property. To account for
inflation and cost overruns, the amount deposited shall equal the total
estimated cost of the public improvements multiplied by 1.20. A building permit
shall not be issued by the town building department until such time as a cash
deposit or a letter of credit which complies with the provisions of this code
is filed with the town clerk. The town will not accept a bond as security for
the required improvement costs.
   D.   Completion time limits: Refer to subsection
9-1-3(E) of this code.
   E.   Defaults, binding effect and assignability: Refer to subsection
9-1-3(D) of this code. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-1-2: SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL
GUARANTEES:
   A.   Deposit: Each permit issued for single-family dwelling, a duplex
dwelling, extensive exterior remodels or additions shall be accompanied by a
signed deposit agreement and a total deposit of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). The funds shall be divided equally between the completion of the
building exterior ($1,000.00) and the landscaping/revegetation, erosion
control/drainage and parking areas ($1,000.00). The form of the agreement shall
be provided by the town planning department. The town shall place the deposit
into an account at a bank of its choosing. The funds shall remain on deposit
until such time that the building exterior and site improvements (landscaping/
revegetation, erosion control/drainage, and parking areas) are completed in
compliance with the approved building exterior plan and approved site plans.
   B.   Project Completion: If such building exterior work is completed within
twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of the building permit, the one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the deposit will be returned to the original
depositor. If such building exterior work is not completed in compliance with
the approved plans within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of the
building permit, the owner may request in writing a onetime extension for up to
six (6) months to complete the required work. The extension request must be
submitted to the building official prior to expiration of the original twelve
(12) month period. The building official may grant the extension for any
reasonable cause. If such exterior work is not completed in compliance with the
approved plans and within the specified time, the town shall follow through
with the actions outlined in subsection C of this section.
   The portion of the deposit ($1,000.00) required for landscaping/
revegetation, erosion control/drainage and parking areas may be held for up to
twenty four (24) months from the date of issuance of the building permit or
such time that town staff has inspected and approved the required work and
proper landscaping/revegetation has occurred. If such erosion control/drainage
and parking areas are not completed in compliance with the approved site plan
and landscape revegetation has not occurred, the town shall follow through with
the actions outlined in subsection C of this section. The original depositor/
property owner may not request any extension of this portion of the deposit
agreement.
   C.   Defaults, Binding Effect And Assignability: Refer to subsection
9-1-3(D) of this code. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-1-3: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL GUARANTEES FOR
SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Development Improvement Agreements: For each new subdivision platted in
the Town, a development improvement agreement shall be approved by the town
council by resolution. The town engineer and/or town planner shall make
recommendations to the town council to either accept or reject the terms of a
proposed development improvement agreement.
   B.   Requirements For Approval: No subdivision plat shall receive approval
from the town unless the property owner/developer meets the following minimum
requirements:
      1.   A development improvement agreement is executed whereby a property
owner/developer agrees to construct any required public and private
improvements shown in the preliminary and final plat documents together with
collateral which is sufficient, in the judgment of the town council, to make
reasonable provision for the completion of said improvements in accordance with
design standards and specific dates for completion.
      2.   The property owner/developer shall deposit cash or execute a letter
of credit in a sum sufficient to cover the estimated costs of the public
improvements that will need to be constructed on the property or shall
otherwise secure its performance by town-approved means. No site disturbance
shall occur until such time as performance is secured to the town's
satisfaction.
   C.   Conditions For Acceptance Of Cash Or Letter Of Credit: The conditions
for town acceptance of cash or an irrevocable letter of credit are as follows:
      1.   To account for inflation and cost overruns, the amount deposited
shall equal the total estimated cost of the public improvements multiplied by
1.20.
      2.   When a cash deposit is made the town shall place the cash in an
interest-bearing account at a bank of the town's choosing. The funds shall
remain on deposit with the town until such time as the terms of the development
improvement agreement are fulfilled to the town's satisfaction. Partial
releases or reductions in the initial amount of the deposit will only be
allowed as major work items are completed and accepted in writing by the town
engineer or applicable special district (e.g., water system). If the work is
completed to the town's satisfaction based on an inspection by the town
engineer and/or town planner, the sum of money for the improvements completed
shall be returned to the property owner/developer within thirty (30) days of
the inspection. It is the property owner/developer's responsibility to schedule
the inspection with the town engineer and/or town planner. Upon final release
of the cash deposit, the town shall include fifty percent (50%) of all interest
accrued on the deposit.
      3.   Irrevocable letters of credit are acceptable when the following
criteria are met:
         a.   The letter of credit shall be from a Colorado bank or savings
institution. Said bank or savings institution may be required to provide proof
of financial stability.
         b.   The letter of credit and any exhibits shall conform to the
standard town form which is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. All
documents shall be approved by the town attorney.
         c.   The letter of credit shall be for a minimum period of one year.
         d.   Partial releases or reductions in the initial amount of the
letter of credit will only be allowed as major work items are completed and
accepted in writing by the town engineer or applicable special district (e.g.,
water system). A new letter of credit shall be executed when partial releases
are approved with such amounts being approved by the town manager in the town
manager's sole discretion, and the town manager's decision shall be final. The
property owner/developer shall notify the town of the need to extend the
expiration date of the letter of credit no less than sixty (60) days in advance
of the expiration date. If the letter of credit is not renewed or extended
within said sixty (60) day period, the town shall be entitled to draw upon the
letter of credit in the full principal amount thereof.
   D.   Defaults, Binding Effect And Assignability:
      1.   Default: It is hereby understood and agreed that in the event that:
a) any required improvements have not been completed to the town's satisfaction
as provided herein; b) the property owner/developer fails to properly install,
inspect or maintain stormwater management plans/erosion control plans; c)
construction ceases for one hundred eighty (180) days; d) the property owner/
developer fails to complete construction of any required improvements by the
completion date; e) the property owner/developer fails to cure any
noncompliance specified in any written notice of noncompliance within the
specified time frame after receipt of the notice of noncompliance; f) the
property owner/developer otherwise breaches or fails to comply with any of its
obligations under the development improvement agreement; g) the property owner/
developer becomes insolvent, files a voluntary petition in bankruptcy, is
adjudicated as bankrupt pursuant to an involuntary petition in bankruptcy, or a
receiver is appointed for property owner/developer; h) the Colorado bank or
savings institution securing the irrevocable letter of credit has financial
instability as determined by the town manager in his or her sole discretion; or
i) the terms of this development improvement agreement and approved plans are
determined to be abandoned at the sole discretion of the town council. The town
may thereupon declare the development improvement agreement to be in default
and may perform any or all of the following actions:
         a.   Collect or draw upon the cash deposit or letter of credit in
amounts sufficient to cover the cost of any required improvements;
         b.   Refuse to issue any building permit, perform building inspections
or issue a certificate of occupancy until any required improvements are
completed;
         c.   Revoke any building permit previously issued under which
construction directly related to such building permit has not commenced;
         d.   Refuse to process additional plans or design review until any
required improvements are completed;
         e.   Vacate any portion of the plat for which any required
improvements have not been completed;
         f.   Complete such work as the town deems necessary to complete any
required improvements, using monies from the cash deposit or letter of credit;
         g.   Remove any required uncompleted improvements the town deems
necessary;
         h.   Take measures to visually improve the property by restoring,
reclaiming, mitigating or screening the property; or
         i.   Any other remedy available at law.
      2.   Work In Excess Of Security: Any cost associated with any work
performed by the town which is in excess of the amount of the cash deposit or
letter of credit shall be billed to the property owner/developer, and if not
paid within one hundred twenty (120) days, the outstanding bill may be
collected in the manner provided by Colorado Revised Statutes 31-20-105.
      3.   Thirty Days' Written Notice: Unless necessary to protect the
immediate health, safety and welfare of the town, or to protect the interest of
the town with regard to security given for the completion of any required
improvements, the town shall provide the property owner/developer thirty (30)
days' written notice of its intent to take any action described above, during
which thirty (30) day period the property owner/developer may cure the breach
described in the notice and prevent further action by the town.
      4.   Binding Effect: The duties and promises undertaken and financial
guarantees provided made by the property owner/developer herein shall become
covenants running with the land and shall be binding upon the property owner/
developer as well as its successors or assigns.
      5.   Assignability: Any grantee or transferee of the property owner/
developer shall be obligated to fulfill any and all obligations of the property
owner/developer under this development improvement agreement. The property
owner/developer may assign its rights and obligations under this agreement to a
party who is the successor or assignee of the property owner/developer in its
capacity as property owner/developer of the development without the consent of
the town; provided, however, that: a) the property owner/developer notify the
town of the assignment and of the name and address of the successor property
owner/developer, and b) the successor property owner/developer assumes the
obligations of the property owner/developer under this agreement and a new
agreement is executed with the town. Unless otherwise agreed by town, the
property owner/developer shall remain liable for performance of the obligations
of the property owner/developer under this agreement. The town shall release
the deposit guarantee furnished by the property owner/developer only if the
town accepts a new guarantee from any successor property owner/developer.
   E.   Completion Time Limits:
      1.   A property owner/developer shall complete construction of all
required improvements within three hundred sixty five (365) days from the date
of the execution of the development improvement agreement. If such improvements
are not completed within one year, plus any approved extension, from the date
of the execution of the development improvement agreement and in compliance
with all approved plans, the cash deposit shall be retained or the letter of
credit shall be drawn upon by the town.
      2.   The property owner/developer may submit a letter to the town council
requesting one or more extensions of up to six (6) months each to complete the
required work. The extension request(s) shall be submitted to the planning
department prior to expiration of the original three hundred sixty five (365)
day period or a previously granted extension period. The town council may grant
the extension for good cause shown by the property owner/developer, in the town
council's sole discretion.
   F.   Requirements And Standards For Street Improvements: The following
street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision in accordance
with requirements and standards specified as follows:
      1.   In all new subdivisions, public and/or private, streets shall be
paved with an approved hard surface material such as asphalt, concrete or other
similar permanent hard surface material. All street paving designs shall be
approved by the town engineer.
      2.   As part of the subdivision review process, the town council may
require that a developer pave streets directly adjoining the subdivision. These
requirements pertain to previously dedicated public streets that have not been
paved but are beneficial to the new subdivision.
   G.   Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks: Curbs, gutters and sidewalks may be
required where the town engineer or the planning and zoning commission deems
them necessary for the proper drainage of stormwater or for the protection of
public safety and welfare.
   H.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at all
intersections in the subdivision, according to the street names approved by the
planning and zoning commission.
   I.   Removal Of Combustible Materials And Other Debris: All combustible
materials and other debris, including fallen trees and stumps removed from the
subdivision roads, shall be removed from the subdivision to avoid disease and
fire hazards.
   J.   Use Of Rocks: All rocks found in excavation shall be utilized in
landscaping or disposed of in an acceptable manner.
   K.   Street Lighting: Street lighting for local streets shall be installed
by the developer in accordance with town standards.
   L.   Bikeways And Trails: Bikeways and trails shall be installed in
accordance with the master plan by the developer in accordance with town
standards.
   M.   Drainage Improvements: Drainage improvements shall be installed in each
new subdivision in accordance with requirements and standards specified as
follows:
   The storm drainage system shall be of sufficient size and design to carry
off all predictable surface water runoff within the subdivision or development,
and stormwater drainage which enters the development from adjacent areas.
Conduits, culverts, drains, ditches, storm sewers, bridges, and other drainage
improvements may be required where deemed necessary by the planning and zoning
commission.
   N.   Erosion Control Structures And Revegetation Measures: The erosion
control structures and revegetation measures shall be considered public
improvements and shall be provided for and installed in accordance with the
requirements set forth in these regulations.
   The subdivider shall make provision for the maintenance of all permanent
erosion control, drainage, and revegetation landscape improvements for a period
of one year after the date certificates of occupancy are issued. The town shall
maintain said improvements thereafter. Such provisions may be accomplished
through the creation of a homeowners' association with title to the public
improvements, by creation of an interest bearing account, or otherwise.
      O.   Water Mains: Water mains shall be installed in a subdivision which
will provide an adequate water supply for domestic and firefighting purposes
when the overall system is brought up to an acceptable standard set forth in
the fire suppression rating schedule published by the Colorado insurance
services office.
      P.   Roadway Landscaping: Roadway landscaping on private drives, local
streets and minor collector roads shall be provided by the developer in
accordance with a plan submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning
commission.
      Q.   Potable Water System: The potable water system shall be connected to
the water system of the appropriate water and sanitation district, and shall be
of sufficient size and design as will, in the opinion of the town engineer,
adequately supply water to each building to be erected in the development.
Water lines shall be designed to connect each lot with mains of not less than
six inches (6") in diameter. Construction details shall be in accordance with
the water and sanitation district specifications. All water system
installations shall be subject to all town ordinances and agreements relating
thereto.
      R.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed at street
intersections or as necessary to assure that no part of any building is located
a distance in excess of one hundred fifty feet (150') from the likely location
of a fire engine as determined by the fire chief after consulting with the
water and sanitation district. Fire hydrants shall be provided with adequate
water pressure and volume for firefighting purposes and shall be located no
more than three hundred feet (300') apart.
      S.   Sanitary Sewage System: The sanitary sewage system shall be
connected to the sanitary sewage system of the appropriate water and sanitation
district, and shall be of sufficient size and design to collect all sewage from
all proposed or probable structures in the development. The sanitary sewage
system shall otherwise be constructed and maintained in conformity with the
requirements and standards of the water and sanitation district.
      T.   Telephone And Electric Lines: Telephone and electric lines,
television cables, and similar utility installations shall be placed
underground consistent with subsection
8-3-9A of this code. Electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and
communication trunk and feeder lines shall be placed underground consistent
with subsection
8-3-9A of this chapter. Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter
cabinets, pedestal ducts, and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to
underground utilities may also be placed aboveground, but shall be adequately
screened with approved planting material.
      U.   Permanent Reference Monuments: Permanent reference monuments of
stone or concrete, at least thirty six inches (36") in length and six inches
(6") square or round, with suitable center point shall be located and placed
within the subdivision or development as required by the Colorado Revised
Statutes, title 38, article 51 and as required by the town engineer. Iron pin
monuments, at least twenty four inches (24") long and flush with the surface,
shall be placed at block and lot corners, and at other points as required by
the town engineer. Affixed securely to the top of each such monument shall be
the Colorado registration number of the land surveyor responsible for the
establishment of said monument. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT COST RECOVERY AND COST SHARING
SECTION:
9-2-1: Findings
9-2-2: Recovery Of Costs Of Public Improvements
9-2-3: Allowable Recovery Costs
9-2-4: Method For Calculating Recoverable Costs
9-2-5: Documentation And Recording Of Recovery Obligations
9-2-6: Inclusion Of Recovery Costs In Final Plat
9-2-7: Recordation And Lien
9-2-8: Payment Of Recovery Costs
9-2-9: Termination of Recoveries
9-2-10: Alternative Method
9-2-1: FINDINGS:
   A.   The town council hereby finds and determines that expansion of land use
and development within the town results in impacts upon public facilities and
improvements and necessitates the construction and expansion of new public
facilities, improvements, and services, including arterial and collector
streets and bridges; water and sewer facilities; schools; pedestrian areas and
community and neighborhood parks; police and fire services; drainageways;
parking facilities; and other town facilities, improvements, and services
(collectively, "public improvements").
   B.   The town council further finds and determines that it is appropriate
and fair to require new development, not current citizens, to bear such
proportionate share of the cost of the public improvements the town determines
are reasonably necessitated by and of reasonable benefit to new development.
   C.   The town council further finds and determines it is fair, reasonable,
and equitable for the town to plan for public improvements for the efficient
and logical development of land within the town and to recover at or prior to
development the cost of such public improvements from the properties benefitted
by such improvements.
   D.   The town council additionally finds that new public improvements
increase the value of and enhance the development potential of adjacent
properties. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-2-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The town shall have the authority to allocate and recover the costs of
construction of public improvements to property owners based on the benefit of
such improvement to said owners. Said recovery costs shall be paid to the town
by the benefitted property owner and forwarded to the party constructing the
improvement. Subject to the provisions of section
9-2-5(A)(5), below, where the construction of the improvement has been financed
in whole or in part by a property owner or owners, and the financed amounts
exceed the amount of benefits the owner or owners will realize from the
improvement so financed, the town shall assume or recover the amount of such
excess costs and reimburse the financing owner or owners to the extent the
amount financed exceeds the benefits received.
   B.   As part of a preliminary plat application for any land within the town,
the town may determine the public improvements that are reasonably necessitated
by and that are of reasonable benefit to the land being developed. The town
shall have the authority to establish and administer a program to recover from
benefitted property owners the costs incurred by the town or other party in
providing those public improvements, which may include:
      1.   The cost of right-of-way acquisition and construction of streets,
including traffic signals, street lights, and traffic signs.
      2.   Costs incurred for the acquisition, construction and servicing of
drainageways.
      3.   The cost of locating or relocating above-ground or underground
utilities.
      4.   Costs incurred for the acquisition, development, and furnishing of
neighborhood and community parks, public open spaces, trails, and other
recreational facilities in excess of normal development requirements.
      5.   Costs incurred for the acquisition, development, construction, and
furnishing of such other town facilities or services that the town determines
are reasonably necessary to serve, and of reasonable benefit to, new
development.
   C.   The town council shall provide by ordinance for the recovery of
appropriate costs for public improvements constructed or to be constructed by
the town. Said ordinance shall establish the nature and extent of the
recoveries due to the town. Such ordinances may include provisions for simple
interest payable to the town.
   D.   In the case of improvements financed by the town with the proceeds of
special assessment bonds, the town may forward any costs recovered under this
chapter to the owners or developers previously assessed for the costs of the
improvements. In the case of a property owner or developer who has elected to
pay an assessment in installments and who is also owed costs recovered, this
may be accomplished by an adjustment to the periodic payment owing, or in any
other manner that the town council deems just.
   E.   The town may require a developer to provide and install public
improvements sufficient to serve surrounding lands that the town determines are
necessary for sound service planning and future property development. The town
shall collect from the owners of those properties benefitted by such
improvements such amounts that the town by ordinance determines to be
reasonable and in proportion to the benefits to such properties. From such
collection, the town shall reimburse the party who installed the public
improvement. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-2-3: ALLOWABLE RECOVERY COSTS:
Costs that are recoverable pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to the
actual costs of materials, labor, equipment, acquisition of rights-of-way and
easements, including condemnation costs, engineering services, and other costs
directly related to the construction of the improvements. A developer's costs
for the administration of contracts, license fees, attorney fees, overhead, and
other administrative, indirect costs shall be considered as the cost of doing
business and shall not be included in recovery costs. (Ord. 550, Series of
2021)
9-2-4: METHOD FOR CALCULATING RECOVERABLE COSTS:
   A.   The town shall establish cost recovery for public improvements based
upon the benefit to the development. Such methods may include comparative area
or distance of a development benefited by a public improvement, comparative
population or housing density of the development benefited by the public
improvement, the trip generation rate, or other methodology for calculating
approximate use of the public improvements, and such other methods as the town
may establish from time to time that are based upon the reasonable benefit
conferred on a development by a public improvement. Cost recovery obligations
shall be based on the following:
      1.   Street Improvements. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2)
below, the owner or developer of property abutting a street constructed and
paid for by another party shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of said
street, determined as follows:
         a.   For streets up to forty-eight (48) feet in width, as measured
from flowline to flowline, exclusive of acceleration and deceleration lanes,
the owner or developer shall be required to pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost
of the improvements, including street pavement, subbase, storm sewer and other
appurtenances, right-of-way costs, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and acceleration
and deceleration lanes adjacent to the development.
         b.   For streets that exceed forty-eight (48) feet in width, as
measured from flowline to flowline, exclusive of acceleration and deceleration
lanes, the owner shall pay for the cost of constructing twenty-four (24) feet
of street improvements, plus the cost of curb, gutter, sidewalk, and any hiker/
biker trails, plus the cost of any required acceleration and deceleration lanes
adjacent to the development. On designated arterial streets, the town shall
fund cost of construction of the remaining portion of the street.
         c.   All drainage and other conduit structures constructed as an
integral part of the street shall be considered to be street improvements, and
the cost of those improvements may be allocated using the same method as
allocating the cost of street improvements. The calculation of recovery costs
for other drainage facilities, including storm drainage facilities that are not
an integral part of the street construction, shall be established on a case-by-
case basis, using a method based upon reasonable benefit to the property.
         d.   The following minimum standards on storm drainage facilities must
be met in order for a project to receive consideration for recovery: closed
conduit; designed to be able to be used by other properties within the basin;
and designed to handle developed flows.
      2.   Bridges, Overpasses and Interchanges. The cost of any bridge,
overpass, interchange, or similar street improvement involving grade-separated
facilities may be assessed on an area or acreage basis, if council finds that
the benefits of a particular improvement are enjoyed by a larger group of
property owners than the abutting property owners.
   B.   In the event the town determines that a development is reasonably
benefitted more than under the minimum recovery methods above, the town may
calculate an alternate method to determine reasonable benefit and recovery
costs for a development, provided that there shall be recovered no more than
one hundred percent (100) of the costs of public improvements, plus applicable
interest.
   C.   All agreements or ordinances created in connection with the
construction of a public improvement for which costs have been allocated
pursuant to this chapter shall be recorded with the Grand County Clerk and
Recorder as a matter of public record. It is the responsibility of every
developer to identify those recovery agreements that pertain to their
developments. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-2-5: DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDING OF RECOVERY OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Developer-Constructed Improvements.
      1.   An agreement between the town and a developer for cost recoveries
may be included within the development improvement agreement in accordance with
the provisions of this Title 9 or may be executed separately with approval by
town council resolution.
      2.   All such cost recovery agreements for developer-constructed
improvements shall include a listing of those properties to be charged with
cost recovery for the improvement(s). The developer shall also provide within
the same time period a cost estimate of the improvements. The town shall review
and approve for recording all such agreements that include provisions for cost
recovery for the benefit of private developers, provided, however, it shall be
the responsibility of the developer to record such agreements, and any effect
on the developer's ability to recover costs, pursuant to the developer's
failure to appropriately record such agreement or include a sufficient legal
description for the properties to be charged with cost recovery, shall be the
sole responsibility of the developer.
      3.   Any such agreement may include a provision for simple interest. The
town council shall, by resolution, establish the interest rate to be applied to
recovery costs. The interest shall be applied to the principal only, based on
one-year increments, or fractions thereof. The maximum amount of allowable
accrued interest for any recovery agreement is fifty percent (50%) of the
original cost of the public improvement
      4.   The town manager shall be empowered to execute such agreements on
behalf of the town.
      5.   In each such agreement, the town shall require that the developer or
his successors notify the town in the event that there is a change in the payee
of recovery fees collected for disbursement by the town. This notice shall be
provided no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of the change
in payee. This notification shall include the new payee, the payee's address, a
description of the event resulting in the change of the payee, and the
effective date of the change in payee. The notice shall be signed by someone
legally authorized to bind the transferor. The town shall send collected
recovery fees to the payee of record, as described in this paragraph. If, due
to lack of notice by the payee, the town is unable to ascertain the identity or
location of the payee within sixty (60) days after receipt of the recovery
fees, such fees shall revert to the town, and the town may declare the
agreement terminated and deposit the undisbursed recovery fees in the town 's
general fund for town use.
      6.   Prior to the town's acceptance of any public improvements
constructed by a developer, the developer shall furnish the town with one set
of reproducible, as-built drawings and a final statement of construction costs
for those improvements subject to recovery in a format acceptable to the town.
The town shall review the developer's final statement of construction costs
and, upon the town 's approval, said final statement of construction costs
shall be recorded by the developer, which thereafter shall be the schedule of
recovery costs that the town will follow in administering the cost recovery
agreement pursuant to section
9-2-8 below.
      7.   The developer benefitting from any cost recovery agreement approved
by the town pursuant to this section (the "developer-beneficiary") shall pay a
fee to the town for the preparation, recordation, and administration of the
agreement as specified in Section
1-8-2 of this code.
      8.   The town's duty and liability in connection with the administration
of a cost recovery agreement pursuant to this section shall be limited as
follows. In administering such agreements:
         a.   The town shall exercise reasonable care to collect such amounts
due the developer-beneficiary, but the town shall not be responsible or liable
for any amounts not actually paid to the town by the responsible party. The
developer-beneficiary shall have no cause of action against the town, other
than to recover any amounts actually collected and on deposit with the town.
         b.   The town shall not be deemed to be acting as an agent or
fiduciary of the developer-beneficiary or the responsible party. It shall be
the exclusive responsibility of the developer-beneficiary to monitor and
enforce the payment provisions of the agreement.
         c.   In the event of non-payment by a responsible party, the
developer-beneficiary, in its capacity as principal third-party beneficiary of
the agreement, shall have as its exclusive remedy the right to bring a cause of
action against the defaulting responsible party. Such action shall be brought
within one year from the date the developer-beneficiary knew, or should have
known in the exercise of due diligence, of the default.
         d.   The limitations set forth above shall be deemed as incorporated
into every cost recovery agreement to be administered by the town.
   B.   Cost Recovery for Town-Constructed Public Improvements. All cost
recovery obligations for town-constructed public improvements shall be
established by ordinance. The ordinance shall include a list of properties to
be charged with cost recovery for the town-constructed public improvement. The
ordinance establishing such cost recovery related to a town-constructed
improvement shall be recorded with the Grand County Clerk and Recorder. If
available, the ordinance shall include a final statement of construction costs
for the improvements subject to recovery. Otherwise, the ordinance may include
an estimate of construction costs for the improvements to be constructed, and a
final statement of construction costs for the improvements shall be recorded as
soon as practical following the completion of the improvements. After the final
statement of construction costs for town -constructed or town -paid public
improvements has been recorded, the town shall thereafter recover such costs
pursuant to the provisions of section
9-2-8 below. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-2-6: INCLUSION OF RECOVERY COSTS IN FINAL PLAT:
All final plats shall contain a section entitled "recovery costs," which shall
contain a list of the public improvements previously constructed on which the
proposed development will be required to pay recovery costs and the areas of
benefit, if applicable, and the town recording information for the ordinance
and agreement that established the recovery costs. Notwithstanding any of the
foregoing to the contrary, the development shall also be responsible for any
recovery costs established subsequent to the approval of the final plat.
However, no recovery cost obligation shall be invalid against a development if
it is undiscovered and/or inadvertently omitted from the final plat. (Ord. 550,
Series of 2021)
9-2-7: RECORDATION AND LIEN:
   A.   The agreement or ordinance that sets forth the public improvements, the
costs thereof, the areas of benefit, and the method of recovery of costs shall
be filed and recorded with the Grand County Clerk and Recorder.
   B.   From the date of recording of any cost recovery agreement for
developer-constructed public improvements, or a cost recovery ordinance for
town-constructed public improvements, each of the records shall create a first
and prior lien upon the properties benefited in the amount of the costs of the
public improvements determined by the town attributable to the property, as
provided by Title 3, Chapter 2, of this code. At its discretion, the town may
allow the lien to become junior to the lien of deed(s) of trust executed by the
landowners to secure loans to finance the construction of public improvements
on the property. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-2-8: PAYMENT OF RECOVERY COSTS:
All recovery costs shall be due and payable at the time of the recording of a
final plat for the applicable property, or at such time as application is made
for a building permit for the applicable property, whichever occurs first. The
town may withhold building permits on property within the area of benefit until
recovery costs are paid. In the event an owner desires to proceed with
development of a portion of his property based on a phased development plan,
the owner may proceed after paying that portion of the recovery costs and
making provision for payment of the remainder satisfactory to the town. (Ord.
550, Series of 2021)
9-2-9: TERMINATION OF RECOVERIES:
Upon receipt of an application by an owner previously entitled to receipt of
cost recoveries or on its own motion, the town may terminate a recovery for a
public improvement, if the costs of the public improvements have been
substantially recovered, if ten years have passed, if the project may be more
effectively financed by another method, or for such other good cause as the
town may determine. (Ord. 550, Series of 2021)
9-2-10: ALTERNATIVE METHOD:
This chapter is intended to establish an alternative method for the financing
of public improvements for lands that will be reasonably benefited thereby and
the provisions hereof shall not be construed to limit the power of the town to
utilize any other lawful method for accomplishing this purpose. (Ord. 550,
Series of 2021)
