COLMAN, SD
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains state legislation through September 30, 2025
 
BY
THE SOUTH DAKOTA MUNICIPAL LEAGUE
THE SOUTH DAKOTA BASIC CODE, 2025 EDITION
Published by
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202 (800) 445-5588
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Severability
   
10.06   Reference to other sections
   
10.07   Reference to offices
   
10.08   Errors and omissions
   
10.09   Powers to enact, amend, or repeal ordinances and resolutions; generally
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.13   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.14   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “code”, for which
designation “code of ordinances”, or “codified ordinances” may be substituted.
Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law
as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant
to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
      (1)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (2)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (3)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding, or thing shall have
reference to a municipality concerned or affected.
Statutory reference:
   General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding, and the like, see
SDCL § 9-1-1
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code or ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which any act provided by this code or
other ordinance is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the last is a holiday and then it also is excluded.
Fractions of a day are to be disregarded in computations which include more
than one day, and involve no questions of priority.
   COUNTY. The county or counties where a municipality is located.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   GOVERNING BODY. The board of trustees, the board of commissioners, or the
common council of a municipality.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   LOT. Includes PARCEL or TRACT OF LAND.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Any city or town that is organized
pursuant to SDCL Title 9.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   ORDINANCE. A permanent legislative act within the limits of its powers of
the governing body of a municipality.
(SDCL § 9-19-1)
   OWNER. The grantee in the last deed of conveyance of any lot or parcel of
land recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county or counties
in which the municipality is located, or the heirs or successors to the
grantee.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   PUBLISH. Publication in an official newspaper of the municipality as
designated by the governing body pursuant to SDCL § 9-12-6.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   RESOLUTION. Any determination, decision, or direction of the governing body
of a municipality of a temporary or special character for the purpose of
initiating effecting, or carrying out its administrative duties and functions.
(SDCL § 9-19-1)
   SDCL. South Dakota Codified Laws.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.06 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this local government exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.09 POWERS TO ENACT, AMEND, OR REPEAL ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS;
GENERALLY.
   Every municipality may enact, make, amend, revise, or repeal all such
ordinances, resolutions, and regulations as may be proper and necessary to
carry into effect the powers granted thereto.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF AN ORDINANCE.
   (A)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoined, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.14 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Municipalities are authorized to provide for the punishment of each
violation of an ordinance, resolution, or regulation with a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ELECTIONS
      
33.   POLICE
      
34.   FINANCE
      
35.   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
General
   
30.001   Forms of government
   
30.002   Classes of municipalities; change of classification
   
30.003   Vacancies
   
30.004   Conflict of interest
   
30.005   Maximum payment or indemnity, excess
Organization; Trustee Form
   
30.015   Composition and qualification
   
30.016   Qualifying for office; oath of office
   
30.017   Term of office
   
30.018   President
   
30.019   Meetings
   
30.020   Quorum; majority required for action
Organization; Aldermanic Form
   
30.035   Mayor; qualifications, term, powers
   
30.036   Vacancy in office of mayor; temporary absence or disability; bribery
   
30.037   Common council; membership; terms of office
   
30.038   President and vice president; term; election; vacancy
   
30.039   Power of council to judge members and govern proceedings; bribery;
attendance requirements
   
30.040   Meetings; quorum; meeting minutes
   
30.041   Votes required
   
30.042   Reconsideration or recision
   
30.043   Mayor; temporary absence or incapacity; mayor pro tempore
   
30.044   Mayor; temporary absence or incapacity; mayor pro tempore; duties and
authority
Organization; Commissioner Form
   
30.055   Composition
   
30.056   Qualifications and terms of office
   
30.057   Mayor as president of board
   
30.058   Resignations and vacancies
   
30.059   Procedure to fill vacancies
   
30.060   Acting mayor during vacancy in office
   
30.061   Meetings
   
30.062   Quorum; voting
   
30.063   Rules of procedure; attendance requirements
   
30.064   General oversight
   
30.065   Five-commissioner city
   
30.066   Three-commissioner city
Organization; City Manager Form
   
30.080   Governing bodies; election and terms of office
   
30.081   Powers of mayor
   
30.082   Duties and authority of city manager
   
30.083   Appointments and removal
   
30.084   Bond required
   
30.085   Removal of city manager
   
30.086   Regular and special meetings
   
30.087   Qualifications and appointment of city manager; residence; restriction
on appointment of former member of governing body
   
30.088   Absence, disability, or suspension of city manager
   
30.089   Responsibility of city manager; power to appoint and remove officers
and employees
   
30.090   Inconsistent statutes inapplicable
   
30.091   City manager; authority to contract; delegation
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.105   Style of ordinances; subject
   
30.106   Readings, passage, and publication
   
30.107   Effective date of ordinances and resolutions
   
30.108   Compilation of ordinances
   
30.109   Continuation in force of ordinances after change in form of government
   
30.110   Vetoed ordinances
Cross-reference:
Compatible and incompatible offices, see §
31.08
Municipal property, see
Ch. 35
Removal from office; vacancies, see
Ch. 31
Statutory reference:
   General powers of municipality, see SDCL Chapter 9-12
   Public comment at meetings, see SDCL § 1-25-1
GENERAL
§ 30.001 FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   Each first or second class municipality must be governed by a mayor
and common council, a mayor and a common council with a city manager, a board
of commissioners, or a board of commissioners with a city manager. Each third
class municipality must be governed by a board of trustees, with or without a
city manager.
   (B)   The present form of government of existing municipalities must
continue until changed as provided by SDCL Title 9.
(SDCL § 9-11-11)
§ 30.002 CLASSES OF MUNICIPALITIES; CHANGE OF CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   There are three classes of municipal corporations:
      (1)   First class, with a population of 5,000 or over;
      (2)   Second class, with a population between 500 and 4,999; and
      (3)   Third class, with a population of fewer than 500.
(SDCL § 9-2-1)
   (B)   For the purpose of classification, the population of each municipality
is determined by the last preceding federal census. Whenever the municipal
boundaries included in the last preceding census substantially differ from the
current boundaries of the municipality, the governing body by resolution may
direct the finance officer to determine the population by filing a certificate
showing the number of persons who voted at the last preceding annual municipal
election. That number multiplied by three constitutes the population for the
purpose of classification until the next federal census is completed.
(SDCL § 9-2-2)
§ 30.003 VACANCIES.
   (A)   General. If a vacancy exists on a municipal governing body, the
remaining members shall appoint a replacement to serve until the next annual
municipal election, or the vacancy may be filled by special election for the
remainder of the unexpired term as provided in division (D) of this section.
   (B)   Aldermanic form. In the aldermanic form of municipal government, the
appointment must be a person from the same ward of the first or second class
municipality.
   (C)   Election to fill remainder of term. If electing a person to fill the
remainder of the unexpired term at an annual municipal election, the vacancy
shall have occurred prior to the publication required by SDCL § 9-13-6.
(SDCL § 9-13-14.1)
   (D)   Special elections to fill vacancy on governing board, office of mayor;
procedures.
      (1)   The governing body of any municipality may, by ordinance, require
that any vacancy on the governing body or in the office of the mayor is to be
filled by a special election called for that purpose to be conducted as
provided in SDCL § 9-13-14 and this division (D).
      (2)   No special election may be held less than 90 days before the annual
municipal election. The finance officer of the municipality shall publish a
notice in the official newspaper of the municipality stating that a vacancy
exists, that the vacancy will be filled by the special election, the date of
the election, and the time and place where nominating petitions may be filed
for office.
      (3)   The notice shall be published once each week for two consecutive
weeks beginning at least 60 days before the special election. Nominating
petitions for the vacancy shall be prepared and filed as provided in SDCL § 9-
13-7, may not be circulated more than 60 days before the date of the special
election, and shall be filed at least 30 days before the date of the special
election. The number of signers required for a nominating petition shall be
calculated as provided in SDCL § 9-13-9. If a nominating petition is filed
before the second Tuesday in January, the prior year’s calculation of
registered voters shall be used. A notice of the special election shall be
published as provided in SDCL §§ 9-13-13 and 9-13-14.
(SDCL § 9-13-14.2)
   (E)   Elected official to hold office until vacancy filled. If for any
reason a municipality fails to elect any person to succeed an elected official
whose term has expired or an elected official fails to file a nominating
petition or qualify, the office is deemed vacant. The elected official whose
term has expired shall continue to act in an official capacity until the
vacancy is filled by election or appointment pursuant to divisions (C) or (D)
of this section.
(SDCL § 9-13-14.3)
Cross-reference:
   Temporary vacancy of mayor in aldermanic form, see §
30.036
§ 30.004 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   No municipal official may participate in discussing or vote on any
issue in which the official has a conflict of interest. Each official shall
decide if any potential conflict of interest requires such official to be
disqualified from participating in discussion or voting. However, no such
official may participate in discussing or vote on an issue if the following
circumstances apply:
      (1)   The official has a direct pecuniary interest in the matter before
the governing body; or
      (2)   At least two-thirds of the governing body votes that an official
has an identifiable conflict of interest that should prohibit such official
from voting on a specific matter.
   (B)   If an official with a direct pecuniary interest participates in
discussion or votes on a matter before the governing body, the legal sole
remedy is to invalidate that official’s vote.
(SDCL § 6-1-17)
§ 30.005 MAXIMUM PAYMENT OR INDEMNITY, EXCESS.
   (A)   In no event may the total amount of payment or indemnity for any one
officer or employee exceed the sum of $25,000. However, this municipality may
establish a different maximum amount of payment or indemnity by a resolution
approved by its governing body.
   (B)   Indemnity in excess of $25,000 or the maximum amount of the payment or
indemnity approved by a resolution adopted by this municipality’s governing
body, whichever is greater, may be presented as a claim to the state
legislature.
(SDCL § 3-19-2)
ORGANIZATION; TRUSTEE FORM
§ 30.015 COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATION.
   The board of trustees of a third class municipality shall consist of not
less than three nor more than five members elected at large. Each shall be a
legal voter of the municipality. The number of trustees of a municipality may
be increased to five or reduced to three in the manner prescribed by SDCL
Chapter 9-11.
§ 30.016 QUALIFYING FOR OFFICE; OATH OF OFFICE.
   The members of the board of trustees shall qualify for office within ten
days after notice of their election by filing an oath or affirmation as may be
required by law.
§ 30.017 TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The members of the board of trustees shall hold office for three years
and until their successors are elected and qualified. A vacancy on the board
must be filled as provided in SDCL § 9-13-14.1 or 9-13-14.2.
   (B)   For the purposes of staggering terms, whenever any third class
municipality is organized, the trustees must be elected for terms of one, two,
and three years respectively at the first annual election. At subsequent
elections, each trustee must be elected for a term of three years.
(SDCL § 9-7-3)
§ 30.018 PRESIDENT.
   At the first regular meeting after their election, the members of the board
of trustees shall elect one of their number as president to serve for one year
and until a successor is elected and qualified.
(SDCL § 9-7-5)
§ 30.019 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The board of trustees shall hold regular meetings at the times as may
be provided by ordinance.
   (B)   Special meetings of the board may be held at any time upon call of the
president or finance officer by oral or written notice to the members.
(SDCL § 9-7-6)
   (C)   If a quorum of trustees for a municipality of the third class meets
solely for purposes of implementing previously publicly-adopted policy,
carrying out ministerial functions of the municipality, or undertaking a
factual investigation of conditions related to public safety, the meeting is
not subject to the provisions of SDCL Chapter 1-25.
Statutory reference:
   Recording of public meeting, see SDCL § 1-25-11
   Similar provisions, see SDCL §§ 1-25-1 et seq.
§ 30.020 QUORUM; MAJORITY REQUIRED FOR ACTION.
   A majority of the members of the board of trustees constitutes a quorum, but
an act of the board is not effective unless assented to by a majority of the
members. Unless a vacancy exists due to removal, resignation, death, or by
operation of law, the quorum consists of the majority of all the trustees
qualified to serve as trustees by election or appointment pursuant to SDCL
Chapter 9-13.
(SDCL § 9-7-7)
ORGANIZATION; ALDERMANIC FORM
§ 30.035 MAYOR; QUALIFICATIONS, TERM, POWERS.
   (A)   Executive. The chief executive officer of a municipality under the
aldermanic form shall be a mayor.
(SDCL § 9-8-1)
   (B)   Qualifications. No person is eligible to be nominated, elected, or
appointed as a mayor unless such person is a citizen of the United States, a
voter of the municipality, and a resident of the municipality, in accordance
with SDCL § 9-14-2. An alderman representing a ward must be a voter of and
resident of the ward for which the person is to hold office. If the mayor or an
alderman at large moves to a permanent residence outside the corporate limits
of the municipality, the office is immediately vacated. If an alderman
representing a ward moves to a permanent residence outside the boundaries of
his or her ward, the office is immediately vacated.
(SDCL § 9-8-1.1)
   (C)   Term. The mayor shall hold office for a term of not less than two nor
more than five years as determined by ordinance. A person may hold office for
more than one term.
(SDCL § 9-8-1)
   (D)   Powers.
      (1)   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council. The mayor
votes only in the case of a tie, except pursuant to § 30.041.
      (2)   He or she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
the laws and ordinances, and take care that such laws and ordinances are
faithfully executed.
      (3)   He or she shall annually and or as may be necessary, give the
council information relative to the affairs of the municipality, and shall
recommend for council’s consideration such measures as he or she may deem
prudent.
      (4)   He or she shall have the power to sign or veto any ordinance or
resolution passed by the common council, and the power to veto any part or item
of an ordinance or resolution appropriating money. Pursuant to SDCL § 9-19-10,
the veto, with written objections must be filed with the finance officer within
ten days after final passage.
(SDCL § 9-8-3)
§ 30.036 VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR; TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR DISABILITY; BRIBERY.
   (A)   If there is a vacancy from any cause in the office of the mayor, the
vacancy must be filled by appointment by a majority vote of all the aldermen,
as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs, to serve until the office is
filled by election for the unexpired term at the next annual municipal election
or by special election as provided in SDCL § 9-13-14.2. Until the vacancy is
filled, the powers and duties of mayor shall be executed by the mayor pro
tempore, as provided in § 30.044.
   (B)   A resignation by the mayor must be in writing and must specify the
effective date of the resignation. A temporary absence or temporary
incapacitation of the mayor is not a vacancy in the office of the mayor.
(SDCL § 9-8-2)
   (C)   The office of a mayor convicted of a crime that involves bribery is
deemed vacated upon entry of a judgement of conviction.
(SDCL § 9-8-5)
Cross-reference:
   Special elections, see §
30.003
§ 30.037 COMMON COUNCIL; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Membership. The common council shall consist of the mayor elected at
large and two aldermen elected from and by the voters of each ward of the
municipality.
   (B)   Term. The term of office shall be for two years, unless a municipality
adopts an ordinance establishing the term of office to be three, four, or five
years. Except as otherwise provided in § 30.036, the mayor and aldermen shall
hold office until successors are elected and qualified. At the first election
of aldermen, the council shall stagger the initial terms of the alderman in
each ward to provide that two aldermen from the same ward are not up for
reelection in the same year. A person may hold office for more than one term. A
vacancy on the common council shall be filled as provided in SDCL §§ 9-13-14.1
or 9-13-14.2. A resignation by an alderman must be in writing and must specify
the effective date of the resignation.
(SDCL § 9-8-4)
   (C)   Eligibility. No person is eligible to be nominated, elected, or
appointed as a mayor or as an alderman unless such person is a citizen of the
United States, a voter of and resident of the municipality, and, if an
alderman, a voter of and resident of the ward for which such person is to hold
office.
§ 30.038 PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT; TERM; ELECTION; VACANCY.
   (A)   At the first regular meeting after the annual election in each year
and after the qualification of the newly elected aldermen, the council shall
elect from among its own members a president and vice president, who shall hold
their respective offices until a president and vice president are elected the
following year. In a year when there is no annual election, the council shall
elect from among its members a president and vice president at the first
regular meeting that occurs no more than one year after the president and vice
president were last elected from among the council’s members.
   (B)   If an emergency prevents the first regular meeting from occurring, the
election must take place at either the next regular meeting or a special
meeting. If there is a vacancy in the office of the president, the council must
elect a president from among its members at the first regular or special
meeting that occurs after the vacancy occurred.
   (C)   If there is a vacancy in the office of the vice president, the council
must elect a vice president from among its members at the first regular or
special meeting that occurs after the vacancy occurred. If the vacancy in the
office of the vice president occurs during a meeting, the council may choose to
elect a vice president from among its members during the same meeting.
(SDCL § 9-8-7)
§ 30.039 POWER OF COUNCIL TO JUDGE MEMBERS AND GOVERN PROCEEDINGS; BRIBERY;
ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of
its own members. It may, by ordinance, determine its own rules of procedure and
code of conduct, punish its members for disorderly conduct while performing the
duties of office, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds of the aldermen
elected thereto, may expel a member.
   (B)   The office of any alderman convicted of a crime that involves bribery
is deemed vacated upon entry of a judgement of conviction.
   (C)   The council may, by ordinance, establish requirements for attendance
at regular meetings and provide for the expulsion of a member in violation of
the attendance requirements.
(SDCL § 9-8-5)
§ 30.040 MEETINGS; QUORUM; MEETING MINUTES.
   (A)   Meetings. The council shall hold its regular meetings on the first
Monday of each month. It may prescribe by ordinance the manner in which special
meetings may be called and may so change the day of its regular monthly
meetings.
   (B)   Quorum. When a seat on a council is vacant due to removal,
resignation, death, or by operation of law, the quorum consists of the majority
of all the aldermen who are qualified to serve as aldermen by election or
appointment pursuant to SDCL Chapter 9-13. The council may compel the
attendance of absentees under the penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
   (C)   Meeting minutes. The meetings of the council are open to the public.
The council shall keep minutes of its meetings.
(SDCL § 9-8-8)
§ 30.041 VOTES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All votes must be taken orally or by roll call. A vote may not be
taken by secret ballot. If any member of the council requests a roll call vote,
a roll call vote must be taken. All votes must be entered in the minutes of the
council’s proceedings.
   (B)   The majority vote of all the aldermen is necessary to pass an
ordinance or proposal that expends or appropriates money. The mayor may not
break a tie on an ordinance or proposal to expend or appropriate money. The
mayor may break a tie on all other ordinances or proposals.
   (C)   A two-thirds vote of the aldermen is required to sell any city
property.
(SDCL § 9-8-10)
§ 30.042 RECONSIDERATION OR RECISION.
   A vote of the council may be reconsidered or rescinded at a regular or
special meeting if a quorum is present and a majority vote to reconsider or
rescind the action.
(SDCL § 9-8-11)
§ 30.043 MAYOR; TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR INCAPACITY; MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   (A)   In the temporary absence or temporary incapacitation of the mayor, the
president of the council shall serve as the mayor pro tempore, as provided in §
30.044, until the temporary absence or temporary incapacitation ends.
   (B)   In the temporary absence or disability of the mayor and president of
the council, the vice president of the council shall serve as the mayor pro
tempore until the temporary absence or temporary incapacitation ends.
(SDCL § 9-8-12)
§ 30.044 MAYOR; TEMPORARY ABSENCE OR INCAPACITY; MAYOR PRO TEMPORE; DUTIES AND
AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The mayor pro tempore shall perform the mayor’s duties, except that
the mayor pro tempore may not appoint, employ, or remove appointive officers
without approval of the council.
   (B)   The mayor pro tempore acts as the presiding officer of the council,
but the mayor pro tempore may only vote as an alderman. No alderman acting as
mayor may vote as the mayor to break a tie vote.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, “appointive officers” are municipal
employees or members of a board, commission, or similar body that the mayor has
the authority to appoint, with or without the approval of the council.
(SDCL § 9-8-13)
ORGANIZATION; COMMISSIONER FORM
§ 30.055 COMPOSITION.
   Under the commission form, where a city manager is not employed, the board
of commissioners shall consist of the mayor and two or four commissioners
elected at large.
(SDCL § 9-9-1)
§ 30.056 QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Qualifications. In accordance with SDCL § 9-14-2, a person may be
nominated, elected, or appointed as a mayor or as a commissioner if the person
is a citizen of the United States and voter and resident of the municipality.
(SDCL § 9-9-2)
   (B)   Terms of office.
      (1)   The term of office of the mayor and commissioners is not less than
two or more than five years as determined by ordinance, except that at the
first election after the adoption of the commission form of government, the
mayor’s term must be for five years and the commissioners must be elected for
staggered terms.
      (2)   If the number of commissioners is four, one must be elected for one
year, one for two years, one for three years, and one for four years.
      (3)   If the number of commissioners is two, one must be elected for two
years and one for four years.
      (4)    At the annual election preceding the expiration of the term of
office of the mayor or any commissioner, a successor must be elected for a term
of not less than two or more than five years, as determined by ordinance.
(SDCL § 9-9-3)
§ 30.057 MAYOR AS PRESIDENT OF BOARD.
   The mayor shall be president of the board and shall have a vote upon all
questions but shall not have the right of veto.
(SDCL § 9-9-7)
§ 30.058 RESIGNATIONS AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   If the mayor or a commissioner resigns, the resignation must be
submitted in writing to the board of commissioners and must specify the
effective date of the resignation.
   (B)   If the mayor or a commissioner moves to a permanent residence outside
the corporate limits of the municipality, the office is immediately vacated.
   (C)   If there is a vacancy in the office of mayor, the vacancy must be
filled by appointment pursuant to §
30.060 until the position is filled by election at the next annual municipal
election or by special election as provided in SDCL § 9-13-14.2. A vacancy on
the board must be filled as provided in SDCL §§ 9-13-14.1 or 9-13-14.2.
   (D)   A temporary absence or temporary incapacitation of the mayor is not
considered a vacancy in the office of the mayor.
(SDCL § 9-9-6)
Cross-reference:
   Special elections, see §
30.003
§ 30.059 PROCEDURE TO FILL VACANCIES.
   In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the board of commissioners
shall appoint by a majority vote of all the members thereof one of its number
as acting mayor, who shall be invested with all the powers and shall perform
all the duties of the mayor, until the election of a mayor.
§ 30.060 ACTING MAYOR DURING VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   (A)   If the mayor is unable to perform the duties of office by reason of
temporary absence or temporary incapacitation, the board must, by a majority
vote of all the commissioners, appoint one of its members to act as mayor until
the temporary absence or temporary incapacitation ends. The appointed
commissioner’s official designation is mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore
is invested with all the powers and shall perform all the duties of the mayor
during the mayor’s temporary absence or temporary incapacitation. The mayor pro
tempore has only one vote as a commissioner and is not entitled to vote as
mayor pro tempore. The temporary absence or temporary incapacitation of the
mayor is not a vacancy in the office of the mayor.
   (B)   If the office of mayor is vacated, the board of commissioners must, by
a majority vote of all commissioners, appoint one of its commissioners as
acting mayor. The acting mayor is invested with all the powers and shall
perform all the duties of the mayor until the vacancy is filled by election for
the unexpired term at the next annual election or by special election as
provided in SDCL § 9-13-14.2.
   (C)   The acting mayor has only one vote as a commissioner and is not
entitled to vote as acting mayor.
(SDCL § 9-9-8)
§ 30.061 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The board shall meet at least once each week, or as otherwise
determined by ordinance, in regular meeting at a time and place as fixed by the
board, to consider, take under advisement, and act on the business as may come
before the board.
(SDCL § 9-9-11)
   (B)   A special meeting may be called by the mayor or by any two
commissioners at any time to only consider the matter mentioned in the call for
the meeting. A notice of a special meeting shall be given pursuant to SDCL § 1-
25-1.1 and shall be provided to each commissioner.
(SDCL § 9-9-12)
§ 30.062 QUORUM; VOTING.
   (A)   Quorum.
      (1)   A majority of all the commissioners on the board of commissioners
constitutes a quorum to do business. If a seat on the board is vacant due to
removal, resignation, death, or by operation of law, the quorum consists of the
majority of all the remaining commissioners who are qualified to serve by
election or appointment pursuant to SDCL Chapter 9-13. The board may compel the
attendance of any absentee under penalties as prescribed by ordinance.
      (2)   No action of the board is effective unless upon a vote of a
majority of all the members of the board.
(SDCL § 9-9-14)
   (B)   Meetings open to public; recording of votes; minutes.
      (1)   Each meeting of the board of commissioners is open to the public.
      (2)   All votes must be taken orally or by roll call. No votes may be
taken by secret ballot. If any member of the board requests a roll call vote, a
roll call vote must be taken.
      (3)   All votes must be entered in the minutes of the council’s
proceedings.
(SDCL § 9-9-16)
   (C)   Majority vote required. The concurrence of a majority of all the
members of the board of commissioners shall be necessary to the passage of any
such ordinance or proposal.
   (D)   Sale of real property. A two-thirds vote of the board is required to
sell any municipal real property.
(SDCL § 9-9-16)
§ 30.063 RULES OF PROCEDURE; ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The board of commissioners is the judge of the election and
qualification of its members. The board may, by ordinance, determine its rules
of procedure and code of conduct, punish its members for disorderly conduct
while performing the duties of office, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds
of the members, expel a member.
   (B)   The board may, by ordinance, establish requirements for attendance at
regular meetings and provide for the expulsion of a member in violation of the
attendance requirements.
(SDCL § 9-9-14.1)
§ 30.064 GENERAL OVERSIGHT.
   The board controls all departments of the municipality and may make and
enforce rules and regulations for the organization, management, and operation
of the departments of the municipality and any agency that may be created for
the administration of the board’s affairs.
(SDCL § 9-9-9)
§ 30.065 FIVE-COMMISSIONER CITY.
   (A)   Mayor’s responsibility.
      (1)   The mayor may exercise all the powers and perform all the duties
provided by the laws of this state or the ordinances of the municipality not in
conflict with the laws of the state.
      (2)   The mayor is the chief executive officer of the municipality,
presides at all meetings of the board, and has general supervision over all
departments and officers.
      (3)   In the temporary absence or temporary incapacitation of a
commissioner, the mayor shall temporarily take charge of the department of that
commissioner.
      (4)   The mayor shall enforce all the laws of the municipality and
require that the conditions of the grant of any franchise or privilege are
faithfully complied with and performed.
      (5)   The mayor shall grant all licenses or permits, except as are
required by ordinance to be granted by the board or by some other department or
officer.
      (6)   The mayor shall supervise each public building of the municipality
and each city park except in any municipality that has a park board, and the
lighting of the streets, alleys, and public buildings of the municipality.
      (7)   The mayor shall annually and from time to time give the board
information relative to the affairs of the municipality and shall recommend for
the board’s consideration any measure the mayor deems prudent.
(SDCL § 9-9-20)
   (B)   Commissioner’s responsibility. In a municipality governed by a board
of five commissioners, the commissioners shall designate by a majority vote one
commissioner to be the commissioner of public safety, one commissioner to be
the commissioner of public works, one commissioner to be the commissioner of
utilities, and one commissioner to be the commissioner of finance and revenue.
(SDCL § 9-9-18)
   (C)   Mayor’s and commissioner’s powers and duties. In any municipality
governed by a board consisting of five commissioners, the mayor and the
commissioners have the powers and duties described in SDCL §§ 9-9-20 to 9-9-24,
inclusive, as set forth in divisions (A) and (D) of this section. In addition,
each commissioner shall supervise any other department assigned or apportioned
by resolution of the governing board, adopted by a majority vote of all the
commissioners at the first meeting of the board in the month following the
election year. Each commissioner is in charge of the apparatus, personnel, and
personal property used by departments under that commissioner’s supervision.
(SDCL § 9-9-19)
   (D)   Specific powers and duties.
      (1)   Commissioner of public safety. The commissioner of public safety
shall supervise the police and fire departments and the departments’ officers
and employees. The commissioner of public safety is also in charge of animal
control within the municipality, including animal impoundments and shelter.
(SDCL § 9-9-21)
      (2)   Commissioner of public works. The commissioner of public works
shall supervise the streets, alleys, public grounds, and municipal
improvements, and all public property, except as otherwise specially provided.
The commissioner shall maintain the property in a clean and sanitary condition
and enforce all contracts, rules, and regulations necessary.
(SDCL § 9-9-22)
      (3)   Commissioner of utilities. The commissioner of utilities shall
supervise the construction, maintenance, and operation of the waterworks,
sewerage, and any other utility departments of the municipality. The
commissioner of utilities shall enforce all regulations with respect to that
department and its revenue.
(SDCL § 9-9-23)
      (4)   Commissioner of finance and revenue. The commissioner of finance
and revenue shall enforce all laws for the assessment and collection of taxes
of every kind and collection of all revenues belonging to the municipality from
whatever source derived. The finance and revenue commissioner shall examine
into and keep the board informed on the finances of the municipality and its
assets and property.
(SDCL § 9-9-24)
§ 30.066 THREE-COMMISSIONER CITY.
   The mayor and commissioners shall have the following responsibilities.
   (A)   Mayor’s responsibilities. The mayor must exercise all the powers and
perform all the duties provided by the laws of this state or the ordinances of
the municipality not in conflict with state law. The mayor is the chief
executive officer of the municipality, shall preside at all meetings of the
board, and has general supervision over all departments and officers. In the
temporary absence or temporary incapacitation of a commissioner, the mayor
shall temporarily take charge of the department of the commissioner. The mayor
shall see that all the laws of the municipality are enforced and that the
conditions of the grant of any franchise or privilege are faithfully complied
with and performed. The mayor shall grant all licenses or permits, except as
required by ordinance to be granted by the board or by some other department or
officer.
(SDCL § 9-9-26)
   (B)   Commissioner’s responsibilities. All matters not designated to the
mayor must be assigned or apportioned as equally as may be between the
commissioners by resolution of the board adopted by a majority vote of all the
commissioners at the first meeting of the board in the month following the
election each year.
(SDCL § 9-9-27)
Statutory reference:
   Three-Commissioner municipality, division of responsibilities, see SDCL § 9-
9-25
ORGANIZATION; CITY-MANAGER FORM
§ 30.080 GOVERNING BODIES; ELECTIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Aldermanic form. The mayor and aldermen shall be elected in the form
prescribed by SDCL §§ 9-8-1 et seq.
(SDCL § 9-10-4)
   (B)   Commission form.
      (1)   There shall be nine commissioners elected for a three-year,
staggered term of office pursuant to SDCL § 9-10-5.
      (2)   At the first regular meeting in May of each year, the commissioners
must elect one of their members to serve as mayor for a term of one year
pursuant to SDCL § 9-10-6.
§ 30.081 POWERS OF MAYOR.
   The duties and powers of the mayor shall be as follows.
   (A)   He or she is the presiding officer over local council or commission.
   (B)   He or she is the recognized head of the municipality for the service
of civil process and for military and ceremonial purposes.
   (C)   He or she may take command of the police of the municipality, appoint
special police, and govern the municipality by proclamation during times of
public danger or emergency, during which times he or she has the powers and
authority to call for assistance as provided in SDCL § 9-29-17.
   (D)   He or she shall have other authority and perform other duties
prescribed by ordinance or resolution not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter, but in no case may he or she have the right of veto.
(SDCL § 9-10-7)
§ 30.082 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   The city manager shall:
   (A)   See that municipal laws, ordinances, and resolutions are enforced;
   (B)   Supervise the administration of the affairs of the municipality;
   (C)   Make recommendations to the governing body concerning the affairs of
the municipality as may seem prudent;
   (D)   Keep the governing body advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the municipality;
   (E)   Prepare and submit to the governing body an annual budget on a date
determined by the governing body pursuant to SDCL §§ 9-21-34 and 9-21-34.1;
   (F)   See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the municipality
or its inhabitants in any contract or franchise to which the municipality is a
party are kept and performed;
   (G)   Be entitled to be present and take part in discussions at all meetings
of the governing body and its committees, except when the governing body is
considering removal of the manager;
   (H)   Sign all warrants for the payment of money, which warrants:
      (1)   Must be countersigned by the finance officer; and
      (2)   May not be issued until the claim has been approved by the
governing body, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution.
   (I)   Have the right to prepare and introduce ordinances and resolutions to
take part in the discussions on all matters coming before the governing body,
but the manager may not vote; and
   (J)   Have other powers and duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or
resolution.
(SDCL § 9-10-15)
§ 30.083 APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   The finance officer, attorney, and library board of trustees must be
appointed by the governing body and may be removed at any time by the governing
body.
   (B)   The finance officer shall appoint all deputies and employees in the
finance office.
   (C)   All other officers and employees, including all members of boards and
commissions, except as otherwise provided by law, must be appointed, and may be
removed, by the city manager.
(SDCL § 9-10-9)
§ 30.084 BOND REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the city manager and every
officer of the municipality, whether appointed by the manager or the governing
body, shall furnish a bond to the municipality in the form and amount as may be
required by the governing body. The bond must be approved by the governing body
and filed with the finance officer. An individual bond is not required,
provided the municipality has blanket coverage pursuant to SDCL § 3-5-14.
(SDCL § 9-10-14)
§ 30.085 REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The governing body shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite
term, but may suspend the manager by resolution of intent to remove the manager
approved by a majority vote of all the members of the governing body. The
resolution of intent to remove the manager must set forth the reasons for the
suspension and proposed removal, and a copy of the resolution must be served
immediately upon the manager. The manager may reply in writing to the
resolution and may request a public hearing within 15 days of being served the
resolution. If a public hearing is requested by the manager, the governing body
must, within 15 days, hold a public hearing upon the question of the manager’s
removal, and the final resolution removing the manager may not be adopted until
the public hearing has occurred.
   (B)   The manager’s pay must continue until the manager’s removal is
effective as provided by this section. The action of the governing body in
removing the manager is final.
(SDCL § 9-10-11)
§ 30.086 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The governing body of any municipality employing a manager shall hold
regular meetings on the day and time adopted by ordinance, with at east one
regular meeting per calendar month. The governing body may, by ordinance,
determine the manner in which special meetings may be called.
   (B)   Unless a seat on the governing body is vacant due to removal,
resignation, death, or by operation of law, a quorum consists of the majority
of all the members of the governing body who are qualified to serve by election
or appointment pursuant to SDCL Chapter 9-13. The governing body may compel the
attendance of absentees under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
   (C)   The meetings of the governing body are open to the public. The
governing body shall keep minutes of its meetings.
(SDCL § 9-10-8)
§ 30.087 QUALIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY MANAGER; RESIDENCE; RESTRICTION
ON APPOINTMENT OF FORMER MEMBER OF GOVERNING BODY.
   (A)   The city manager must be chosen by the governing body on the basis of
his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference
to actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the
duties of office. The governing body may establish residency requirements for
the manager.
   (B)   A person elected to membership on the governing body may not be
eligible for appointment as manager until one year has elapsed following
expiration of the term for which the member was elected.
(SDCL § 9-10-10)
§ 30.088 ABSENCE, DISABILITY, OR SUSPENSION OF CITY MANAGER.
   In case of the absence or disability of the manager or in case of suspension
as provided in SDCL § 9-10-11, the governing body may designate a qualified
administrative officer of the municipality to perform the duties of the manager
during the absence, disability, or suspension.
(SDCL § 9-10-12)
§ 30.089 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY MANAGER; POWER TO APPOINT AND REMOVE OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The city manager is responsible to the governing body for the proper
administration of all affairs of the municipality. To that end, except as
otherwise provided by law, the manager has power to appoint and remove all
officers and employees in the administrative service of the municipality and
may authorize the head of any department or office responsible to the manager
to appoint and remove subordinates in the department or office.
   (B)   Appointments made by or under the authority of the manager must be
made without definite term, on the basis of executive and administrative
ability, and on the basis of the training and experience of the appointees in
the assigned work.
(SDCL § 9-10-13)
§ 30.090 INCONSISTENT STATUTES INAPPLICABLE.
   Provisions of the statutes governing municipalities inconsistent with this
chapter are inapplicable to municipalities employing a City Manager.
(SDCL § 9-10-18)
§ 30.091 CITY MANAGER; AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT; DELEGATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a contract of the
municipality is not valid unless the contract has been authorized by a vote of
the governing body at an official meeting, is executed in the name of the
municipality by the mayor, is countersigned by the finance officer, and has the
corporate seal attached.
   (B)   Pursuant to §
34.30, the governing body of a municipality may, by ordinance or resolution,
delegate to the manager the authority to enter into a contract on behalf of the
municipality and to execute the contract and any other instrument necessary or
convenient for the performance of the contract, subject to the limitations
established by the governing body.
(SDCL § 9-10-19)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.105 STYLE OF ORDINANCES; SUBJECT.
   (A)   Ordinances must be in the following style:
      (1)   An Ordinance                                   (Insert Title);
      (2)   Be it ordained by (city or town) of                           
(insert name of the municipality). The substance of the ordinance follows.
(SDCL § 9-19-6)
   (B)   Ordinances can only embrace one subject which must be expressed in its
title.
(SDCL § 9-19-5)
§ 30.106 READINGS, PASSAGE, AND PUBLICATION.
   (A)   All ordinances shall be read twice by title with at least five days
between each reading. The ordinances, if passed, shall be signed by the mayor
or acting mayor or president of the board of trustees, and filed with the
finance officer and published once.
(SDCL § 9-19-7)
   (B)   (1)   After being signed and filed, the ordinances must be published
at least once in the official newspaper. The only exception to this is that an
ordinance incorporating or adopting comprehensive regulations or a code
promulgated, approved, and published by a recognized and established national
organization prescribing building, electrical, plumbing, safety, fire, or
health regulations need not be published in newspaper but upon adoption of such
an ordinance the auditor or clerk shall publish a notice of the fact of
adoption once a week for two successive weeks in the official newspaper, and 20
days after the completed publication of such notice, unless the referendum
shall have been invoked, such ordinance shall become effective.
(SDCL § 9-19-7)
      (2)   If any amendment presented and approved by the governing body at
the second reading of an ordinance substantially alters the substance of the
ordinance from the first reading, the proposed ordinance as amended may not be
considered for final adoption until at least five days after a duly noticed
public meeting of the governing body pursuant to SDCL Chapter 1-25.
(SDCL § 9-19-7.1)
      (3)   The vote on the second reading of all ordinances must be recorded
and published.
(SDCL § 9-19-9)
   (C)   Amendments to a planning or zoning ordinance may be published without
republishing the full ordinance in the section or subsection of the ordinance
containing the change is published in its entirety.
(SDCL § 11-4-8)
   (D)   Resolutions differ from ordinances in that any resolution may be
passed after only one reading. The resolution must be recorded at length either
separately or in the minutes of the meeting. The votes for and against the
resolution must also be published.
(SDCL § 9-19-8)
§ 30.107 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Unless an ordinance or resolution is drawn to take effect immediately upon
passage, all ordinances and resolutions become effective on the twentieth day
after passage and publication, unless suspended by operation of a referendum.
(SDCL § 9-19-13)
§ 30.108 COMPILATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Municipalities can compile the ordinances of the municipality in book
form provided that while compiling the ordinances they are not revised or
amended. The finance officer shall furnish a free copy of the newly compiled
book to the circuit clerk of court and the county law library of each county in
which the municipality is situated.
(SDCL § 9-19-15)
   (B)   Every municipality also has the power to revise their ordinances once
every five years.
(SDCL § 9-19-16)
   (C)   (1)   Upon the adoption of an ordinance which revises the ordinances
of the municipality by the governing body, the auditor or clerk shall publish a
notice of the adoption of the revised ordinances once in the official
newspaper. Twenty days after the completed publication of the notice, unless
the referendum is invoked, the ordinance shall become effective without
publication in a newspaper.
      (2)   The governing body may publish the revised ordinances in book form.
The auditor or clerk shall furnish a free copy of the book or the revised
ordinances to the circuit clerk of court and the county law library of each
county in which the municipality is situated.
(SDCL § 9-19-17)
   (D)   If a municipality posts the ordinance book or any part of the book on
the municipality’s official website, the municipality shall ensure the most
current version of the ordinance book or any part of the book is posted.
(SDCL § 9-19-14.1)
§ 30.109 CONTINUATION IN FORCE OF ORDINANCES AFTER CHANGE IN FORM OF
GOVERNMENT.
   Any ordinance or resolution of this municipality shall continue in force and
effect the same as though no change of government has occurred.
(SDCL § 9-11-10)
§ 30.110 VETOED ORDINANCE.
   If the mayor vetoes any ordinance, resolution, or other item pursuant to
SDCL § 9-19-10 the finance officer shall present the ordinance, resolution, or
other item with the mayor’s written objection at the next meeting of the
council and it may be reconsidered. If the ordinance or resolution is passed by
a two-thirds vote of the aldermen, it shall be published and become effective
notwithstanding the mayor’s disapproval.
(SDCL § 9-19-11)
Cross-reference:
   Passage of appropriation ordinance, see §
34.03
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Municipal Officers
   
31.01   Appointment
   
31.02   Warrant or certificate of appointment
   
31.03   Appointed financial official
   
31.04   Municipal treasurer
   
31.05   Municipal attorney
   
31.06   Municipal engineer
   
31.07   Additional duties
   
31.08   Compatible and incompatible offices
   
31.09   Salaries and fringe benefits
   
31.10   Qualification and discharge of duties of office by appointive and
elective officers
Removal from Office; Vacancies
   
31.15   Grounds for removal
   
31.16   Vacancies in office
   
31.17   Vacancies due to temporary resignation; temporary replacement and term
   
31.18   Officer’s discharge of duties when elected to fill a vacancy
   
31.19   Temporary resignation for members of National Guard or reserves;
notice; temporary replacement; length of term
Employees
   
31.35   Criminal background check
Cross-reference:
   Governing body and vacancies, see
Ch. 30
Statutory reference:
   Municipal proceedings and municipal records, see Chapter 9-18
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Such officers as needed and provided for by ordinance shall be
appointed.
   (B)   All appointive officers of a municipality governed by a mayor and
common council shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
council, and in other municipalities they shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the members elected to the governing body, except as provided in the city
manager law and subject to the provisions of the civil service applying to
employees, police officers, and firefighters. The officers shall be appointed
annually or at intervals determined by the governing body.
(SDCL § 9-14-3)
§ 31.02 WARRANT OR CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   All appointed officers, except the auditor and marshal, shall be
commissioned by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed by the mayor and
auditor. The marshal shall be commissioned by warrant, under the corporate
seal, signed by the president of the board of trustees and the clerk.
   (B)   The mayor shall issue a certificate of appointment under the seal of
the municipality to the auditor.
(SDCL § 9-14-4)
§ 31.03 APPOINTED FINANCIAL OFFICIAL.
   The appointed financial official shall have the following duties:
   (A)   Supervising the accounting system for all departments and offices of
the municipality in accordance with the recommendations of the department of
legislative audit except that for those municipalities administered under the
city manager form of government, the supervision is by the city manager;
(SDCL § 9-14-19)
   (B)   (1)   Keeping an office at a place directed by the governing body;
      (2)   Keeping the corporate seal, all papers and records of the
municipality, and a record of the proceedings of the governing body, whose
meetings the finance officer shall attend;
      (3)   Drawing and countersigning all warrants on the treasury in
pursuance of orders or resolutions of the governing body and keep a full and
accurate account of all such warrants in books provided for that purpose; and
      (4)   Making or cause to be made estimates of the expenses of any work to
be done by the municipality and countersign all contracts made on its behalf
and certificates of work authorized by any committee of the governing body or
by any municipal officer. However, the finance officer may destroy any record
which the records destruction board, acting pursuant to SDCL § 1-27-19,
declares to have no further administrative, legal, fiscal, research, or
historical value.
(SDCL § 9-14-17)
   (C)   (1)   Keeping regular books of account in which shall be entered all
indebtedness of the municipality, and which shall at all times show the
financial condition of the municipality, the amount of bonds, warrants,
certificates, or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the governing body,
and the amounts of all bonds, warrants, certificates, or other evidences of
indebtedness which have been redeemed and the amount of each outstanding; and
      (2)   Countersigning all bonds, warrants, or other evidences of
indebtedness of the municipality and keep accurate accounts of each, stating to
whom and for what purpose issued and the amount of the bond, warrant, or other
evidence of indebtedness of the municipality. The finance officer shall keep an
account with all receiving and disbursing officers of the municipality, showing
the amount received from the different sources of revenue and the amount which
was disbursed under the direction of the governing body. However, the finance
officer may destroy any record which the records destruction board, acting
pursuant to SDCL § 1-27-19, declares to have no further administrative, legal,
fiscal, research, or historical value.
(SDCL § 9-14-18)
   (D)   Keeping a list of all certificates issued for work or any other
purpose. Before the levy by the governing body of any special tax, the finance
officer shall, unless that duty is performed by the engineer, report to the
governing body a schedule of all lots that are subject to the proposed special
tax or assessment and the amount of the special tax or assessment. The schedule
shall be verified by the finance officer’s affidavit.
(SDCL § 9-14-20)
§ 31.04 MUNICIPAL TREASURER.
   (A)   The municipal treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the
municipality and shall keep accurate records of the money.
(SDCL § 9-22-2)
   (B)   The municipal treasurer shall perform all other duties as set out in
SDCL §§ 9-22-1 et seq.
§ 31.05 MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   When required by the governing body or any officer of the municipality, the
municipal attorney shall furnish an opinion upon any matter relating to the
affairs of the municipality or the official duties of such officer; conduct the
prosecution of all actions or proceedings arising out of the violation of any
ordinance; and perform such other professional services incident to his or her
office as may be required by ordinance or directed by the governing body.
(SDCL § 9-14-22)
§ 31.06 MUNICIPAL ENGINEER.
   (A)   If a municipality chooses to employ or retain a person to serve as a
municipal engineer, the municipal engineer shall be a licensed professional
engineer under SDCL Chapter 36-18A. If the municipal engineer is not also
licensed as a land surveyor under SDCL Chapter 36-18A, the municipal engineer
shall delegate any duties that are defined in SDCL Chapter 36-18A as the
practice of land surveying to a licensed land surveyor.
   (B)   The governing body shall by ordinance or agreement prescribe the
duties and fix the compensation of the municipal engineer.
   (C)   All surveys, profiles, plans, or estimates made by the municipal
engineer for the municipality are the property of the municipality and shall be
carefully preserved in the municipality’s office or the office of the municipal
engineer and are open to public inspection.
(SDCL § 9-14-24)
§ 31.07 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   The governing body is authorized to prescribe by ordinance additional duties
not inconsistent with the laws of the state to any municipal officer.
(SDCL § 9-14-27)
§ 31.08 COMPATIBLE AND INCOMPATIBLE OFFICES.
   (A)   Compatible offices.
      (1)   No mayor, alderman, commissioner, or trustee is disqualified from
holding such office in any municipality as a result of holding any liquor
license or being the spouse of a person holding any liquor license.
(SDCL § 9-14-16)
      (2)   (a)   The provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (B) of this section do
not prohibit any mayor, alderman, commissioner, or trustee from serving in any
other volunteer, unsalaried municipal position or providing any service for a
municipality if the compensation for such service does not exceed $5,000 per
calendar year.
         (b)   The provisions of divisions (A) (1) and (B) of this section do
not prohibit any mayor, alderman, commissioner, or trustee from receiving
compensation in excess of $5,000 per calendar year for service to a municipal
ambulance service in municipalities of the second or third class.
(SDCL § 9-14-16.1)
   (B)   Incompatible offices.
      (1)   No mayor, alderman, commissioner, or trustee shall hold any other
office under the municipality while an incumbent of any such office.
      (2)   No auditor or clerk may hold the office of treasurer in the
municipality while an incumbent of such office.
(SDCL § 9-14-16)
Cross-reference:
   Regulation and licensing of liquor operations, see
Ch. 113
§ 31.09 SALARIES AND FRINGE BENEFITS.
   (A)   The governing body shall fix and determine by ordinance or resolution
the amount of salaries and compensation of all municipal officers and the times
at which the same shall be paid.
(SDCL § 9-14-28)
   (B)   (1)   The municipality may appropriate funds to pay the necessary
expenses of its officers or employees in conducting business or attending
meetings within or without the state as the governing body determines necessary
to carry out authorized municipal activities.
(SDCL § 9-12-3)
      (2)   The municipality is authorized to provide the following:
         (a)   Appropriation of funds to compensate the members of municipal
boards and commissions;
(SDCL § 9-12-3.1)
         (b)   1.   By self insurance, or by purchase from private companies,
group life, health and accident insurance, or any one or more of such insurance
risks, for their respective employees and officers and the immediate families
of such employees and officers, as the terms EMPLOYEE and OFFICER are defined
in SDCL § 9-14-31. Such accident insurance applies only if benefits under the
worker’s compensation law are not applicable.
(SDCL § 9-14-30)
            2.   The policy or policies for the insurance provided in division
(B)(2)(a) of this section may be administered by the municipality through its
respective governing bodies, acting individually or jointly through some joint
agency created by such governmental subdivisions for carrying out the purposes
of SDCL §§ 9-14-30 to 9-14-35, inclusive, or the municipality may contract with
any private firm to administer the policies.
(SDCL § 9-14-34)
         (c)   Inclusion in the municipal insurance program of retired
employees and officers and their spouses, provided the officer or employee
served for at least 15 years and participated in municipal insurance program at
least five years immediately preceding retirement; and
(SDCL § 9-14-35)
         (d)   Appropriation of necessary funds for the cost of all or any
portion of the insurance provided by SDCL § 9-14-30 and the deduction from
salaries or wages, the employee’s or officer’s share of the cost of such an
insurance program.
(SDCL § 9-14-33)
§ 31.10 QUALIFICATION AND DISCHARGE OF DUTIES OF OFFICE BY APPOINTIVE AND
ELECTED OFFICERS.
   Each appointive municipal officer shall begin discharging the duties of the
office as soon as the officer has qualified by filing an oath or affirmation of
office in the usual form provided by law. The officer shall file the form
within ten days after the first meeting of the month following the appointment.
The officer shall hold office until the appointment and qualification of a
successor.
(SDCL § 9-14-5)
REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCIES
§ 31.15 GROUNDS FOR REMOVAL.
   Any officer may be charged, tried and removed from office for misconduct,
malfeasance, nonfeasance, crimes in office, drunkenness, gross incompetency,
corruption, theft, oppression, or gross partiality.
(SDCL § 3-17-6)
§ 31.16 VACANCIES IN OFFICE.
   The removal of any municipal officer from the ward or municipality for which
the officer was elected or appointed, or the officer’s failure, within ten days
after the first meeting of the month following the election or appointment, to
qualify and begin the duties of office, causes a vacancy in the office.
(SDCL § 9-14-10)
§ 31.17 VACANCIES DUE TO TEMPORARY RESIGNATION; TEMPORARY REPLACEMENT AND TERM.
   (A)   If any member of a governing body or any other elected officer of a
municipality, who is incapacitated by an illness or an accident which causes
the member or officer to be unable to attend meetings of the governing body of
fulfill the duties of the office, the member may elect to temporarily resign
from the governing body or office.
   (B)   Notice of temporary resignation may be given in the same manner as
giving notice of resignation from the governing body or office. If the member
or officer is unable to give notice, the member’s or officer’s spouse or
guardian or any person who has durable power of attorney for the member or
officer may give notice of resignation.
   (C)   A temporary replacement may be made in accordance with the provisions
of statute applying to the governing body or office. The temporary member or
officer shall serve until the member or officer is able to fulfill the
requirements of office or until the expiration of the member’s or officer’s
term, whichever comes first.
(SDCL § 3-4-9)
§ 31.18 OFFICER’S DISCHARGE OF DUTIES WHEN ELECTED TO FILL A VACANCY.
   Each elective municipal officer, if elected to fill a vacancy, shall begin
discharging the duties of the office as soon as the officer has qualified by
filing an oath or affirmation of office in the usual form provided by law. The
officer shall file the form within ten days after the first meeting of the
month following the election. Except as otherwise provided, each officer, if
elected for a full term, shall begin discharging the duties of the office on
the first meeting of the month next succeeding the election or as soon
thereafter as the officer has qualified.
(SDCL § 9-14-5)
§ 31.19 TEMPORARY RESIGNATION FOR MEMBERS OF NATIONAL GUARD OR RESERVES;
NOTICE; TEMPORARY REPLACEMENT; LENGTH OF TERM.
   If any member of a governing body of the municipality, who is also a member
of the South Dakota National Guard or another reserve component of the armed
forces of the United States, is called into active duty which causes the member
to be unable to attend meetings of the governing body, the member may elect to
temporarily resign from the governing body. Notice of temporary resignation may
be given in the same manner as giving notice of resignation from such governing
body. A temporary replacement may be made in accordance with the provisions of
statute applying to the governing body. The temporary member shall serve until
the member returns from active duty or until the expiration of the member’s
term, whichever occurs first.
(SDCL § 3-4-8)
EMPLOYEES
§ 31.35 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK.
   Each person over 18 years of age seeking employment with a municipality
shall submit, subject to the discretion of the municipality, to a state and
federal criminal background investigation by means of fingerprint checks by the
South Dakota Division of Criminal Investigation and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The completed fingerprint cards will be forwarded to the
Division of Criminal Investigation before the prospective new employee enters
into service. Upon completion of the state and federal criminal background
check, the Division of Criminal Investigation shall forward to the municipality
all information obtained as a result of the check. Failure to submit or
cooperate with the criminal background investigation is grounds for denial of
an application.
(SDCL § 9-14-42)
CHAPTER 32: ELECTIONS
Section
   
32.01   Ballots
   
32.02   Required notices
   
32.03   Special elections
   
32.04   Local campaign finance ordinances
   
32.05   Nominating petition
   
32.06   Election returns and notice of election to candidates
Cross-reference:
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
Statutory reference:
   For campaign finance requirements, see SDCL Chapter 12-27
§ 32.01 BALLOTS.
   (A)   Preparation of ballots. The finance officer shall prepare and furnish,
at the expense of the municipality, all official ballots. The quantity of
ballots shall be at least 10% more than the number of voters at the comparable
election. The ballots shall be white in color, of good quality of print paper,
printed in black ink, and in the English language only.
   (B)    Availability of ballots. The ballots for municipal elections shall be
available for absentee voting no later than 15 days prior to election day. If
the ballots are for a runoff election, the ballots shall be available no later
than seven days prior to the runoff election day. Absentee voting shall be
conducted pursuant to SDCL Chapter 12-19.
   (C)   Form of ballots. The names of the candidates for each office to be
voted for in the precinct shall be arranged without any other designation than
that of the office for which they are candidates. If more than one member of
the governing body is to be elected, the ballot shall contain instructions as
to how many candidates for the governing body are to be voted for. The finance
officer shall determine, by lot, each candidate’s position on the ballot. Each
candidate may be present or represented when the position on the ballot is
being determined. No candidate’s name may be printed upon the official ballot
unless the candidate has been nominated as provided in this SDCL Chapter 9-13.
(SDCL § 9-13-21)
§ 32.02 REQUIRED NOTICES.
   Municipal officials shall make the following legal publications in the
official newspaper in conjunction with municipal elections.
   (A)   The finance officer of the municipality shall publish a notice
identifying which vacancies will occur by termination of the terms of office of
elective officers, stating the time and place where nominating petitions may be
filed. These notices are to be published once each week for two consecutive
weeks between January 15 and January 30.
(SDCL § 9-13-6)
   (B)   Two notices of the availability of registration officials, stating
when registration will be terminated and the effect of a failure to register.
The notice must be published at least once each week for two consecutive weeks.
The last publication to be not less than ten nor more than 15 days before the
deadline for registration.
(SDCL § 12-4-5.2)
   (C)   (1)   A notice of each municipal election shall be published once each
week for two successive weeks, the first publication may not be less than ten
days prior to the election. A facsimile of the official ballot shall be
published in the calendar week prior to each election. The notice and ballot
shall be published in the official newspaper or newspapers of the municipality
as designated in SDCL § 9-12-6.
      (2)   If no newspaper is published in the municipality, the notice shall
also be posted in three of the most public places in the municipality.
(SDCL § 9-13-13)
   (D)   If there is to be a secondary election, a notice of election shall be
published once during the week before any secondary election, which shall
include a list of all persons appearing on the ballot for the election.
§ 32.03 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)    Every special election authorized by law, except as provided in SDCL
§§ 6-8B-4 and 9-13-14.2, shall be held upon the same notice, at the same
polling places, be conducted, returned, and canvassed, and the result declared
as provided herein for the annual municipal election.
   (B)   The notice of such special election shall state any question or
questions to be voted upon.
(SDCL § 9-13-14)
Cross-reference:
   Special elections, see §
30.003
§ 32.04 LOCAL CAMPAIGN FINANCE ORDINANCES.
   Any municipality may adopt an ordinance to meet the provisions of SDCL
Chapter 12-27 with or without any amendments applicable to municipal elections.
Candidates are required to file campaign contributions and expenditure reports.
(SDCL§ 12-1-2.1)
Statutory reference:
   For candidate’s financial interest statements, see SDCL § 12-25-30
§ 32.05 NOMINATING PETITION.
   (A)   No candidate for elective municipal office may be nominated unless a
nominating petition is filed with the finance officer no later than 5:00 p.m.
on the last Friday in February preceding the day of election. The petition
shall be considered filed if it is mailed by registered mail by 5:00 p.m. on
the last Friday in February before the election.
   (B)   The petition shall contain the name, residence address and mailing
address of the candidate and the office for which the candidate is nominated
and shall be on the form prescribed by the state board of elections. The
signer’s post office box number may be given in lieu of a street address if the
signer lives within a municipality of the second or third class.
   (C)   The finance officer may only accept nominating petitions that are on
the prescribed form and were circulated pursuant to the provisions in SDCL
Chapters 9-13 and 12-6. Upon verification signed by the finance officer or
clerk that the nominating petition contains the minimum number of signatures of
registered voters within either the municipality or ward, or both, and that the
candidate is a registered voter within either the municipality or ward, or
both, the filing of the petition constitutes nomination.
(SDCL § 9-13-7)
§ 32.06 ELECTION RETURNS AND NOTICE OF ELECTION TO CANDIDATES.
   (A)   The election returns shall be reported as soon as possible to the
finance officer, and within seven days of the election, the governing body
shall canvass the election returns, declare the result, and enter the result on
its journal.
(SDCL § 9-13-24)
   (B)   The finance officer, within two days after the result of the election
is declared, shall notify each person elected to office of the person’s
election. If a person does not qualify by filing an oath or affirmation of
office in the usual form provided by law within ten days after the first
meeting of the month next succeeding the election, the office becomes vacant.
(SDCL § 9-13-28)
Cross-reference:
   Qualifications and discharge of duties, see §
31.18
CHAPTER 33: POLICE
Section
   
33.01   Police powers
§ 33.01 POLICE POWERS.
   (A)   The mayor having a common council, each member of a board of city
commissioners, and each town marshal shall possess, within the jurisdiction of
the municipality, all the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs to suppress
disorder and keep the peace pursuant to SDCL § 9-29-16.
   (B)   All police officers of this municipality posses the powers of
constables and are permitted to do the following:
      (1)   Execute and serve warrants;
      (2)   Pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of
the state; and
      (3)   Arrest and detain any person guilty of any breach of the peace or
any violation of the laws of the state or ordinance of the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, see SDCL § 9-29-19
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE
Section
Budget
   
34.01   Preparation of budget
   
34.02   Budget ordinance
   
34.03   Passage of appropriation ordinance
   
34.04   Certification of levies
   
34.05   Supplemental and emergency appropriations
   
34.06   Disbursement of funds
Taxation
   
34.20   Annual levy
   
34.21   Municipal tax
   
34.22   Special bed, board, booze, and ticket sales tax
Bids and Contracts
   
34.30   Contracts authorized
   
34.31   Interest in contracts
   
34.32   Performance bonds
   
34.33   Contracts, methods of awarding
   
34.34   Sealed bids
   
34.35   Sealed proposals
   
34.36   Unique supplies or services; sole source procurement; negotiations
   
34.37   Emergency procurement
   
34.38   Purchases of supplies and services under $50,000
   
34.39   Cancellation of invitation for bids or request for proposals and
rejection of bids or proposals
   
34.40   Public improvement contracts involving $100,000; supplies and services
contracts involving $50,000 or more; advertisement for bids or proposals
   
34.41   Time for entering into contract
   
34.42   Recovery from defaulting bidder or offeror
   
34.43   Exempt procurements
   
34.44   Public sale or auction; performance bond; competitive quotations;
records to be retained
   
34.45   Purchases from state contract list or below state contract price
   
34.46   Fuel purchased by local government units
Funds and Monies Received
   
34.55   Business improvement districts, usage of funds
   
34.56   Internal service fund for equipment purchases
   
34.57   Payments to municipality from revenues of cooperative providing
electric service within municipality
   
34.58   Bad checks given to city or its agents
Bonds and Notes
   
34.70   Municipal bonds and notes
Statutory reference:
   Centralized public bid exchange, see SDCL § 5-18A-13
   Fiscal powers of municipalities, see SDCL § 9-12-2
   Purchasing agency contracts, see SDCL § 5-18A-1 and Chapters 5-18A, 5-18B,
5-18C and 5-18D
BUDGET
§ 34.01 PREPARATION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   The finance officer shall report to the governing body, on or before
September 1, an estimate of expenses for the ensuing year and revenue to be
raised for the current year. This estimate may contain a line item for
contingencies, provided it does not exceed 5% of the total budget.
(SDCL § 9-22-23)
   (B)   The annual report shall be prepared with an annual report from the
boards and commissions in the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Budget of park boards, see SDCL §§ 9-38-42 and 9-38-44
§ 34.02 BUDGET ORDINANCE.
   No later than the first regular meeting of the governing body in September,
or within ten days thereafter, an annual appropriation ordinance for the
ensuing year must be introduced in which it shall appropriate the sums of money
necessary to meet all lawful expenses and liabilities of the municipality. The
ordinance shall specify the function and subfunction as prescribed by the
department of legislative audit for which the appropriations are made and the
amount appropriated for each function and subfunction, which amount shall be
appropriated from the proper fund.
(SDCL § 9-21-2)
§ 34.03 PASSAGE OF APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The appropriation ordinance shall be passed by a majority of the
aldermen. The mayor cannot break a tie.
(SDCL § 9-7-7)
   (B)   The mayor under the aldermanic form of government can veto all or any
part of an appropriation ordinance.
(SDCL §§ 9-8-3 and 9-19-10)
   (C)   Upon passage, the appropriation ordinance shall be published in the
same manner as all other ordinances.
Cross-reference:
   Special elections, see §
32.03
§ 34.04 CERTIFICATION OF LEVIES.
   Pursuant to SDCL § 10-12-7, all tax levies must be certified to the county
auditor by the taxing district on or before October 1 of each year.
§ 34.05 SUPPLEMENTAL AND EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   Supplemental appropriation. If no provision in the appropriation is
made for the municipality to conduct the indispensable functions of government,
the governing body may approve and adopt a supplement appropriation ordinance,
provided that it sets out in detail the reason and amount for each
appropriation. The procedures to adopt the supplemental appropriation are the
same as for the annual appropriation ordinance.
(SDCL § 9-21-7)
   (B)   Emergency appropriation. If an event occurs that could not have been
reasonably anticipated at the time the annual appropriation was created and
adopted, the governing body may order the mayor or president to borrow, in the
name of the municipality and with the attest of the finance officer, a amount
sufficient to provide for the necessary expense incurred by the emergency
event.
(SDCL § 9-21-15)
§ 34.06 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   Before payment of any services or property is allowed, the following must
occur:
   (A)   An itemized invoice accompanied by a voucher verified by the
appropriate municipal official that the services, other than those provided by
municipal employees, or materials have been received shall be submitted;
   (B)   (1)   The invoice and voucher required by this section shall be filed
in the office of the municipal finance officer.
      (2)   However, the governing body of any municipality may authorize the
prepayment of claims against the municipality for services before they have
been provided if the municipality has adopted an ordinance in advance that
specifies the maximum amount allowable for any such prepayment and if a service
contract exists.
(SDCL § 9-23-1)
   (C)   No claim against any municipality shall be audited or allowed unless
it be fully itemized and a memorandum of the same entered upon the minutes of
the meetings of the governing body.
(SDCL § 9-23-2)
TAXATION
§ 34.20 ANNUAL LEVY.
   Pursuant to SDCL § 9-21-19, the municipality shall include the annual tax
levy in the annual appropriation.
Cross-reference:
   Sewer system and tax levy, see
Ch. 51
   Special elections, see §
32.03
   Water supply system and tax levy/special assessments, see
Ch. 50
§ 34.21 MUNICIPAL TAX.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide additional needed
revenue for this municipality by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax
pursuant to the powers granted to this municipality by the State of South
Dakota, by SDCL Chapter 10-52, entitled Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax
Law, and acts amendatory thereto.
   (B)   Enactment of tax.
      (1)   There is hereby imposed as a municipal retail occupational sales
and service tax upon the privilege of engaging in business a tax measured by 1%
on the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the
jurisdiction of this municipality who are subject to the South Dakota Retail
Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL Chapter 10-45 and acts amendatory
thereto.
      (2)   The tax will not be applied to items that may be specifically
exempt under state law. Items exempted from municipal tax include: farm
machinery and irrigation equipment; parts or repairs for farm machinery;
agricultural animal health products and medicine; passenger transportation
service; collection and disposal of solid waste; veterinarian and animal
specialty services; and air transportation.
   (C)   Use tax. In addition there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the
privilege of use, storage, and consumption, within the jurisdiction of this
municipality, of tangible personal property or services purchased at the same
rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all transactions or use,
storage and consumption which are subject to the South Dakota Use Tax Act, SDCL
Chapter 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto.
   (D)   Collection. Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by
SDCL Chapter 10-52 and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the
South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same
rules and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such
additional rules and regulations as the secretary of revenue and regulation of
the state shall lawfully prescribe.
   (E)   Interpretation. It is declared to be the intention of this section and
the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in
the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales
and Service Act, SDCL Chapter 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto and the South
Dakota Use Tax, SDCL Chapter 10-46 and acts amendatory hereto, and that this
shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments
prescribed by this section and the rules and regulations relating to the
ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
in the municipal jail for 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL
Chapter 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL Chapter 10-46, and acts
amendatory thereto are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise
taxes by the Department of Revenue and Regulation.
§ 34.22 SPECIAL BED, BOARD, BOOZE, AND TICKET SALES TAX.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide additional needed
revenue for this municipality by imposing a municipal gross receipts tax
pursuant to the powers granted to this municipality by the State of South
Dakota, by SDCL Chapter 10-52A, and acts amendatory thereto.
   (B)   Enactment of tax.
      (1)   There is hereby imposed a municipal gross receipts tax of 1% upon
the gross receipts from the sale of leases or rentals of hotel, motel,
campsites, or other lodging accommodations within the municipality for periods
of less than 28 consecutive days, the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined in
SDCL §§ 35-1-1 et seq., establishments where the public is invited to eat,
dine, or purchase and carry out prepared food for immediate consumption, and
ticket sales or admissions to places of amusement, athletic, and cultural
events.
      (2)   The tax applies to the gross receipts of all persons engaged in
business within the jurisdiction of this municipality of who are subject to the
South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL Chapter 10-45 and
acts amendatory thereto.
   (C)   Collection. Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by
SDCL Chapter 10-52A and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the
South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same
rules and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such
additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue of the state shall
lawfully prescribe.
   (D)   Interpretation. It is declared to be the intention of this section and
the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in
the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales
and Service Act, SDCL Chapter 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and that this
shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
   (E)   Use of revenue. Any revenues received under this section may be used
only for the purpose of land acquisition, architectural fees, construction
costs, payment for civic center, auditoriums or athletic facility buildings,
including the maintenance, staffing, and operations of such facilities, and the
promotion and advertising of the municipality, its facilities, attractions, and
activities.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments
prescribed by this section and the rules and regulations relating to the
ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
in the municipal jail for 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2)   In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL
Chapter 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, are hereby authorized for the
collection of these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue.
BIDS AND CONTRACTS
§ 34.30 CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   No contract of a municipality is valid unless the contract has be
authorized by a vote of the governing body at an official meeting.
   (B)   Each written contract must be executed in the name of the municipality
by the mayor or president of the board of trustees, be countersigned by the
finance officer, and have the corporate seal attached. However the governing
body of a municipality may, by ordinance or resolution, delegate to any
employee of the municipality the authority to enter in to a contract on behalf
of the municipality and to execute the contract and any other instrument
necessary or convenient for the performance of the contract subject to the
limitations delegated by the governing body.
(SDCL § 9-1-5)
§ 34.31 INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   No elected or appointed official or his or her agent shall be interested in
any contract entered into by the municipality pursuant to SDCL § 6-1-1.
§ 34.32 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   (A)   Whenever any contract for the construction of a public improvement is
entered into, the contractor shall furnish surety in an amount not less than
the contract price. The contractor shall also guarantee that he or she will
promptly pay all persons supplying him or her with labor.
   (B)   The performance bond may be waived when the bid submitted does not
exceed $25,000.
   (C)   The contractor shall also pay all taxes which may arise under SDCL
Chapter 10-46, 10-46A, and 10-46B. For the purposes of this section and SDCL §
5-21-4, the term SURETY means a bond or undertaking executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the State of South Dakota.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions. See SDCL §§ 5-21-1, 5-21-1.1, 5-21-3
§ 34.33 CONTRACTS, METHODS OF AWARDING.
   Unless otherwise authorized by law, each contract for supplies, services,
and construction shall be awarded by one of the following methods:
(A)   Competitive sealed bids as provided in SDCL § 5-18A-5;
   (B)   Competitive sealed proposals as provided in SDCL §§ 5-18A-6 and 5-18A-
7;
   (C)   Small purchases as provided in SDCL § 5-18A-11;
   (D)   Sole source procurement as provided in SDCL § 5-18A-8; or
   (E)   Emergency procurement as provided in SDCL § 5-18A-9.
(SDCL § 5-18A-3)
§ 34.34 SEALED BIDS.
   (A)   Required. Contracts shall be awarded by the use of competitive sealed
bids except as otherwise provided in SDCL Chapters 5-18A, 5-18B, 5-18C, and 5-
18D.
(SDCL § 5-18A-4)
   (B)   Procedures. The following procedures apply to the use of competitive
sealed bids.
      (1)   Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given pursuant to
SDCL § 5-18A-14.
      (2)   The invitation for bids shall include a purchase description, and
all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. The
invitation for bids for supplies shall include the length of time, not to
exceed 45 days, between the bid opening and the award of the bid.
      (3)   A bid may be submitted either manually or electronically in a
manner authorized by the purchasing agency.
      (4)   Each bid shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more
witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as may be specified,
together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded. Except as otherwise
provided by law, the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection.
      (5)   Each bid shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or
correction, except as authorized in this section. Each bid shall be evaluated
based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may
include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing,
quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those
criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for
award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs,
and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the
evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that
are not set forth in the invitation for bids.
      (6)   Any bid may be withdrawn by letter or by electronic communications
or in person before the time specified in the advertisement for bid. The
purchasing agency may allow modification of bids by mail, facsimile, or
electronic notice received at the place designated in the invitation to bid not
later than the time set for the opening of bids. A modification may not reveal
the bid price but shall provide the addition or subtraction or the modification
so that the final prices or terms will not be known to the purchasing agency
until the sealed bid is opened. A modification may not be withdrawn after the
time set for the opening of bids. Each modification shall be confirmed in
writing by the successful bidder before award of the contract. No bid made may
be changed or altered by telephone. After bid opening, no withdrawal of a bid
or change in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest
of the purchasing agency or fair competition is permitted. The purchasing
agency may waive technical irregularities in the bid or proposal of the low
bidder or offeror which irregularities do not alter the price, quality, or
quantity of the services, or items of tangible personal property bid or
offered. Any decision to permit the correction or withdrawal of a bid, or to
cancel an award or a contract based on a bid mistake, shall be supported by a
written determination made by the purchasing agency, and included in the bid
file.
      (7)   The contract for services or public improvement shall be awarded
within 30 days and the contract for supplies shall be awarded within 45 days of
the bid opening of the bid opening by written notice to the lowest responsible
and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth
in the invitation for bids. The purchasing agency may reject any and all bids
and readvertise for bids if none of the bids are satisfactory, or if the
purchasing agency believes an agreement has been entered into by the bidders to
prevent competition. If the low bidder is not responsible or the bid is not
made in accordance with the requirements of SDCL Chapters 5-18A, 5-18B, 5-18C,
and 5-18D or the low bid is withdrawn as authorized by this section, the bid of
the next lowest responsible and responsive bidder may be accepted.
      (8)   If it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase
description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be
issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an
invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been qualified
under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation.
      (9)   If, after advertising for bids, no firm bids are received, the
purchasing agency may negotiate a contract for the purchase of the supplies,
services, or public improvement projects at the most advantageous price, if the
specifications of the original bid are met.
      (10)   If two or more competitive sealed bids submitted are identical in
price and product quality, the bids are the low bid, and no resident bidder
preference is applicable, the purchasing agency may:
         (a)   Award the bid by lottery to one of the identical low bidders; or
         (b)   Reject all the bids and resolicit bids for the required
supplies, services, or public improvement.
(SDCL § 5-18A-5)
§ 34.35 SEALED PROPOSALS.
   (A)   Competitive sealed proposals; when permitted. A contract may be
entered into by competitive sealed proposals if the purchasing agency
determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bids is either not
practicable or not advantageous.
(SDCL § 5-18A-6)
   (B)   Procedures. The procedures for issuing a contract through competitive
sealed proposals are as follows:
      (1)   The proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.
The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and
other factors, if any;
      (2)   Public notice of the request for proposals shall be given pursuant
to SDCL § 5-18A-14;
      (3)   A proposal may be submitted either manually or electronically in a
manner authorized by the purchasing agency;
      (4)   Each proposal shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of contents
to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of
proposals shall be prepared documenting the name and address of each offeror
and identifying each offeror awarded a contract. The register shall be open for
public inspection after contract award;
      (5)   As provided in the request for proposals, a discussion may be
conducted with any responsible offeror who submitted a proposal determined to
be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of
clarification to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, the
solicitation requirements. Each offeror shall be accorded fair and equal
treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of a
proposal. A revision may be permitted after a submission and prior to an award
for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offer. In conducting any
discussion, there may be no disclosure of any information derived from any
proposal submitted by a competing offeror;
      (6)   An award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal
conforms to the solicitation and is determined in writing to be the most
advantageous to the purchasing agency taking into consideration price and the
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or
criteria may be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the
basis on which the award is made. Written notice of the award of a contract to
the successful offeror shall be promptly given to each offeror. The purchasing
agency may reject any and all proposals and readvertise for proposals if none
of the proposals are satisfactory, or if the purchasing agency believes any
agreement has been entered into by the offerors to prevent competition; and
      (7)   This section does not apply to state professional service contracts
issued pursuant to SDCL §§ 5-18A-37 and 5-18D-17 to 5-18D-24, inclusive.
(SDCL § 5-18A-7)
§ 34.36 UNIQUE SUPPLIES OR SERVICES; SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT; NEGOTIATIONS.
   (A)   Unique supplies and services. A contract may be awarded for supplies
or services without competition if the purchasing agency determines in writing
that the supplies or services are of such a unique nature that the contractor
selected is clearly and justifiably the only practicable source to provide the
supplies or services.
   (B)   Sole source. The determination that the contractor selected is
justifiably the sole source shall be based on either the uniqueness of the
supplies or services or the sole availability at the location required.
   (C)   Negotiations. In such cases, the purchasing agency shall conduct
negotiations, including price, delivery, and quantity to obtain the most
advantageous price and shall include the written verification of the sole
source in the contract file. This section does not apply to construction
services or construction equipment.
(SDCL § 5-18A-8)
   (D)   Records of sole source procurement contracts. The purchasing agency
shall maintain a record listing each contract made under sole source
procurement and emergency procurement for a minimum of five years. The record
shall contain:
      (1)   Each contractor’s name;
      (2)   The amount and type of each contract; and
      (3)   A listing of the supplies, services, and public improvements
procured under each contract.
(SDCL § 5-18A-10)
§ 34.37 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   Allowed. A purchasing agency may make or authorize others to make an
emergency procurement without advertising the procurement if rentals are not
practicable and there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety or
for other urgent and compelling reasons. Failure to abide by the bid provisions
of SDCL Chapters 5-18A, 5-18B, 5-18C, and 5-18D in a timely manner is not an
emergency. An emergency procurement shall be made with such competition as is
practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for
the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be
included in the contract file.
(SDCL § 5-18A-9)
   (B)   Records of sole emergency procurement contracts. The purchasing agency
shall maintain a record listing each contract made under sole source
procurement and emergency procurement for a minimum of five years. The record
shall contain:
      (1)   Each contractor’s name;
      (2)   The amount and type of each contract; and
      (3)   A listing of the supplies, services, and public improvements
procured under each contract.
(SDCL § 5-18A-10)
§ 34.38 PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES AND SERVICES UNDER $50,000.
   Unless otherwise specified by statute, purchases of supplies and services
under $50,000 shall be made as follows.
   (A)   Purchases under $50,000 may be made in accordance with procedures
established by the purchasing agency.
   (B)   No purchases may be artificially divided to constitute a small
purchase under this section.
(SDCL § 5-18A-11)
§ 34.39 CANCELLATION OF INVITATION FOR BIDS OR REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS AND
REJECTION OF BIDS OR PROPOSALS.
   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may
be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in
part as may be specified in the solicitation, if the purchasing agency
determines it is in the best interests of the agency. The reasons for the
cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file.
(SDCL § 5-18A-12)
§ 34.40 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS INVOLVING $100,000; SUPPLIES AND SERVICES
CONTRACTS INVOLVING $50,000 OR MORE; ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS OR PROPOSALS.
   If the purchasing agency intends to enter into a contract for any public
improvement that involves the expenditure of $100,000 or more, or a contract
for the purchase of supplies or services, other than professional services,
that involves the expenditure of $50,000 or more, the purchasing agency shall
advertise for bids or proposals. The advertisement shall appear as a legal
notice in the appointed legal newspaper. The advertisement shall be printed at
least twice, with the first publication at least ten days before opening of
bids or the deadline for the submission of proposals. The first publication
shall be in each official newspaper of the purchasing agency, and the second
publication may be in any legal newspaper of the state chosen by the purchasing
agency. If the purchasing agency has no official newspaper, the first
publication shall be made in a legal newspaper with general circulation in the
jurisdiction of the purchasing agency to be selected by the purchasing agency.
The advertisement shall state the time and place where the bids will be opened
or the deadline for the submission of proposals. In each notice, the purchasing
agency shall reserve the right to reject any or all bids or proposals.
(SDCL § 5-18A-14)
§ 34.41 TIME FOR ENTERING INTO CONTRACT.
   After receiving notice of a contract award, the successful bidder or offeror
shall enter into a contract with the purchasing agency within the time
specified in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. If any bidder or
offeror fails to enter into a contract within the time specified, the contract
may be awarded to the next lowest responsive and responsible bidder or offeror
for the same kind of work and material, unless all bids or proposals are
rejected. The defaulting bidder or offeror shall be responsible for the
difference in price.
(SDCL § 5-18A-15)
§ 34.42 RECOVERY FROM DEFAULTING BIDDER OR OFFEROR.
   If any successful bidder or offeror fails to fulfill the conditions of an
awarded contract, the purchasing agency may proceed to recover from the
defaulting party whatever damages may have been sustained as a result of the
default. The purchasing agency shall have all remedies provided in the contract
and provided by law.
(SDCL § 5-18A-16)
§ 34.43 EXEMPT PROCUREMENTS.
    The provisions of SDCL Chapters 5-18A, 5-18B, 5-18C, and 5-18D do not apply
to:
   (A)   Any highway construction contract entered into by the Department of
Transportation;
   (B)   Any contract for the purchase of supplies from the United States or
its agencies or any contract issued by the General Services Administration;
   (C)   Any purchase of supplies or services, other than professional
services, by purchasing agencies from any active contract that has been awarded
by any government entity by competitive sealed bids or competitive sealed
proposals or from any contract that was competitively solicited and awarded
within the previous 12 months;
   (D)   Any equipment repair contract;
   (E)   Any procurement of electric power, water, or natural gas; chemical and
biological products; laboratory apparatus and appliances; published books,
maps, periodicals and technical pamphlets; works of art for museum and public
display; medical supplies; communications technologies, computer hardware and
software, peripheral equipment, and related connectivity; tableware or
perishable foods;
   (F)   Any property or liability insurance or performance bonds, except that
the actual procurement of any insurance or performance bonds by any department
of the state government, state institution, and state agency shall be made
under the supervision of the Bureau of Human Resources and Administration;
   (G)   Any purchase of surplus property from another purchasing agency;
   (H)   Any animals purchased;
   (I)   Any authority authorized by SDCL Chapters 1-16A, 1-16B, 1-16G, 1-16H,
1-16J, 5-12, or 11-11;
   (J)   Any purchase of supplies for any utility owned or operated by a
municipality if the purchase does not exceed the limits established in SDCL §
5-18A-14; or
   (K)   For political subdivisions, any contract for asbestos removal in
emergency response actions and any contract for services provided by
individuals or firms for consultants, audits, legal services, ambulance
services, architectural services and engineering, insurance, real estate
services, or auction services.
(SDCL § 5-18A-22)
§ 34.44 PUBLIC SALE OR AUCTION; PERFORMANCE BOND; COMPETITIVE QUOTATIONS;
RECORDS TO BE RETAINED.
   (A)   Exempted. The governing board of a unit of this municipality shall be
exempted from the provisions of SDCL Chapters 5-18C, 5-18A, 5-18B, and 5-18D if
it is able to purchase supplies at a substantial savings at a public sale or
auction.
   (B)   Performance bond waived. Any performance bond required by SDCL § 5-21-
1 may be waived on items purchased for less than $10,000 at a public sale or
auction.
   (C)   Competitive quotes. The governing board shall contact and attempt to
obtain competitive quotations from at least three suppliers of identical or
similar supplies. The board may authorize an agent to attend a sale or auction
and expend an amount not in excess of 80% of the average of the quotations
received.
   (D)   Records retained. A record of the names of the suppliers, the
quotations received, and the procurement procedures used in purchasing shall be
documented, noted in the minutes, and retained on file by the governing board.
(SDCL § 5-18C-3)
§ 34.45 PURCHASES FROM STATE CONTRACT LIST OR BELOW STATE CONTRACT PRICE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of SDCL Chapters 5-18C, 5-18A, 5-18B, or 5-
18D, any purchasing agency of a local governmental unit may purchase, without
advertising for bids, from a willing vendor, any supplies contained in the
state contract list established pursuant to SDCL § 5-18D-6, or from any willing
vendor at a price at or below that shown in the state contract. The governing
body of the purchasing agency shall note in its minutes what supplies were
purchased from the state contract and shall further note the identity and
address of the vendor and the price paid. If an item is purchased at a price
lower than that found on the state contract, the purchasing agency shall note
that fact in its minutes and show the identity and address of the vendor and
the price paid.
(SDCL § 5-18C-8)
§ 34.46 FUEL PURCHASED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS.
   The bid requirements of SDCL Chapter 5-18C, 5-18A, 5-18B, and 5-18D do not
apply to the purchase of fuel by units of local government. The governing board
of a unit of local government may, instead of advertising for bids, negotiate a
contract for the purchase of fuel at the most advantageous price. The governing
board shall contact and attempt to obtain competitive quotations from at least
three suppliers. A record of the names of the suppliers, the quotations
received and the procurement procedures used in purchasing shall be documented,
noted in the minutes, and retained on file by the governing body. The contract
may include a procedure for adjusting prices to meet changing market conditions
not within the control of the vendor.
(SDCL § 5-18C-6)
FUNDS AND MONIES RECEIVED
§ 34.55 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS, USAGE OF FUNDS.
   Any money generated pursuant to SDCL § 9-55-2 may be used for any one or
more of the following purposes:
   (A)   The acquisition, construction, maintenance, and operation of public
off-street parking facilities for the benefit of the district area;
   (B)   Improvement of any public place or facility in the district area,
including landscaping and plantings;
   (C)   Construction or installation of convention or event centers,
pedestrian shopping malls or plazas, sidewalks, including moving sidewalks,
parks, meeting and display facilities, bus stop shelters, lighting, benches or
other seating furniture, sculptures, trash receptacles, shelters, fountains,
skywalks, and pedestrian and vehicular overpasses and underpasses or any useful
or necessary public improvement;
   (D)   Leasing, acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, extending,
maintaining, or repairing parking lots or parking garages, both above and below
ground, or other facilities for the parking of vehicles, including the power to
install such facilities in public areas, whether such areas are owned in fee or
by easement, in the district area;
   (E)   Creation and implementation of a plan for improving the general
architectural design of public areas in the district area;
   (F)   The development of any activities and promotion of the district area;
   (G)   Maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of any improvements or
facilities authorized by SDCL Chapter 9-55;
   (H)   Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the facilities
in the district area, whether the project is capital or noncapital in nature;
   (I)   Enforcement of parking regulations within the district area; and
   (J)   Employing or contracting for personnel, including administrators for
any improvement or promotional program under this chapter, and providing for
any service necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of SDCL Chapter 9-55.
(SDCL § 9-55-3)
§ 34.56 INTERNAL SERVICE FUND FOR EQUIPMENT PURCHASES.
   The governing body of a municipality may by resolution create an internal
service fund to provide for the acquisition of equipment. Monies may be
budgeted and transferred to the fund from any source which may lawfully be used
for such purpose, including equipment usage charges on any municipal department
or agency. For purposes of this section, the term EQUIPMENT includes machinery,
motor vehicles, and any other equipment or personal property.
(SDCL § 9-21-32)
§ 34.57 PAYMENTS TO MUNICIPALITY FROM REVENUES OF COOPERATIVE PROVIDING
ELECTRIC SERVICE WITHIN MUNICIPALITY.
   A rural electric cooperative serving less than a majority of customers in a
municipality which does not have a municipally owned system, may, at the option
of the municipality, pay in addition to other taxes provided by law, an amount
to be agreed upon, not to exceed 2% of the total gross revenue collected by the
rural electric cooperative for that year, by the electric supplier and the
governing body of the municipality. If the parties have not agreed on the
amount on or before May 1 following the calendar year from which the amount is
to be paid, the amount to be paid shall be 2% of the total gross revenue
collected by the rural electric cooperative from the sale of power distributed
to structures and electric service outlets situated within the municipality.
The tax imposed by a municipality pursuant to this section may be passed on to
the purchaser. Any revenue received by the rural electric cooperative from the
tax imposed by a municipality pursuant to this section that is separately
stated on the invoice, bill of sale, or similar document is not considered
gross receipts as defined in SDCL Chapters 10-45, 10-46, or 10-52.
(SDCL § 49-34A-45)
§ 34.58 BAD CHECKS GIVEN TO CITY OR ITS AGENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make and deliver for draw and
deliver or utter or give to the city, or to any officer, employee, agent,
agency, board, bureau, or commission thereof, in payment of any license, fee,
fine, penalty, assessment, tax, debt, obligation or other exaction, payment, or
amount of money which the municipality or such officer, employee, agent,
agency, board, bureau, or commission is lawfully authorized to receive or
collect, any check or draft upon any bank or banking association with knowledge
that the maker or drawer thereof does not have an account in or with such bank
or banking association subject to such check or draft. The fact that payment of
such check or draft, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be
refused by such bank or banking association for lack of sufficient funds to the
credit of the drawer or maker with which to pay the same, or because such
drawer or maker has no account subject to such check or draft, shall be prima
facie evidence that the same was made and delivered or drawn and delivered or
uttered or given with the knowledge hereinabove mentioned.
   (B)   The bad check fee to be set by resolution may be assessed against
returned checks as allowed by state law.
Penalty, see §
10.99
BONDS AND NOTES
§ 34.70 MUNICIPAL BONDS AND NOTES.
   A municipality may borrow money from any source willing to lend the money by
issuing a promissory note subject to the limitations set in SDCL §§ 9-25-13 to
9-25-16, inclusive. Notes issued pursuant to this section are payable solely
from the sources provided in SDCL § 9-25-13 and do not constitute an
indebtedness of the municipality within the meaning of any constitutional or
statutory provisions or limitations, any provisions in the notes set forth or
set forth in the resolution authorizing the notes to the contrary
notwithstanding. The notes shall recite the authority under which the notes are
issued and shall state that the notes are issued in conformity with the
provisions, restrictions, and limitations of SDCL §§ 9-25-13 to 9-25-16,
inclusive, and that the notes and the interest thereon are payable from the
sources provided. The notes shall be authorized, issued, and sold in accordance
with SDCL Chapter 6-8B. No election is required and the notes may not be issued
for a term in excess of five years. However, a note issued for any loan
authorized by the United States Department of Agriculture may be issued for a
term of not more than ten years and an unsecured promissory note under the
municipal debt limit may be issued for a term of not more than 20 years.
(SDCL § 9-25-12)
CHAPTER 35: MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
Section
   
35.01   Surplus property
   
35.02   Transfer of property to other units of government
§ 35.01 SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   The governing board of a municipality may sell, trade, destroy, or otherwise
dispose of any land, structures, equipment, or other property which the
governing board has, by appropriate motion, determined is no longer necessary,
useful, or suitable for the purpose for which it was acquired. No motion is
required to sell, trade, destroy, or otherwise dispose of consumable supplies,
printed text, zoo animals, or subscriptions.
(SDCL § 6-13-1)
Cross-reference:
   Aldermen; sale of city property, see §
30.041
   Commissioner form of government; sale of city property, see §
30.064
Statutory reference:
   Surplus property, see Chapter 6-13
§ 35.02 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY TO OTHER UNITS OF GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, but, in
compliance with the provisions of the Constitution of the State of South
Dakota, this municipality, authorized by law to levy taxes, may lease or sell
or give and convey any personal property, real property, or money of such
entity or perform any work or render any services, to the state or any public
corporation thereof, to be used by such grantee for an authorized public
purpose.
   (B)   The lease or sale or gift and conveyance, or the performance of such
work, to be authorized, shall be made or done on the terms and in the manner
provided by resolutions of the governing body. However, no money may be
transferred from any sinking or interest fund unless sufficient money is left
therein to pay all interest which may accrue on and the principal of all
outstanding bonds.
(SDCL § 6-5-5)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
      
51.   SEWER SYSTEMS
      
52.   GARBAGE
      
53.   FIRE PROTECTION AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 50: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
Section
General
   
50.01   Municipal authority
   
50.02   Real property in adjoining states
   
50.03   Emergency contract for repair or replacement
   
50.04   Contract for waterworks system; maximum tax levy
   
50.05   Special assessments governed by provisions for sewer assessments
   
50.06   Connection from water main to lot line
   
50.07   Classification of water pipes and mains
   
50.08   Distance between water connections
Purchase of Pipes and Mains
   
50.25   Acquisition of water mains in newly annexed area
Water Service
   
50.45   Municipal artesian wells authorized
   
50.46   Request for rural water system within three miles of municipality
   
50.47   Municipality to provide service after previously declining
   
50.48   Providing service to persons with rural water system; purchase of
facilities
   
50.49   Service to persons within extended areas
   
50.50   Election to provide service to those outside three-mile area
   
50.51   Certain matters negotiable for contract between parties
   
50.52   Connection of plumbing fixtures to public water system, purchase/lease
of preexisting private wells
Water Conservation
   
50.65   Water shortages defined
   
50.66   Regulation of outdoor water use
   
50.67   Amendment of regulations by resolution
Cross-reference:
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
   Special elections, see §
32.03
   Tax levy, see
Ch. 34
GENERAL
§ 50.01 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY.
   The municipality shall construct, establish, operate, and maintain a system
of waterworks and facilities and may regulate the distribution and use of the
supplied thereby. It shall have the authority to assess, levy, and collect
taxes and special assessments for such purposes; and may appropriate funds and
levy taxes to accumulate funds for such purposes, as provided by SDCL Title 9.
The accumulated funds shall be placed in a separate fund which may not revert
at the end of the fiscal year. The municipality shall establish a maximum
amount allowed to be accumulated in the fund. The fund shall be established by
a resolution adopted pursuant to SDCL Chapter 9-19. Every municipality may
enter into agreements with the United States, with the state, and with any
authorized agency, subdivision, or unit of government, federal or state, to
carry out such purposes.
(SDCL § 9-47-1)
§ 50.02 REAL PROPERTY IN ADJOINING STATES.
   The municipality shall have power to purchase, lease, own, and hold real
property and easements therein in an adjoining state for waterworks purposes.
(SDCL § 9-47-2)
§ 50.03 EMERGENCY CONTRACT FOR REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Wherever, in the municipality, the emergency specified in SDCL § 9-21-
15 as the complete failure of the water supply of such municipality, the
governing body thereof is authorized to contract for the drilling of a new well
or for such repairs, replacements, and new equipment as may be necessary,
privately, without advertising for bids as required by the laws of this state
relating to contracts of municipalities, and to pay therefor as provided in
SDCL §§ 9-21-15 and 9-21-16 as to emergencies; provided, however, that no such
contract shall be executed until the governing body has adopted a resolution of
necessity therefor, by unanimous vote, which resolution shall become effective
immediately upon its passage and publication.
   (B)   Any contract entered into as provided by this section shall be as
binding, and have the same force and effect, as though the same were let in all
particulars as provided by the laws of this state relating to contracts of
municipalities.
(SDCL § 9-47-3)
Statutory reference:
   Replacement or repair required by unanticipated event, see SDCL § 9-21-15
§ 50.04 CONTRACT FOR WATERWORKS SYSTEM; MAXIMUM TAX LEVY.
   When the expense in connection with the waterworks system is to be raised by
general taxation, no contract for construction, purchase, lease, or maintenance
which shall stipulate for an annual payment greater than an annual levy of five
mills on each dollar of the assessed valuation of the municipality shall be
authorized until such contract shall first have been submitted to a vote of the
voters of such municipality at a general or special election and ratified by a
majority of those voting at such election.
(SDCL § 9-47-4)
§ 50.05 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS GOVERNED BY PROVISIONS FOR SEWER ASSESSMENTS.
   When the expense in connection with the waterworks system is raised by
special assessments, such assessments shall be levied and collected in the
manner provided in SDCL Chapter 9-43.
(SDCL § 9-47-5)
Cross-reference:
   Sewer assessments, see§
51.65
§ 50.06 CONNECTION FROM WATER MAIN TO LOT LINE.
   To provide for the laying of water connections from the municipality water
mains to the lot line, the municipality shall assess the cost against the
abutting property owner.
(SDCL § 9-47-6)
Statutory reference:
   Manner for assessments, see SDCL Chapter 9-43
§ 50.07 CLASSIFICATION OF WATER PIPES AND MAINS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Water
pipes or mains are classified as the following.
   SERVICE PIPE or MAIN. One designed to supply water to the property abutting
upon the particular street or way in which it is laid.
   SUPPLY PIPE or MAIN. Any pipe, ditch, flume, conduit, or other appliance
designed to conduct a supply of water from its source to the municipality.
   TRUNK PIPE. One designed to supply water to the property abutting upon the
street or way in which it is laid and to other pipes or mains in a defined
district or portion of the municipality.
(SDCL § 9-47-8)
§ 50.08 DISTANCE BETWEEN WATER CONNECTIONS.
   No more than one water connection shall be made for each platted lot or for
each 44 feet of frontage of unplatted ground in the residence section, and for
each 22 feet of frontage in the business section of the municipality, except
when the abutting owner requests in writing the placing of water connections at
a less number of feet.
(SDCL § 9-47-18)
PURCHASE OF PIPES AND MAINS
§ 50.25 ACQUISITION OF WATER MAINS IN NEWLY ANNEXED AREA.
   The municipality shall have the power, within the discretion of the
governing board of the municipality, to purchase, lease with purchase option,
lease or otherwise acquire from the owners thereof, or condemn under provision
of SDCL § 9-12-1(2), any water main or mains laid in, on or under any street or
alley or otherwise located in any municipality, district or subdivision outside
the corporate limits of the municipality and which subdivision or district
shall have been, by annexation proceedings or otherwise, annexed to the
municipality.
(SDCL § 9-47-17)
WATER SERVICE
§ 50.45 MUNICIPAL ARTESIAN WELLS AUTHORIZED.
   The municipality, if it chooses, may establish and maintain a municipal
artesian well.
(SDCL § 9-47-20)
§ 50.46 REQUEST FOR RURAL WATER SYSTEM WITHIN THREE MILES OF MUNICIPALITY.
   If a rural water system is requested after July 1, 1989, to provide water
service to any person who resides within three miles of a municipality owning
and operating a water supply system, the rural water system shall promptly
notify such municipality of such request in writing. Within 60 days from the
receipt of such notice, the municipality may elect to provide water service to
such person. If the municipality does not so elect, the rural water system may
provide such service.
(SDCL § 9-47-22)
§ 50.47 MUNICIPALITY TO PROVIDE SERVICE AFTER PREVIOUSLY DECLINING.
   If a rural water system provides service to a person whom a municipality has
declined to serve, pursuant to §
50.46, and the municipality thereafter elects to provide water service to such
person, the municipality shall first purchase the facilities of the rural water
system which were required and used to provide service to such person. The
purchase price shall be the present day reproduction cost, new, of the
facilities being acquired, less depreciation computed on a 30-year straight-
line basis, plus an amount equal to the cost on a nonbetterment basis of
constructing any necessary facilities to reintegrate the system of the rural
water system after detaching the portion to be sold; plus as compensation for
service rights, an annual amount, payable each year for a period of five years,
equal to the sum of 5% of the gross revenues received from the sale of water
service to such person during the five-year period. Gross revenues received
shall be determined by applying the rate in effect by the purchased rural water
system at the time of purchase.
(SDCL § 9-47-23)
§ 50.48 PROVIDING SERVICE TO PERSONS WITH RURAL WATER SYSTEM; PURCHASE OF
FACILITIES.
   If a municipality elects to provide water service to any person who is being
served by a rural water system and who resides within the boundaries of a
municipality or within three miles of the municipality as the boundaries exist
on July 1, 1989, the municipality shall purchase the facilities of the rural
water system which were required and used to provide service to such person.
The purchase price shall be as set forth in §
50.47.
(SDCL § 9-47-24)
§ 50.49 SERVICE TO PERSONS WITHIN EXTENDED AREAS.
   If the three-mile area referred to in §
50.48 is extended as a result of annexation, consolidation, or incorporation
after July 1, 1989, and the municipality elects to provide service to any
person receiving service from a rural water system residing within the newly
extended three-mile area, the municipality shall purchase the facilities of the
rural water system which were required and used to provide service to such
person. The purchase price shall be determined pursuant to §
50.47. The provisions of §
50.46 are applicable to all persons seeking water service in the newly extended
area from and after the effective date of such extension.
(SDCL § 9-47-25)
§ 50.50 ELECTION TO PROVIDE SERVICE TO THOSE OUTSIDE THREE-MILE AREA.
   If a municipality elects to provide water service to any person being served
by a rural water system and located more than three miles from the municipal
boundaries, the municipality shall purchase the facilities of the rural water
system which were required and used to provide service to such person. The
purchase price shall be determined pursuant to §
50.47.
(SDCL § 9-47-26)
§ 50.51 CERTAIN MATTERS NEGOTIABLE FOR CONTRACT BETWEEN PARTIES.
   The provisions of SDCL §§ 9-47-22 through 9-47-26, inclusive, do not prevent
a municipality and a rural water system from contracting with each other
relative to the transfer of customers, disposition, and sale of facilities and
related matters on such terms and conditions as they may determine.
(SDCL § 9-47-27)
§ 50.52 CONNECTION OF PLUMBING FIXTURES TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM, PURCHASE/LEASE
OF PREEXISTING PRIVATE WELLS.
   (A)   Each building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall connect
to a public water supply system if available. A public water system is
available to a premises used for human occupancy if the property line of the
premises is within 200 feet of the system.
   (B)   A municipality may purchase, lease with purchase option, lease, or
otherwise acquire from the owners, any preexisting private wells located within
the municipality. The provisions of this section do not apply to municipalities
of the first class.
   (C)   Nothing in this section requires any municipality to provide any
municipal service outside of its municipal boundaries.
(SDCL § 9-47-28)
WATER CONSERVATION
§ 50.65 WATER SHORTAGE DEFINED.
   Whenever the municipality determines that an emergency exists, in that the
water supply available to the entire municipality for essential functions is in
jeopardy because of drought, flood, natural disaster, other act of God, or any
other cause beyond the control of the municipality, the municipality may impose
such restrictions on the use of water as it determines to be necessary to meet
such emergency. In the event the municipality declares such an emergency and
imposes restrictions on the use of water, all users of the municipality’s water
shall submit to those restrictions.
§ 50.66 REGULATION OF OUTDOOR WATER USE.
   Whenever the municipality determines that an emergency exists as provided in
§
50.65, outdoor water use within the municipality water system shall be
regulated as follows.
   (A)   Residential lawn watering is prohibited between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   Residential lawn watering during permitted hours will be conducted
with no more than two sprinklers or 50-foot soaker hoses and hose diameter
shall not exceed five-eighths inch.
   (C)   No watering shall be conducted with an open hose.
   (D)   Residential users with underground sprinkling systems and commercial
and public water systems shall be regulated by the municipal water department.
§ 50.67 AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS BY RESOLUTION.
   Upon adoption of a resolution by the governing body declaring an emergency
water shortage, the governing body may, by resolution, amend and modify the
restrictions set forth in §
50.66 and make such other regulations pertaining to the use of water within the
municipality as is deemed in the public interest.
CHAPTER 51: SEWER SYSTEMS
Section
General
   
51.01   Municipal authority
   
51.02   Classification of sewers
   
51.03   Real property in adjoining state
   
51.04   Sewer pipes on private property; discharge
   
51.05   Acquisition on sewer mains, newly annexed area
   
51.06   Financing; general obligation bonds
   
51.07   Connections from sewers to lot lines
   
51.08   Disposing private or industrial waste through municipal sewage plant
Connections
   
51.20   Minimum distance between sewer connections
   
51.21   Connection of plumbing fixtures to public water sewer system
Purchase of Private Sewers
   
51.35   Municipal purchase of private sewers
   
51.36   Plans, specifications and cost estimate for purchase of sewer
   
51.37   Property owner’s protest against purchase of private sewer
Sewer Charges
   
51.50   Sewer charges or rentals
   
51.51   Sewer charges
   
51.52   Metering water supply to determine sewer charges
   
51.53   Separate fund for sewer charges and rentals
   
51.54   Special contracts
   
51.55   Revenue bond authority
   
51.56   Sewer utility rates and charges for recovery of capital costs
Assessments
   
51.65   Assessment of property for proportionate share of sewer previously
constructed
GENERAL
§ 51.01 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The municipality may establish and construct main, trunk, sanitary,
storm and service sewers, and septic or sewage treatment plants, drains, and
manholes either within its corporate limits or within ten miles of its
corporate limits; may appropriate funds and levy taxes to accumulate funds for
such purposes; may establish sewer districts as provided by SDCL Title 9; may
acquire any sewer, drain, or system of sewerage and drainage already
established and constructed; and may acquire land within or without the
municipality for a septic or sewage treatment plant or outlet to any main
sewer, and may assess the cost thereof with cost of any necessary extension or
connection of such main sewer to all the property within the sewer district
benefitted as provided by this chapter.
   (B)   The proceeds of any taxes levied for the accumulation of funds under
this section shall be placed in a separate fund which may not revert at the end
of the fiscal year. The municipality shall establish a maximum amount to be
accumulated in the fund. The fund shall be established by a resolution adopted
pursuant to SDCL Chapter 9-19.
(SDCL § 9-48-2)
§ 51.02 CLASSIFICATION OF SEWERS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Sewers
are classified as follows.
   COMBINED SANITARY AND STORM SEWER. A sewer which is not designated as either
a storm sewer or sanitary sewer is designed for this use.
   MAIN SEWER. One designed to carry the entire sewage or water of a
municipality or sewerage district to the sewer outlet, septic, or disposal
plant.
   SANITARY SEWER. One designed solely to carry sewage and wastes from
buildings or structures. The term SANITARY SEWER shall exclude drainage from
roofs, sidewalks, roadways, streets, alleys, or other surface drainage.
   SERVICE SEWER. One designed to carry sewage or water from the property
abutting upon the street or way in which it is laid into a trunk or main sewer,
or into the sewer outlet, septic, or disposal plant.
   STORM SEWER. One designed solely to carry storm or surface waters.
   TRUNK SEWER. One designed to carry the sewage or water from any particular
district or portion of the municipality as well as the sewage or water from
property abutting upon the street or way in which it is laid, and of sufficient
capacity to carry the sewage or water from the service sewers in the district
or portion of the municipality in which it is laid, to the main sewer outlet,
septic, or disposal plant.
(SDCL § 9-48-1)
§ 51.03 REAL PROPERTY IN ADJOINING STATE.
   The municipality shall have power to purchase, lease, own, and hold real
property and easements therein in an adjoining state for sewerage purposes.
(SDCL § 9-48-3)
§ 51.04 SEWER PIPES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; DISCHARGE.
   The municipality may construct, maintain, or authorize the construction and
maintenance of sewer pipes on private property or in or along any stream of
water, or empty or discharge the sewage of the municipality into any stream of
water within or without its limits, subject to the provisions of SDCL Chapter
34A-2, if such can be done without creating any foul or noxious odors in the
air over or along such stream.
(SDCL § 9-48-4)
Statutory reference:
   Environmental protection, see SDCL Chapter 34A-2
§ 51.05 ACQUISITION OF SEWER MAINS, NEWLY ANNEXED AREA.
   The municipality shall have power, within the discretion of the governing
board of the municipality, to purchase, lease with purchase option, lease or
otherwise acquire from the owners thereof, or condemn under provision of SDCL §
9-12-1(2), any sewer main or mains laid in, on or under any street or alley or
otherwise located in any municipality, district, or subdivision outside the
corporate limits of the municipality and which subdivision or district shall
have been, by annexation proceedings or otherwise, annexed to the municipality.
(SDCL § 9-48-5)
§ 51.06 FINANCING; GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS.
   The municipality may issue its general obligation bonds pursuant to SDCL
Chapter 9-26 for the purpose of financing the construction of sewers.
(SDCL § 9-48-6)
§ 51.07 CONNECTIONS FROM SEWERS TO LOT LINES.
   The municipality shall have power to regulate and provide for the laying of
sewer connections from the city trunk or service sewers, to the lot line. The
municipality may assess the cost against the abutting property owner as
provided by SDCL Chapter 9-43.
(SDCL § 9-48-7)
§ 51.08 DISPOSING PRIVATE OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE THROUGH MUNICIPAL SEWAGE PLANT.
   A municipality, where a sewage treatment or septic plant is maintained, may
enter into a contract to connect to the plant for the purpose of treating or
disposing of private sewage or industrial waste originating within the
municipality or within ten miles of the corporate limits of the municipality,
if the plant has the capacity to handle the sewage or industrial waste.
(SDCL § 9-48-32)
CONNECTIONS
§ 51.20 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   No more than one sewer connection shall be made for each platted lot, or for
each 44 feet of frontage of unplatted ground, in the residence section, and for
each 22 feet of frontage in the business section of the municipality, except
when the abutting owner requests in writing the placing of sewer connections at
a less number of feet.
(SDCL § 9-48-20)
§ 51.21 CONNECTION OF PLUMBING FIXTURES TO PUBLIC WATER SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Each building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall connect
to a public water sewer system if available. A public sewer system is available
to a premises used for human occupancy if the property line of the premises is
within 200 feet of the system. A municipality may purchase, lease with purchase
option, lease, or otherwise acquire from the owners, or condemn pursuant to
SDCL § 9-12-1(2), any preexisting private sewers located within the
municipality.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to municipalities of the
first class. Nothing in this section requires any municipality to provide any
municipal service outside of its municipal boundaries.
(SDCL § 9-48-53)
PURCHASE OF PRIVATE SEWERS
§ 51.35 MUNICIPAL PURCHASE OF PRIVATE SEWERS.
   Whenever there has been constructed by any person within any street or alley
a private sewer or sewers which shall be wholly or partly within any district
subsequently established as provided in this chapter, the municipality may
purchase such sewer or sewers or any part thereof and assess such cost to the
property fronting or abutting upon the sewer as provided in SDCL Chapter 9-43.
(SDCL § 9-48-16)
§ 51.36 PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND COST ESTIMATE FOR PURCHASE OF SEWER.
   No purchase pursuant to §
51.35 shall be made until plans and specifications of the location,
arrangement, form, and size, and material to be used in the construction of
such sewer or sewers and an estimate of the cost of constructing the same at
the time of making such estimate shall have been made and filed by the engineer
or other competent person and a resolution providing for such purchase has
become effective after notice and hearing thereon as provided in the case of a
resolution to construct service sewers.
(SDCL § 9-48-17)
§ 51.37 PROPERTY OWNER’S PROTEST AGAINST PURCHASE OF PRIVATE SEWER.
   If the owners of a majority of the real property fronting or abutting on a
sewer described in §
51.35 prior to such resolution becoming effective shall file a written protest
against such purchase, the governing body shall not have power to purchase the
same.
(SDCL § 9-48-18)
SEWER CHARGES
§ 51.50 SEWER CHARGES OR RENTALS.
   Any municipality which has installed or plans to install sewer utilities for
public use may by ordinance or resolution establish charges to be paid to the
municipality for the use of the sewer utilities by every user whose premises
are served by a connection to the sewer utilities directly or indirectly. A
municipality may also submit to the voters of such municipality at any general
election or any special election called for such purpose the question of
whether or not the municipality shall be authorized to establish charges for
the use of sewer utilities. If a majority of the voters voting upon such
question shall vote in favor thereof then such municipality may by ordinance or
resolution establish charges to be paid to the municipality for the use of the
sewer utilities by every user whose premises are served by a connection to the
sewer utilities directly or indirectly. For the purpose of this section the
term SEWER UTILITIES means any main, trunk, and service sewers; sanitary and
storm sewers; and septic or sewage treatment plants, drains, and manholes.
(SDCL § 9-48-26)
§ 51.51 SEWER CHARGES.
   Such charges shall be as nearly as may be in the judgment of the governing
body equitable and in proportion to the services rendered and taking into
consideration in the case of each such premises the quantity of sewage therein
or thereby produced and its concentration, strength, or river pollution
qualities in general, and, in the case of storm drainage, taking into
consideration in the case of each premises the quantity of storm runoff and may
use the square footage of impervious surfaces as a basis for charges or the
total square footage weighted by the classification of existing land use or
total square footage weighted by zoning designation or total square footage.
Such charges may be collected at the same time, place, and in conjunction with
the water rentals in any municipality owning and operating the municipal water
supply system and distribution system.
(SDCL § 9-48-27)
§ 51.52 METERING WATER SUPPLY TO DETERMINE SEWER CHARGES.
   The metering of private water supplies produced or operated on premises
served by public sewer utilities may be required. If the use or consumption of
water on any premises is taken into consideration in determining the charge to
be made for the use of sewer utilities serving the premises, the municipality
shall consider the amount or proportion of water used on the premises that does
not reach or burden the sewer utilities.
(SDCL § 9-48-28)
§ 51.53 SEPARATE FUND FOR SEWER CHARGES AND RENTALS.
   Any funds, fees, rentals, charges, or rates collected under the authority of
§§
51.50 through
51.52, inclusive, shall be remitted to the finance officer by the officer
charged with their collection at least once each month and shall be kept in a
separate fund to be known as the sewer rental fund. Such fund shall be used for
the purpose of paying the cost of financing the operation, maintenance, or
construction of the sewer utilities. However, no part of such fund may be used
to meet the cost of construction of lateral sewers serving local territory or
the portion of the cost of sewer utilities which have been financed by special
assessment against benefitted properties. Surplus funds may be transferred in
the manner described in SDCL Chapter 9-21.
(SDCL § 9-48-29)
§ 51.54 SPECIAL CONTRACTS.
   Nothing contained in §§
51.50 through
51.53, inclusive, shall be construed to limit or restrict the power of
municipalities to contract as granted by §
51.08, and any contract heretofore or hereafter entered into under such power
shall be in lieu of any fees, rates, rentals, or charges established under §§
51.50 through
51.53, inclusive.
(SDCL § 9-48-30)
§ 51.55 REVENUE BOND AUTHORITY.
   Nothing contained in §§
51.50 through
51.53, inclusive, shall be construed to limit or restrict the power of
municipalities to establish, equip, maintain, operate, extend, or improve water
and sewer systems or combined water and sewer systems in the manner provided in
SDCL Chapter 9-40, and any statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted amendatory
thereof and supplemental thereof, and to fix, impose, and collect rents and
charges for the service of such utility systems, and to issue revenue bonds and
make the same payable from the revenues provided by such rates and charges, and
to provide lawful stipulations and covenants for the security of such bonds.
The procedural requirements in SDCL Chapter 9-40 shall constitute the only
conditions prerequisite to the carrying out of such undertakings, the issuance
of such bonds and the fixing and collection of such rates and charges. The
monies derived from such rates and charges may be used and accounted for in
accordance with the provisions of SDCL Chapter 9-40, and are not subject to the
limitations of §§
51.50 through
51.53, inclusive.
(SDCL § 9-48-31)
§ 51.56 SEWER UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES FOR RECOVERY OF CAPITAL COSTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision in SDCL Chapter 9-48, this
municipality which maintains, has installed, or plans to install sewer
utilities for public use may establish, fair and equitable rates and charges
for sewer utilities to be paid by the users of the sewer utilities and others
connected thereto. The rates and charges may be established to recover past
capital costs and pay for the capital costs of developing new capacity. For the
purposes of this section, the term, capital costs, includes:
      (1)   Costs of construction or expansion of infrastructure that is
necessary to serve a new development, including the design, surveying,
engineering, environmental, and other professional fees that are directly
related to the construction or expansion of the sewer utility;
      (2)   Land acquisition costs including the purchase of interest in land,
any court award or settlement, appraisal, relocation service, negotiation
service, title insurance, expert witness, attorney, and other professional fees
that are directly related to the land acquisition;
      (3)   Debt service;
      (4)   Rate of return including a risk premium for any potential default;
and
      (5)   Directly related expenses incurred in preparing or updating the
comprehensive plan or zone improvement plan, including all administrative,
consulting, attorney, and other professional fees.
   (B)   The rates and charges may be assessed separately or added to other
rates established pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Two or more municipalities, sanitary districts, political subdivisions
of this state, or any combination thereof, may enter into an agreement or
contract with each other, or otherwise enter into an agreement as permitted by
law, for the provision of sewer utilities.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the term SEWER UTILITY means any
main, trunk, service sewer, sanitary and storm sewer, and septic or treatment
facility, drain, pumping station, lift station, interceptor, force main,
manhole, flow equalization structure, and any other equipment, material, and
facility related thereto.
(SDCL § 9-48-32.1)
ASSESSMENTS
§ 51.65 ASSESSMENT OF PROPERTY FOR PROPORTIONATE SHARE OF SEWER PREVIOUSLY
CONSTRUCTED.
   (A)   Whenever either a main sewer or trunk sewer or service sewer has been
constructed for which the cost has not been apportioned against property which
may be benefitted thereby as provided by this chapter, or SDCL Chapter 9-43,
the municipality may require the owner of the property to pay its proportionate
share of the cost of such construction, without interest, according to the
benefits to accrue to such property before the property may be platted,
replatted, or served by the facilities, as determined by the municipality.
   (B)   The municipality shall investigate and determine the amount to be
paid. The amount shall be apportioned by the municipality among the persons,
including the municipality, paying the appropriate cost.
(SDCL § 9-48-15)
CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   License for collection and hauling of garbage
   
52.03   Revocation of license
   
52.04   Hearing; revocation; appeal
   
52.05   Vehicles used for collecting
   
52.06   Loading of vehicles
   
52.07   Yard waste collection
   
52.08   Garbage containers
   
52.09   Littering prohibited
   
52.10   Burning garbage
   
52.11   Customer information
Statutory reference:
   Municipal garbage disposal systems, see SDCL § 9-32-11
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL WASTE. Any accumulation of manure or straw which has been used for
the transportation, housing or penning of animals.
   GARBAGE. All refuse or accumulation of animal and vegetable matter which
attends the preparation, transportation, cooking, eating, sale, disposal or
storage of meat, fish, vegetables, fruit and all other food or food products.
   HAULING UNIT. The container in which garbage is transported. It may be
permanently affixed to a chassis or may be temporarily attached, such as a
roll-off unit.
   LITTER. Garbage, rubbish, waste material or animal waste improperly disposed
of by discarding, abandoning, allowing to accumulate, scattering or depositing
the same outside an approved container.
   RUBBISH. All combustible refuse matter, such as contaminated or
nonrecyclable paper, sweepings, rags, contaminated cardboard, and similar
materials.
   TRASH. All waste paper, rags, refuse, leaves, cans, other containers, and
all accumulations of waste not defined as garbage.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, garden waste, and leaves.
§ 52.02 LICENSE FOR COLLECTION AND HAULING OF GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in the business of collecting and
hauling garbage or trash from any place within the municipality without first
having obtained a license. All applications for licenses shall be in writing
and shall give the name and address of the person or firm proposing to enter
into the business, together with the number and type of vehicles to be used.
The application may be given to the municipal finance officer, any member of
the governing body, or may be presented at any regular meeting in person. The
municipality shall act on all license applications and, if any are refused, the
reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. All licenses shall be annual and
shall expire December 31 of each year. The annual fee for each vehicle engaged
in this business shall be set by the municipality annually.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   In addition to any penalties provided elsewhere in this code, the
municipality may, upon a showing of sufficient cause, revoke any license
granted for the collection of garbage. Conviction for violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be sufficient cause.
§ 52.04 HEARING; REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)    If the municipality determines that facts exist for revocation
of a license, the municipality shall notify the licensee in writing of the
intent to revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal
delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most
current business address on file with the municipality. Within five working
days of receipt of the notice, the licensee may provide to the municipal
manager or person appointed by the municipality, in writing, a response that
shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be revoked.
Within three days of the receipt of the licensee’s written response, the
municipal manager or person appointed by the municipality shall notify the
licensee in writing of the hearing date on licensee’s revocation proceeding.
      (2)   Within ten working days of the receipt of licensee’s written
response, the municipal manager or person appointed by the municipality shall
conduct a hearing at which the licensee shall have the opportunity to be
represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf.
If a response is not received by the municipal manager or person appointed by
the municipality in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the municipal
manager or person appointed by the municipality finds that grounds exist for
revocation, the decision shall become final five days after the municipal
manager or person appointed by the municipality sends, by certified mail,
written notice that the license has been revoked. The notice shall include a
statement advising the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
      (3)   If the municipal manager or person appointed by the municipality
finds that no grounds exist for revocation of a license, then within five days
after the hearing, the municipal manager or person appointed by the
municipality shall withdraw the intent to revoke the license, and shall so
notify the licensee in writing by certified mail of that action and shall
contemporaneously issue the license.
   (B)   When a decision to revoke a license becomes final, the licensee whose
license has been revoked, shall have the right to appeal the action to a court
of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal,
challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the municipality’s enforcement of the
revocation, the municipality shall immediately issue the licensee a provisional
license. The provisional license shall allow the licensee to continue operation
of the business and will expire upon the court’s entry of a judgment on the
licensee’s action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the
municipality’s enforcement.
§ 52.05 VEHICLES USED FOR COLLECTING.
   (A)   Collectors of garbage shall provide themselves with a suitable vehicle
covered on the top so as to prevent the escape of odors and contents.
   (B)   The vehicles shall be thoroughly washed whenever necessary to prevent
them from becoming dangerous or offensive to public health.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.06 LOADING OF VEHICLES.
   Vehicles used for transporting garbage, rubbish, animal waste, and waste
materials shall be loaded so that no materials shall fall off or be blown off
the vehicle while in transit. Loosely loaded vehicles with open boxes must be
tarped.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.07 YARD WASTE COLLECTION.
   Yard waste shall be collected by licensed commercial garbage haulers. Yard
waste shall be deposited in a proper container, a Kraft-type paper bag
designated for yard waste, or a 32-gallon rigid watertight container with a
tightly fitted cover, and placed at a location, other than curbside, designated
for collection by the licensed commercial garbage hauler contracted to remove
the same. All yard waste and containers therefore shall be kept in an
inconspicuous place except when placed for collection. Yard waste shall be
collected or removed at a minimum of once a week.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.08 GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   The occupant of every dwelling house or apartment and of every place of
business and building shall provide a suitable container in which the occupants
shall deposit all garbage accumulating upon the premises, which garbage
containers shall be kept in an unobtrusive manner except to facilitate
scheduled pickup. Garbage cans shall be provided with tightly fitting covers.
The vicinity of garbage cans shall be kept free from garbage.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.09 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or
deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, lake, stream, river, pond, body of
water or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or
cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles, or any form of litter
or waste matter.
   (B)   Duty of business owners, occupants.
      (1)   Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of
business situated within the municipality shall exercise reasonable diligence
at all times to keep his or her premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper,
paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials
thrown or left on the premises, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the
materials from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.
      (2)   Receptacles. Garbage receptacles of sufficient size and number
shall be kept accessible to all persons on the premises where the articles may
be placed.
      (3)   Signs. Every business establishment shall place upon its premises
in a conspicuous place, in close proximity to the receptacles referred to in
division (B)(2) of this section, a sign which shall, in essence, convey to all
persons a request that they use the receptacles for the separate disposal of
garbage.
   (C)   Duty of person. It shall be unlawful for any person going upon the
premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper,
paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials
except in receptacles provided for the purposes.
   (D)   Removal of litter by municipality. If the occupant, person in charge
or owner of any real property within 14 days fails to remove litter from real
property after notice from the municipality to do so, the municipality may
cause the litter to be removed and for the purpose may enter upon any real
property. The cost of removal may be assessed against the real property.
   (E)   Litter on sidewalk. The owner or occupant of any lot or private ground
abutting upon any public sidewalk shall not allow rubbish, debris, or
obstruction of any kind to be or remain on the sidewalk along the abutting
property.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Arrest for violation of municipal litter ordinance; notice to appear; time;
refusal to give written
    promise to appear, see SDCL § 34A-7-15
   Littering prohibited, see SDCL §§ 34A-7-6 et seq.
   Ordinances to regulate litter, see SDCL § 34A-7-14
   Refuse in public places and streams, SDCL § 9-32-10
§ 52.10 BURNING GARBAGE.
   No garbage or other matter that gives off an offensive odor during
combustion shall be burned in the municipality.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.11 CUSTOMER INFORMATION.
   All licensed garbage collectors/haulers shall at least annually provide
customers with written information regarding volume of base-rate structure and
garbage, and yard waste service.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 53: FIRE PROTECTION AND SAFETY
Section
Flammable and Combustible Liquids
   
53.01   Compliance with International Fire Code
   
53.02   Location requirements for aboveground tanks
   
53.03   Spill control
   
53.04   Protection against vehicular collision
   
53.05   Maintenance of area within any dike
   
53.06   Tank piping system in contact with soil; protection from corrosion
   
53.07   Delivery and dispensing operations to comply with International Fire
Code; determining liquid level; equipment requirements
   
53.08   Application to facilities constructed after July 1, 2016
   
53.09   Limitations as to tank capacity
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
§ 53.01 COMPLIANCE WITH INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   Except as otherwise provided in SDCL Chapter 34-38, aboveground storage
tanks shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 57 of the
International Fire Code, 2015 edition.
(SDCL § 34-38-26)
§ 53.02 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ABOVEGROUND TANKS.
   (A)   Any aboveground storage tank shall be located at least:
      (1)   Fifty feet from the nearest important building on the same
property;
      (2)   Fifty feet from any fuel dispenser;
      (3)   Fifty feet from the nearest side of any public way; and
      (4)   Fifty feet from any property line that is or may be built upon.
   (B)   However, distances may be reduced based on site limitations and
conditions or quantity of liquid storage at the discretion of the local and
division authority having jurisdiction.
(SDCL § 34-38-28)
§ 53.03 SPILL CONTROL.
   Spill control shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 57 of the
International Fire Code, 2015 edition.
(SDCL § 34-38-29)
§ 53.04 PROTECTION AGAINST VEHICULAR COLLISION.
   Aboveground tanks shall be protected against vehicular collision by suitable
barriers.
(SDCL § 34-38-31)
§ 53.05 MAINTENANCE OF AREA WITHIN ANY DIKE.
   The area within any dike shall be kept free of vegetation, debris, and any
other material that is not necessary to the operation of the tank and piping
system.
(SDCL § 34-38-32)
§ 53.06 TANK PIPING SYSTEM IN CONTACT WITH SOIL; PROTECTION FROM CORROSION.
   Any portion of a tank piping system that is in contact with the soil shall
be protected from corrosion in accordance with Chapter 57 of the International
Fire Code, 2015 edition.
(SDCL § 34-38-33)
§ 53.07 DELIVERY AND DISPENSING OPERATIONS TO COMPLY WITH INTERNATIONAL FIRE
CODE; DETERMINING LIQUID LEVEL; EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Delivery operations shall comply with applicable requirements of
Chapter 57 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition. Dispensing operations
shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 57 of the International Fire Code,
2015 edition.
   (B)   The delivery vehicle shall be separated from any aboveground tank by
at least 25 feet.
   (C)   Means shall be provided for determining the liquid level in each tank
and this means shall be accessible to the delivery operator. Provisions shall
be made either to automatically stop the delivery of fuel to the tank if the
liquid level in the tank reaches 95% of capacity or to sound an audible alarm
if the liquid level in the tank reaches 90% capacity.
   (D)   A check valve, gate valve with quick-connect coupling, or a dry-break
valve shall be installed in the piping at the point where connection and
disconnection is made for delivery from a vehicle to any aboveground tank. This
device shall be protected against tampering and physical damage.
   (E)   If the delivery hose is connected directly to the tank, the fill line
at the tank shall be equipped with a tight-fill device for connecting the hose
to the tank.
(SDCL § 34-38-34)
§ 53.08 APPLICATION TO FACILITIES CONSTRUCTED AFTER JULY 1, 2016.
   The provisions of SDCL Chapter 34-38 apply to facilities constructed after
July 1, 2016. Existing installations shall be permitted only if, in the opinion
of local and state authorities, the existing installation does not constitute a
distinct hazard to life or property.
(SDCL § 34-38-38)
§ 53.09 LIMITATIONS AS TO TANK CAPACITY.
   Tanks may not exceed an individual capacity of 12,000 gallons and may not
exceed an aggregate capacity of 48,000 gallons. Any variance in excess of these
amounts can only be granted by the division pursuant to SDCL Chapter 1-26.
(SDCL § 34-38-39)  
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
      
73.   SNOWMOBILES
      
74.   BICYCLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Authority
   
70.03   Adoption of state traffic laws
   
70.04   Persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or animals
   
70.05   Refusing to comply with order of police
   
70.06   Boarding or alighting from vehicle
   
70.07   Opening doors into traffic
   
70.08   Animals and vehicles on sidewalk
   
70.09   Clinging to motor vehicle
   
70.10   Use of dynamic brake device prohibited
   
70.11   Texting prohibited
   
70.12   Seizure of handheld electronic wireless communications devices
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   For local provisions, see Title XVII
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases defined in SDCL § 32-14-1, shall, when used in this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in such section,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
§ 70.02 AUTHORITY.
   This municipality shall have authority to enact and enforce regulations
pursuant to SDCL §§ 9-31-1 through 9-31-5.
§ 70.03 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS.
   The provisions of SDCL Title 32 are adopted by reference. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate those provisions. All traffic control signs,
devices, signals, and markings shall be deemed erected pursuant to SDCL Title
32.
§ 70.04 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS.
   All persons propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or any animal and
every person driving any animal upon any roadway in this municipality shall be
subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the operator of any
vehicle, except those provisions with reference to the equipment of vehicles
and those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
Ch. 74
§ 70.05 REFUSING TO COMPLY WITH ORDER OF POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse to:
   (A)   Submit to any lawful inspection under this chapter; and
   (B)   Comply with the provisions of a warning ticket issued by a police
officer under the provisions of this chapter.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful to board or alight from a vehicle that is in motion.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 OPENING DOORS INTO TRAFFIC.
   No person may open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor may any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(SDCL § 32-30-2.5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 ANIMALS AND VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person may drive any vehicle other than a bicycle, motorized
scooter, or an electric personal assistive device upon a sidewalk or sidewalk
area in the municipality except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.
(SDCL § 32-26-21.1)
   (B)   No person shall ride, drive, lead any horse or mule, or drive or lead
any cow or any other animal upon any public sidewalk in the municipality or
cause to be drawn any vehicle ordinarily drawn by horses or mules on any
sidewalk of the municipality.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person riding on a motorcycle to attach himself
or herself to any other vehicle on a roadway.
(SDCL § 32-20-6.5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 USE OF DYNAMIC BRAKE DEVICE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section, the use or operation of a dynamic
braking device on unmuffled vehicles is hereby prohibited within this
municipality
   (B)   A DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE is a device used on vehicles that converts
the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the
purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. These devices are commonly
referred to as “air brakes”, “engine brakes”, “compression brakes”, “Jacob’s
Brakes”, or “Jake Brakes”.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to municipal emergency vehicles, whether
or not responding to an emergency.
   (D)   As an affirmative defense to a charge of a violating of this section,
the driver of the vehicle must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that:
      (1)   The driver of the vehicle was operating the vehicle in compliance
with all applicable laws at the time the unmuffled dynamic braking device was
used;
      (2)   The speed of vehicle was reasonable given all of the relevant
circumstances;
      (3)   The driver believed that the use of the unmuffled dynamic braking
device was necessary to either:
         (a)   Avoid an imminent threat to the safety of the driver or any
other person; or
         (b)   Avoid an imminent threat to property.
      (4)   The driver’s belief as to the necessity for using the unmuffled
dynamic braking device was objectively reasonable.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 TEXTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOBILE ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Any hand-held or portable electronic device
capable of providing wireless data or voice communication between two or more
persons or amusement, including a cellular telephone, broadband personal
communication device, two-way messaging device, text messaging device, pager,
electronic device that can receive or transmit text or character-based images,
access or store data, or connect to the internet, personal digital assistant,
laptop computer, computer tablet, stand-alone computer, portable computing
device, mobile device with a touchscreen display that is designed to be worn,
electronic game, equipment that is capable of playing a video, taking
photographs, capturing images, or recording or transmitting video, and any
similar device that is readily removable from a vehicle and is used to write,
send, or read text or data or capture images or video through manual input. The
term does not include a radio designed for the citizens band service or the
amateur radio service of the Federal Communications Commission or a commercial
two-way radio communications device.
      OPERATE. To drive or assume physical control of a motor vehicle upon a
highway, including operation while temporarily stationary because of traffic,
road conditions, a traffic light, or a stop sign. The term does not include a
motor vehicle that is lawfully parked.
      SOCIAL NETWORKING SITE. Any web-based service that allows persons to
construct a profile within a founded system and communicate with other users of
the site.
(SDCL § 32-26-46)
   (B)   Use of mobile electronic device.
      (1)   No person may operate a motor vehicle while using a mobile
electronic device. A violation of this division (B) is a class 2 misdemeanor.
      (2)   This division (B) does not apply to:
         (a)   A law enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency medical
technician, paramedic, operator of an authorized emergency vehicle, or
similarly engaged paid or volunteer public safety first responder during the
performance of that person’s official duties, and a public utility employee or
contractor acting within the scope of that person’s employment;
         (b)   The use of a mobile electronic device for emergency purposes,
including a text messaging device to contact a 911 system, an emergency call to
a law enforcement agency, health care provider, fire department, or other
emergency services agency or entity, or to report to appropriate authorities a
fire, traffic accident, serious road hazard, or medical or hazardous materials
emergency, or to report the operator of another motor vehicle who is driving in
a reckless or otherwise unsafe manner or who appears to be driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, or to report a crime;
         (c)   The use of a global positioning or navigation system feature of
a mobile electronic device, but does apply to manually entering information
into the global positioning or navigation system feature of the device;
         (d)   Reading, selecting, or entering a telephone number or name in a
mobile electronic device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone
call and using the device for the call, or if a person otherwise activates or
deactivates a feature or function of a mobile electronic device; or
         (e)   The use of a mobile electronic device in a voice-operated or
hands-free mode if the operator of the motor vehicle does not use the
operator’s hands to operate the device, except to activate or deactivate a
feature or function of the device.
(SDCL § 32-26-47.1)
   (C)   Social networking sites. No person may access, read, or post to a
social networking site while operating a motor vehicle. A violation of this
division (C) is a class 2 misdemeanor.
(SDCL § 32-26-47.2)
§ 70.12 SEIZURE OF HANDHELD ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE.
   No mobile electronic device used in violation of §§
70.11(B) and (C) may be seized by a law enforcement officer to establish a
violation of either of those divisions. However, a mobile electronic device may
be seized upon compliance with the search and seizure requirements in SDCL
Chapter 23A-35.
(SDCL § 32-26-48)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of Title VII shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General
   
71.001   Driver’s license required
   
71.002   License or permit; minimum age
   
71.003   License plate
   
71.004   Maximum number of passengers in front
   
71.005   Failure to stop
   
71.006   Following too closely
   
71.007   Following fire apparatus
   
71.008   Right-of-way for highway equipment and personnel; use of left-hand
side of highway
   
71.009   Unsafe backing
   
71.010   Driving over fire hose
   
71.011   Interference with driver’s view
   
71.012   Reckless driving
   
71.013   Driving through procession
   
71.014   Driver’s license or permit required to operate motorcycle, moped, all-
terrain vehicle, or three-wheel vehicle; testing requirements
Operation of Vehicles
   
71.025   Driving on right side of street
   
71.026   Intersections and grade crossings
   
71.027   Passing oncoming vehicles
   
71.028   Roadways laned for traffic
   
71.029   Driving on left on approach to intersection
   
71.030   Overtaking vehicles
   
71.031   Passing on right
   
71.032   Passing on right; driving off pavement
   
71.033   Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle
   
71.034   Driving on left; obstructed view
   
71.035   Passing by crossing highway center line; vision obscured
   
71.036   No passing zone
   
71.037   Overtaking bicycle; minimum separation
Right-of-Way and Special Stops
   
71.050   Intersections; yield right-of-way
   
71.051   Right-of-way; emergency vehicles
   
71.052   Left-turning vehicles
   
71.053   Entry on highway from alley
   
71.054   Action required at stop sign; place of stopping
   
71.055   Stop required before entering from alley, building, or private road
   
71.056   Duty when approaching yield sign; pedestrians
   
71.057   Stop required when grade crossing signal operating
   
71.058   Required to stop at all grade crossing; no gear shifting while
crossing
Turning Movements
   
71.070   Right-turning vehicle
   
71.071   Left-turning vehicle
   
71.072   Turning from wrong lane
   
71.073   Authority to modify method of turning
   
71.074   Starting, stopping, or turning signals; when required
   
71.075   Arm signals, mechanical signs, and electrical signals
   
71.076   Manner of making arm signals
Accidents
   
71.090   Duty of vehicle driver to stop in case of accident
   
71.091   Immediate report to police
   
71.092   Duty to stop after accident with unattended vehicle or property
   
71.093   Property damage; duty
   
71.094   Physical incapacity of driver; duty of occupant
Cross-reference:
   General provisions, see
Ch. 70
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
GENERAL
§ 71.001 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, except those expressly exempted in SDCL §§ 32-12-22.1 through 32-
12-28, inclusive, may drive any motor vehicle upon a highway in this state
unless the person has a valid driver’s license under the provisions of this
chapter.
(SDCL § 32-12-22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.002 LICENSE OR PERMIT; MINIMUM AGE.
   No person shall legally drive unless he or she has a valid permit or license
and is, at a minimum, 16 years of age.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Application for permit and minimum age, see SDCL § 32-12-11
   Restricted minor’s permit, restrictions on operation, see SDCL § 32-12-12
§ 71.003 LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, no person may operate or
drive a motor vehicle on the public highways of this state unless the vehicle
has a distinctive number assigned to it by the department, and two number
plates, bearing the number conspicuously displayed, horizontally and in an
upright position, one on the front and one on the rear of the vehicle, each
securely fastened. The plates shall at all times, as far as is reasonably
possible, be kept clear and free of mud, ice, or snow so as to be clearly
visible.
   (B)   All number plates, markers, or stamps evidencing registration or
licensing of any vehicle in this or any foreign state, territory, district, or
possession and any plate, marker, or stamp used in substitution for or in lieu
of the number plates required by this section by virtue of any law or executive
order for any prior year or years shall be removed from such vehicles.
   (C)   A motorcycle is only required to display one number plate. The
motorcycle plate may be mounted in any visible manner other than upside down.
(SDCL § 32-5-98) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.004 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PASSENGERS IN FRONT.
   No person may drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the
front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the
driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(SDCL § 32-26-43) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.005 FAILURE TO STOP.
   (A)   Any driver of a motor vehicle who intentionally fails or refuses to
bring a vehicle to a stop, when given visual or audible signal to bring the
vehicle to a stop, is guilty of failure to stop at the signal of a law
enforcement officer.
   (B)   The signal given by the law enforcement officer may be by hand, voice,
emergency light, or siren. The officer giving the signal shall be in uniform,
prominently displaying a badge of office, and the vehicle shall be
appropriately marked showing it to be an official law enforcement vehicle.
(SDCL § 32-33-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   For license revocation and exceptions, see SDCL § 32-33-18 and 32-35-43.1
§ 71.006 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle may not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the highway.
(SDCL § 32-26-40) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.007 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than one on official
business to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm
closer than 500 feet or to drive into or park such vehicle within the block
where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(SDCL § 32-31-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.008 RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR HIGHWAY EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL; USE OF LEFT-HAND
SIDE OF HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Highway equipment and personnel in the performance of their duties of
maintaining the highway shall have the preference of right-of-way and shall be
permitted to drive upon the left-hand side of the traveled portion of the
highway for the purpose of dumping materials, for repairing the highway, and
also for smoothing the road surface.
   (B)   Highway equipment shall, at all times, display a flashing or revolving
light to warn the traveling public. However, highway equipment may not
indiscriminately block the traffic, but shall allow reasonable room on the
traveled portion of the highway for other vehicles to pass. The equipment may
not be bound by the provisions of this chapter to turn to the right when
meeting other vehicles or allowing them to pass when work requires such
equipment to remain on the other side of the traveled portion of the highway.
The equipment is subject to the laws of travel as provided in this chapter,
unless the performance of maintenance work requires otherwise.
(SDCL § 32-26-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.009 UNSAFE BACKING.
   It shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to back the vehicle unless
such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other
traffic.
(SDCL § 32-30-20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.010 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle may be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when
laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command.
(SDCL § 32-31-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.011 INTERFERENCE WITH DRIVER’S VIEW.
   No passenger in a vehicle may ride in such position as to interfere with the
driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(SDCL § 32-26-44) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.012 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any vehicle upon a highway, alley, public park,
recreational area, or upon the property of a public or private school, college,
or university carelessly and heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of
others, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, is guilty of
reckless driving.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL §§ 32-24-1 et seq.
§ 71.013 DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSION.
   No driver shall drive through or otherwise interfere with any funeral or
other authorized procession, in any of the streets, and it shall be the duty of
any driver of any vehicle to stop when reaching a street upon which a
procession is passing and wait until it has passed.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see SDCL § 32-14-5
§ 71.014 DRIVER’S LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED TO OPERATE MOTORCYCLE, MOPED, ALL-
TERRAIN VEHICLE, OR THREE-WHEEL VEHICLE; TESTING REQUIREMENTS.
   No person may operate a motorcycle, except a moped as defined in SDCL § 32-
20-1, a licensed all-terrain vehicle under SDCL § 32-20-13, or any motor
vehicle that has three wheels and is operated with a steering wheel and foot
controls on the public streets or highways without a motor vehicle driver
license or permit upon which a state testing officer has certified that such
person is qualified to operate such motorcycle. An operator of a moped, a
licensed all-terrain vehicle, or a motor vehicle that has three wheels and is
operated with a steering wheel and foot controls shall have a valid motor
vehicle driver license or permit. The department may waive the testing
requirements upon completion of a motorcycle safety course approved pursuant to
SDCL § 32-20-14.
(SDCL § 32-20-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 71.025 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET.
   Upon all highways of sufficient width, except upon one-way streets, the
driver of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the highway and
shall drive a slow-moving vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge
or curb of such highway, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of
the highway and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle subject to
the limitations applicable in overtaking and passing set forth in SDCL §§ 32-
26-26 through 32-26-39.
(SDCL § 32-26-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.026 INTERSECTIONS AND GRADE CROSSINGS.
   In crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a highway by
a railroad right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall at all times cause such
vehicle to travel on the right half of the highway unless such right half is
obstructed or impassable.
(SDCL § 32-26-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.027 PASSING ONCOMING VEHICLES.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled
portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(SDCL § 32-26-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.028 ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following shall apply.
   (A)   Lane driving required. On a roadway divided into lanes, a vehicle
shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and may
not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such
movement can be made with safety.
(SDCL § 32-26-6)
   (B)   Three-lane highway. Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes,
a vehicle may not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center
lane is clear of left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated
exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is
marked or signposted to give notice of such allocation.
(SDCL § 32-26-7)
   (C)   Slow moving traffic lane. Official signs may be erected on a roadway
divided into lanes directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction
regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such sign.
(SDCL § 32-26-8)
   (D)   Highway divided by physical barrier. If any highway has been divided
into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or
clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway and no
vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any such dividing space, barrier,
or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing
section or at a crossover or intersection established by public authority.
(SDCL § 32-26-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.029 DRIVING ON LEFT ON APPROACH TO INTERSECTION.
   No vehicle may be driven on the left side of the roadway when approaching
within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing or
when the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge,
viaduct, or tunnel.
(SDCL § 32-26-36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.030 OVERTAKING VEHICLES.
   The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof. The driver of an
overtaking vehicle shall pass at a safe distance to the
side of an overtaken vehicle and may not cut in front of the latter until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
(SDCL § 32-26-26) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.031 PASSING ON RIGHT.
   The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
   (A)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
   (B)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement, not occupied by
parked vehicles, of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles
in each direction; and
   (C)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
(SDCL § 32-26-27) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.032 PASSING ON RIGHT; DRIVING OFF PAVEMENT.
   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right
only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event may such
movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled portion of the
roadway.
(SDCL § 32-26-28) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.033 DUTY OF DRIVER OF OVERTAKEN VEHICLE.
   Unless overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an
overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the
overtaking vehicle, and may not increase the speed of his or her vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(SDCL § 32-26-31) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.034 DRIVING ON LEFT; OBSTRUCTED VIEW.
   No person may drive any vehicle on the left side of the roadway when
approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the
driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard if
another vehicle is approaching from the opposite direction.
(SDCL § 32-26-35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.035 PASSING BY CROSSING HIGHWAY CENTER LINE; VISION OBSCURED.
   No driver of a vehicle may drive to the left side of the center line of a
highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be made in safety.
(SDCL § 32-26-34) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.036 NO PASSING ZONE.
   The driver of a vehicle may not overtake and pass any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction when traveling in a no-passing zone on
highways or bridges when either marked by signs or lines on the roadways.
(SDCL § 32-26-37) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.037 OVERTAKING BICYCLE; MINIMUM SEPARATION.
   The driver of any motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same
direction shall allow a minimum of a three-foot separation between the right
side of the driver’s vehicle, including any mirror or other projection, and the
left side of the bicycle if the posted limit is thirty-five miles per hour or
less and shall allow a minimum of six feet separation if the posted limit is
greater than thirty-five miles per hour. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same direction may
partially cross the highway centerline or the dividing line between two lanes
of travel in the same direction if it can be performed safely. The driver of
the motor vehicle shall maintain that separation until safely past the
overtaken bicycle.
(SDCL § 32-26-26.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY AND SPECIAL STOPS
§ 71.050 INTERSECTIONS; YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-
way to the vehicle on the right except as otherwise provided in §§
71.008,
71.051 and
71.053.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit
any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have.
(SDCL § 32-26-13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.051 RIGHT-OF-WAY; EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway shall yield the right-of-way to
police and fire department vehicles and ambulances if they are operated upon
official business and the drivers give an audible signal by bell, siren, or
exhaust whistle or visual signal by flashing, oscillating, or rotating beams of
red light or combination of red, blue, or white light visible 180 degrees to
the front of the vehicle.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not relieve the driver of a police,
fire department vehicle, or ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons using the highway nor does it protect the driver
of any such vehicle from the consequence of an arbitrary exercise of such
right-of-way.
(SDCL § 32-26-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.052 LEFT-TURNING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Manner of making turn. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left
shall approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. If practicable, the
left turn shall be made to the left of the center of the intersection and so as
to leave the intersection or other location in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction as the vehicle on
the roadway being entered.
(SDCL § 32-26-18)
   (B)   Right-of-way of oncoming vehicle. The driver of a vehicle within an
intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. The
driver after having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required
by this chapter, may make such left turn.
(SDCL § 32-26-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.053 ENTRY ON HIGHWAY FROM ALLEY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a public highway from an
alley, building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on such public highway.
(SDCL § 32-26-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.054 ACTION REQUIRED AT STOP SIGN; PLACE OF STOPPING.
   (A)   Unless directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall come to a full stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
   (B)   After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered or is approaching the intersection from another
highway and may not proceed into the intersection until certain that such
intersecting roadway is free from oncoming traffic which may affect safe
passage.
(SDCL § 32-29-2.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.055 STOP REQUIRED BEFORE ENTERING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, OR PRIVATE ROAD.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road, or
driveway within a business or residence district shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across such alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or if there
is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(SDCL § 32-29-2.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.056 DUTY WHEN APPROACHING YIELD SIGN; PEDESTRIANS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to
the sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall
stop if necessary in a similar manner as provided in §
71.054, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the
roadway on which he or she is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard. The driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding.
   (B)   However, if the driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in
a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign
without stopping, the collision is prima facie evidence of his or her failure
to yield the right-of-way.
(SDCL § 32-29-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.057 STOP REQUIRED WHEN GRADE CROSSING SIGNAL OPERATING.
   If any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and a
law enforcement officer or a clearly visible or audible signal gives warning of
the immediate approach of a railway train or car or other on-track equipment,
he or she shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and may not proceed
until he or she can do so safely.
(SDCL § 32-29-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.058 REQUIRED TO STOP AT ALL GRADE CROSSING; NO GEAR SHIFTING WHILE
CROSSING.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, any
school bus carrying passengers, any vehicle carrying passengers owned or
operated by a nonprofit organization that requires inspection pursuant to SDCL
§ 32-21-3.1, or any vehicle carrying explosive substances or combustible or
flammable liquid as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any
track of a railroad, except where a police officer or traffic control signal
directs traffic to proceed or the track is nonoperational and is marked with a
supplemental sign as provided in SDCL § 31-28-7, shall stop such vehicle within
50 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and may not proceed until he or
she has ascertained that he or she can do so safely.
   (B)   After stopping and upon proceeding, the driver of the vehicle shall
cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity of
changing gears while traversing the crossing and may not shift gears while
crossing the track or tracks.
(SDCL § 32-29-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.070 RIGHT-TURNING VEHICLE.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
71.073, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an
intersection shall approach such intersection in the lane for traffic nearest
to the right-hand side of the highway, and in turning shall keep as closely as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the highway.
(SDCL § 32-26-17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.071 LEFT-TURNING VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall approach the turn
in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the
direction of travel of the vehicle. If practicable, the left turn shall be made
to the left of the center of the intersection and so as to leave the
intersection or other location in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available
to traffic moving in the same direction as the vehicle on the roadway being
entered.
(SDCL § 32-26-18)
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard. The driver after having so yielded and having
given a signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn.
(SDCL § 32-26-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.072 TURNING FROM WRONG LANE.
   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in
proper position upon the roadway as required by §§
71.070 and
71.071. A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
(SDCL § 32-26-18.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.073 AUTHORITY TO MODIFY METHOD OF TURNING.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality may modify the method of turning at
intersections provided by §§
71.070 and
71.071(A) by clearly indicating by buttons, markers, or other direction signs
installed within an intersection the course to be followed by vehicles turning
thereat. No such signs or buttons shall be placed upon any state highway
without the approval of the Department of Transportation.
      (2)   If the municipality modifies the method of turning, it shall be a
violation not to turn in the indicated manner.
   (B)   When an intersection is so constructed and laid out that different and
clearly defined courses of travel are provided for vehicles turning to the left
or right, as the case may be, it shall be lawful for any driver in making any
such turn to follow the course thereby indicated.
(SDCL § 32-26-20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.074 STARTING, STOPPING, OR TURNING SIGNALS; WHEN REQUIRED.
   The driver of any vehicle upon a highway before starting, stopping, or
turning from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in
safety and if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement shall give a
clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and whenever the operation of any
other vehicle may be affected by such movement shall give a signal as required
in §
71.075 plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle of the intention to
make such movement.
(SDCL § 32-26-22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.075 ARM SIGNALS, MECHANICAL SIGNS, AND ELECTRICAL SIGNALS.
   The signal required in §
71.074 shall be given either by means of the hand and arm in the manner
specified in §
71.076, or by an approved mechanical or electrical signal device. However, a
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent the hand and arm signal from
being visible both to the front and rear, the signal shall be given by device
of a type which has been approved by the Department of Public Safety.
(SDCL § 32-26-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.076 MANNER OF MAKING ARM SIGNALS.
   If the signals required by §§
71.074 and
71.075 are given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his or
her intention to start, stop, or turn by extending the hand and arm from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward.
(SDCL § 32-26-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.090 DUTY OF VEHICLE DRIVER TO STOP IN CASE OF ACCIDENT.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury or
death to any person or damage to property shall immediately stop and give his
or her name and address, and the name and address of the owner and the license
number of the vehicle he or she is driving to the person struck or the driver
or occupants of any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person
injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such
person to a physician or surgeon for medical treatment if it is apparent that
such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.
(SDCL § 32-34-3) Penalty see, §
70.99
§ 71.091 IMMEDIATE REPORT TO POLICE.
   (A)   If none of the persons specified in §
71.090 are in condition to receive the information to which they otherwise
would be entitled, and no police officer is present, the driver of any vehicle
involved in such accident, after fulfilling all other requirements of §
71.090, insofar as possible on his or her part to be performed, shall forthwith
report such accident to the nearest office of a duly authorized police
authority and submit thereto the information specified in §
71.090.
(SDCL § 32-34-3.1)
   (B)   The driver of any motor vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
bodily injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent
of $1,000 or more to any one person’s property or $2,000 per accident shall
immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of the
accident to the nearest available law enforcement officer who has jurisdiction.
(SDCL § 32-34-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.092 DUTY TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR PROPERTY.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in an accident
with any vehicle or other property which is unattended resulting in any damage
to such other vehicle or property shall immediately stop and shall then and
there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other
property of his or her name, address and the name and address of the owner and
the license number of the vehicle he or she is driving or shall attach securely
in a conspicuous place in or on such vehicle or other property a written notice
giving his or her name, address, and the name and address of the owner and the
license number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall without
unnecessary delay notify the nearest office of a duly authorized police
authority. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than
is necessary.
(SDCL § 32-34-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.093 PROPERTY DAMAGE; DUTY.
   Any driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to
property shall stop his or her vehicle at the scene of the accident and
immediately give his or her name and address, and the name and address of the
owner of the vehicle. If the damage is to another motor vehicle and the owner
of the damaged vehicle is not at the scene of the accident, the driver shall
immediately leave such information on the other motor vehicle. If the damage is
to property other than a motor vehicle, and the owner of the damaged property
is not at the scene, the driver shall leave such information with the owner of
the property or with a law enforcement agency as soon as possible.
(SDCL § 32-34-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.094 PHYSICAL INCAPACITY OF DRIVER; DUTY OF OCCUPANT.
   (A)   An accident report is not required from any person who is physically
incapable of making such report during the period of such incapacity.
(SDCL § 32-34-8)
   (B)   If the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an
immediate notice of an accident and there was another occupant in the vehicle
at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or
cause to be given the notice not given by the driver.
(SDCL § 32-34-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Section
   
72.01   Standing or parked vehicles; remaining space required; unobstructed
view required
   
72.02   Safeguarding of unattended vehicle
   
72.03   Position of parking
   
72.04   Places where standing and parking prohibited
   
72.05   Places where stopping prohibited
   
72.06   Places where parking prohibited; loading and unloading
   
72.07   Parking spaces for persons with disabilities
   
72.08   Unauthorized parking or stopping
Cross-reference:
   General provisions, see
Ch. 70
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
§ 72.01 STANDING OR PARKED VEHICLES; REMAINING SPACE REQUIRED; UNOBSTRUCTED
VIEW REQUIRED.
   No person may park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon any highway unless a clear or unobstructed width of not less
than 20 feet upon the main-traveled portion of such highway opposite such
standing vehicle shall be left for free passage of other vehicles thereon, nor
unless a clear view of such vehicle may be obtained from a distance of 200 feet
in each direction upon such highway.
(SDCL § 32-30-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 SAFEGUARDING OF UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle may permit it to stand
unattended without effectively setting the brake thereon and, if standing upon
any grade, turning the front wheel to the curb or side of the highway.
(SDCL § 32-30-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 POSITION OF PARKING.
   (A)   Two-way road. Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this
section and SDCL §§ 32-30-2.2 to 32-30-2.4, inclusive, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
(SDCL § 32-30-2.1)
   (B)   One-way road. Unless otherwise provided, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the
curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement,
with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway, or its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or
edge of the roadway.
(SDCL § 32-30-2.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 PLACES WHERE STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Unless necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or unless a police
officer or official traffic control device has so directed, no person may stand
or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or
discharge a passenger or passengers:
   (A)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (B)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (C)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (D)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signals, stop sign,
yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (E)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
said entrance when properly signposted; and
   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(SDCL § 32-30-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 PLACES WHERE STOPPING PROHIBITED.
   Unless necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or unless a police
officer or official traffic control device has so directed, no person may stop,
stand, or park a vehicle:
   (A)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (B)   On a sidewalk;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   On a crosswalk;
   (E)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
   (F)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (G)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or with a
highway tunnel;
   (H)   On any railroad tracks; or
   (I)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(SDCL § 32-30-6.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 PLACES WHERE PARKING PROHIBITED; LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   Unless necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or unless a police
officer or official traffic control device has so directed, no person may park
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:
   (A)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
   (B)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(SDCL § 32-30-6.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07 PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   There are designated parking spaces which shall be accessible to and
usable by persons with physical disabilities.
   (B)   There are parking spaces that are only for use by a person using a
wheelchair.
   (C)   The parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with the Americans
With Disabilities Act as amended on January 1, 2002.
(SDCL § 32-30-11.6)
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person not having
special license plates issued under SDCL § 32-5-76, a serially numbered
certificate issued under SDCL §§ 32-5-76.1 or 32-5-76.2, or a similar license
plate or certificate issued in another state on an automobile used in
transporting that person to park in any of the above designated spaces if that
person does not display the appropriate designation of disability pursuant.
That person shall be subject to SDCL § 32-30-11.3.
(SDCL § 32-30-11.3)
Statutory reference:
   Disabled parking and time limitation, see SDCL § 32-30-11.1
§ 72.08 UNAUTHORIZED PARKING OR STOPPING.
   The owner of any vehicle not displaying a serially numbered certificate or
special license plate parked or stopped in a parking space, or blocking a
parking space, on public or private property designated as reserved for a
person with a physical disability commits a violation of this section and is
subject to SDCL § 32-30-11.4.
(SDCL § 32-30-11.4)
CHAPTER 73: SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Speeding and reckless driving prohibited
   
73.03   Age restrictions
Cross-reference:
   General provisions, see
Ch. 70
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases defined in SDCL § 32-20A-1, shall, when used in this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in such section,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
§ 73.02 SPEEDING AND RECKLESS DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   No person may operate a snowmobile in the following manner:
   (A)   At a speed that is greater than is reasonable or prudent under the
circumstances;
   (B)   In any reckless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another; or
   (C)   Without a functioning muffler complying with SDCL § 32-15-17.
(SDCL § 32-20A-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   There is no age limitation for the operation of a snowmobile. However, no
person under the age of 14 may drive a snowmobile across a roadway as defined
in SDCL § 32-14-1(27) or a highway as defined in SDCL §§ 31-1-5(1) to 31-1-5
(4), inclusive, except under the immediate direction of a parent, legal
guardian, or person who is 18 years of age or older.
(SDCL § 32-20A-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: BICYCLES
Section
   
74.01   Operation on sidewalk or crosswalk
   
74.02   Parking on sidewalk
   
74.03   Operation on roadway; riding close to right-hand curb
   
74.04   Turning, stopping, or starting signals required
   
74.05   Racing
   
74.06   Electric bicycles
Cross-reference:
   General provisions, see
Ch. 70
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
§ 74.01 OPERATION ON SIDEWALK OR CROSSWALK.
   (A)   A person operating a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except as provided in
division (B) of this section and except that bicyclists must stop before
entering a crosswalk or highway from a sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(SDCL § 32-20B-2)
   (B)   A person operating a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian.
(SDCL § 32-20B-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.02 PARKING ON SIDEWALK.
   A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or restricted by
an official traffic control device or ordinance. The parked bicycle may not
impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
(SDCL § 32-20B-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 OPERATION ON ROADWAY; RIDING CLOSE TO RIGHT-HAND CURB.
   (A)   (1)   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then
existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway.
      (2)   However, a person operating a bicycle may move from the right-hand
curb or edge of the roadway to overtake and pass another bicycle or vehicle
proceeding in the same direction, to prepare for a left turn at an intersection
or into a private road or roadway or to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it
unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE is a lane that
is too narrow for a bicycle and vehicle to travel safely side by side within
the lane.
(SDCL § 32-20B-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 TURNING, STOPPING, OR STARTING SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   A person operating a bicycle shall give a continuous signal of intention to
turn right or left during the last 100 feet traveled by the bicycle before
turning. The signal shall also be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting to
turn. A signal by hand and arm need only be given intermittently if the hand is
needed in the control operation of the bicycle. No driver of a bicycle may
overtake another vehicle on the right if the overtaken vehicle is signaling to
make a right turn. Except as provided in this section, a person operating a
bicycle shall comply with the provisions of SDCL §§ 32-26-22 and 32-26-22.1.
(SDCL § 32-20B-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.05 RACING.
   (A)   Racing in approved event authorized. A person may race a bicycle on a
highway when competing in a racing event that has been approved by the
transportation commission or local authorities on a highway under their
jurisdictions. Approval of a bicycle highway racing event may be granted only
under conditions that assure reasonable safety for all race participants,
spectators, and other highway users, and prevent unreasonable interference with
traffic flow, which would seriously inconvenience other highway users. Tests of
endurance are not considered bicycle racing.
(SDCL § 32-20B-7)
   (B)   Exemption from traffic laws. The municipality may exempt participants
in an approved bicycle highway racing event on a highway under their
jurisdiction from compliance with any traffic laws otherwise applicable
thereto, provided that traffic control is adequate to assure the safety of all
highway users.
(SDCL § 32-20B-8)
§ 74.06 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   Electric bicycle defined; classes. For purposes of this chapter, the
term ELECTRIC BICYCLE means a bicycle or a tricycle that is equipped with a
seat or saddle, with operable pedals for propulsion, and with an electric motor
of 750 watts or less.
      (1)   An electric bicycle is a class I electric bicycle if the motor
provides assistance only when the person is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when a speed of 20 mph is achieved.
      (2)   An electric bicycle is a class II electric bicycle if the motor is
capable of propelling the bicycle without the person pedaling and ceases to
provide assistance when a speed of 20 mph is achieved.
      (3)   An electric bicycle is a class III electric bicycle if the motor
provides assistance only when the person is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when a speed of 28 mph is achieved.
(SDCL § 32-20B-9)
   (B)   Label to be affixed to electric bicycle by manufacturer or
distributor; modification; violation as misdemeanor.
      (1)   Beginning January 1, 2020, any person who manufacturers or
distributes an electric bicycle in this state shall permanently affix to the
electric bicycle a label that contains the following information:
         (a)   The designated class of the electric bicycle;
         (b)   The maximum assisted speed of the electric bicycle; and
         (c)   The wattage of the electric bicycle’s motor.
      (2)   If a person makes a modification to the electric bicycle that
affects the bicycle’s maximum speed, or manner of propulsion, the person shall
amend the label required by this section to accurately reflect the required
information.
      (3)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.
(SDCL § 32-20B-10)
   (C)   Electric bicycle equipment requirements. An electric bicycle shall be
equipped so that the electric motor is disengaged or ceases to function when
the person stops pedaling or when the brakes are applied.
(SDCL § 32-20B-11)
   (D)   Designated areas of operation of electric bicycles.
      (1)   Unless otherwise prohibited by the municipality, a person may
operate a class I or class II electric bicycle on any bicycle path or multi-use
path in the municipality.
      (2)   A person may not operate a class III electric bicycle on a bicycle
path or multi-use path in this municipality unless:
         (a)   The bicycle path or multi-use path is within or adjacent to a
highway or roadway; or
         (b)   The governmental entity having jurisdiction over the bicycle
path or multi-use path expressly permits the use.
      (3)   A person may operate a class III electric bicycle on a trail that
has been designated as nonmotorized, if the trail was constructed only by
clearing or grading the native soil and without the installation or placement
of any additional surface material and if the governmental entity having
jurisdiction over the trail has not otherwise prohibited or restricted the
operation.
(SDCL § 32-20B-12)
   (E)   Age restrictions for class III electric bicycle. To operate a class
III electric bicycle in the municipality, a person shall be at least 16 years
of age. This section does not prohibit a person younger than 16 years of age
from riding as a passenger on a class III electric bicycle, if the bicycle is
designed to accommodate a passenger.
(SDCL § 32-20B-13)
   (F)   Helmet requirement for class III electric bicycle. Any person who is
less than 18 years of age and operating a class III electric bicycle and any
person who is a passenger on a class III electric bicycle, regardless of age,
shall wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet.
(SDCL § 32-20B-14)
   (G)   Speedometer requirement for class III electric bicycle. Any person
operating a class III electric bicycle shall ensure that the bicycle is
equipped with a functioning speedometer.
(SDCL § 32-20B-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES
      
91.   ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
      
92.   LITTER
      
93.   ANIMALS
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
95.   RECREATION FACILITIES
      
96.   NOISE
      
97.   PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES
Section
General
   
90.01   General authority
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Conditions and/or acts constituting a nuisance
   
90.04   Slot machine and premises public nuisance
   
90.05   Junk yards adjacent to interstate and primary highways; regulation
   
90.06   Appliances and other airtight containers
   
90.07   Harboring flies, insects, or rodents
   
90.08   Abandoned property
   
90.09   Accumulation of lumber, junk, and other materials
   
90.10   Offensive, foul, or vicious smells
   
90.11   Public nuisance not legalized by lapse of time
   
90.12   Liability of successive owners for continuing nuisance
Nuisance Vegetation
   
90.20   Certain weeds and plants declared nuisances
   
90.21   Duty to correct
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.35   Notice to owner of nuisance
   
90.36   Failure to comply with notice; removal of nuisance; costs
   
90.37   Hearing; time; issuance of order; appeal
   
90.38   Abatement of nuisance, notice required, taxing cost of abatement, civil
action
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Loud and raucous noise, see §
131.05
GENERAL
§ 90.01 GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   This municipality shall have the power to declare what shall constitute a
nuisance and prevent, abate, and remove the same pursuant to SDCL § 9-29-13.
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Any deteriorated, wrecked, or derelict property in
unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value, if
any, and which has been left unprotected outside of a permanent structure from
the elements, and shall include, with being so restricted, deteriorated,
wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats,
machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture, and
any other similar articles in such a condition.
   ANIMAL WASTE. Any accumulation of waste manure or straw resulting from the
transportation, housing, or confining of animals not awaiting transportation,
sale, or slaughter in a duly licensed stockyard, sale pavilion, or hatchery.
ANIMAL WASTE is also known as LIVESTOCK WASTE.
   APPLIANCE. Any household or office device operated by gas or electrical
current which would include, by not be limited to, stoves, refrigerators,
washing machines, and dryers.
   BREEDING PLACES FOR FLIES. The accumulation of manure, garbage, or anything
whatever which are harboring places and breeding places for flies.
   BREEDING PLACES FOR RATS AND OTHER RODENTS. The accumulation of manure,
garbage, or anything whatever which are harboring places and breeding places
for rats and other rodents.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The municipal health inspector, the fire inspector, the
building inspector, their respective authorized representatives, or any other
municipal official authorized by the governing body with the enforcement of
this code.
   GARBAGE and REFUSE. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained
or to accumulate upon any public or private property any animal or vegetable
matter which attends the processing, preparation, transportation, cooking,
eating, sale or storage of meat, fish, vegetables, fruit, and other food or
food products found within the municipality which arc likely to transmit
disease or which may be a hazard to health.
   GARBAGE HANDLING IMPROPERLY. Throwing or letting fall on or permitting to
remain on any street, alley, or public ground any manure, garbage, rubbish,
filth, fuel, or wood while engaged in handling or removing any such substances.
   IMPERFECT PLUMBING. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean, or filthy sink, water
closet, urinal, or other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by
human beings.
   MANURE. The accumulation of MANURE or livestock waste unless it be in a
securely tied, closed biodegradable package placed in a leak-proof container
with a tight fitting cover.
   NUISANCE. A NUISANCE consists in unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to
perform a duty, which act or omission either:
      (1)   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, bay, stream, canal
or basin, or any public park, square, sidewalk, street, or highway;
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use of
property; and
(SDCL § 21-10-1)
      (5)   Nothing which is done or maintained under the express authority of
a statute can be a NUISANCE.
(SDCL § 21-10-2)
   POLLUTING RIVER. Throwing or leaving any dead animal or decayed animal or
vegetable matter or any slops or filth whatsoever, either solid or fluid, into
any pool water.
   PREMISES. A lot or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, parking areas
thereon, walkways, and sidewalks.
   PRIVATE NUISANCE. Every other nuisance that is not a public nuisance is a
PRIVATE NUISANCE.
(SDCL § 21-10-3)
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. One which affects at the same time an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal.
(SDCL § 21-10-3)
   RUBBISH. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any combustible refuse matter
such as paper, sweepings, rags, grass, tree branches, wood shavings, wood,
magazines, cardboard, and the like.
   STAGNANT WATER. Any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae exist.
   VEGETATION.
      (1)   All weeds or plants declared to be primary or noxious weed or
secondary noxious weed by the State Weed Board and all other weed and grass
growing upon any lot or parcel of land in the municipality to a greater height
than eight inches which have gone or are about to go to seed. This section does
not prohibit the cultivation of crops.
      (2)   Fallen tree limbs, dead trees, and dead tree limbs, which in the
opinion of the governing body or appointed official constitute a health,
safety, or fire hazard.
      (3)   Limbs of trees hanging within less than seven feet in height from
any sidewalk or 14 feet
in height from the traveled portion or parking area of any street or road
right-of-way within the municipality, all of which collectively are hereinafter
referred to as OVERHANGING LIMBS.
   WASTE MATERIAL. All noncombustible inorganic matter such as ashes, glass,
sand, earth, stones, concrete, mortar, metals, tin cans and the like.
§ 90.03 CONDITIONS AND/OR ACTS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE.
   One or more of the following conditions and/or acts either alone or in
combination with other, which at the same time affects an entire community or
neighborhood, or a considerable number or persons, although the extent of
annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal, constitutes
a public nuisance, however this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
   (A)   The keeping of a premises at variance with the zoning laws applicable
to the premises;
   (B)   The interference, obstructing, or rendering dangerous for passage any
lake, or navigable river, bay, stream, public park, street, alley, or highway;
   (C)   Broken windows, doors, attic vents, and underfloor vents;
   (D)   Allowing the exterior building coverings to deteriorate as to
encourage decay, dry rot, warping, and cracking;
   (E)   Any malfunctioning, leaking, unclean or filthy sink, water closet,
urinal, or other plumbing fixture in any building open for public use;
   (F)   Any sign or sign structure that is dismantled, partially dismantled,
defective, broken, deteriorated, in disrepair or defaced;
   (G)   The accumulation of dead animals or fowl, animal or fowl matter or
waste of any kind, dead, decayed, diseased trees, and other vegetation;
   (H)   Failure to store in a covered metal container or throwing or letting
fall on or permit to remain on any street, alley or public ground any manure,
garbage, rubbish, filth, fuel, small dead animals, wood, or like material;
   (I)   Allowing the movement by natural elements, or the accumulation, or
discarding, or throwing of litter, which would include, but not be limited to,
trash, refuse, debris, newspapers, magazines, glass, plastic containers, or
styrofoam containers;
   (J)   Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or be
accumulated upon any public or private property any combustible refuse matter
such as papers, sweepings, rags, grass, tree branches, wood shavings, wood,
magazines, cardboard, and the like;
   (K)   The accumulation of junk and/or litter maintained upon any premises;
   (L)   Undressed hides kept longer than 24 hours, except at the place where
they are to be manufactured, or in storeroom or basement whose construction is
approved by the health department;
   (M)   Parking or permitting a livestock truck or trailer to remain on any
street, area or public ground in a residential district when such truck or
trailer gives off an offensive odor or is contaminated with manure or other
filth;
   (N)   Any excavation or depression in which stagnant water is permitted to
collect or allow for the multiplication of insects;
   (O)   (1)   Maintaining upon such premises or upon the sidewalk abutting or
adjoining such lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, loose earth, mounds of
soil, fill material, asphalt, concrete rubble or waste material of any kind
(all such materials shall hereinafter be referred to as waste materials),
except for waste materials used for construction or landscaping upon premises
in which case it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, occupant, or persons
in possession of premises wherein waste material exist, to maintain weed
control during construction and to level or remove waste materials after
construction is completed, or in any event, within eight months for time or
placement of waste materials.
      (2)   For sites where filling, grading, or excavation activities have or
will span more than one year, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessees,
occupant, or person on possession of said premises to level or remove the waste
materials from said premises at least once each year during the months of
either June, July, or August for the purpose of maintaining weed and rodent
control.
   (P)   Livestock and poultry when a public nuisance. The collecting, keeping
or feeding of any cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, or poultry upon premises
which are not maintained in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition, free
from any noxious or offensive odor, or which will unreasonably interfere with
the proper enjoyment of property in the area for residential or business
purposes.
Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Land usage, see Title XV
§ 90.04 SLOT MACHINE AND PREMISES PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   All slot machines capable of being used for gambling and places where
they are kept or operated together with all property of any kind kept or used
in connection with the operation of the same, are hereby declared to be public
nuisances.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the manufacture, or any act appurtenant
to the manufacture, of slot machines, or devices in this state for
distribution.
(SDCL § 22-25-14) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 JUNK YARDS ADJACENT TO INTERSTATE AND PRIMARY HIGHWAYS; REGULATION.
   (A)   For the purposes of promoting the public safety, health, welfare,
convenience, and enjoyment of public travel, to protect the public investment
in public highways, and to preserve and enhance the scenic beauty of lands
bordering public highways, it is hereby declared to be in the public interest
to regulate and restrict the establishment, operation, and maintenance of junk
yards in areas adjacent to the interstate and primary systems within this
state.
   (B)   Junkyards that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter are
public nuisances.
(SDCL § 31-30-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 APPLIANCES AND OTHER AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (A)   The keeping of any discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight
container is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and the same shall
be abated as provided by state law and the abatement of such nuisance shall
not, in any manner, affect any penalty which may be imposed for the violation
of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain
outside of any dwelling, building, or other structure or within any unoccupied
or abandoned building, dwelling, or other structure under his or her control in
a place accessible to children any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator,
or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock, or other
locking device which may not be released rom the inside, without first removing
the door or lid, snap lock, or other locking device from the icebox,
refrigerator, or container.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 HARBORING FLIES, INSECTS, OR RODENTS.
   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to place, leave, dump, or permit the
accumulation of manure, garbage, or anything whatever, which harbors or favors
the multiplication of flies, insects, or rodents.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to leave abandoned, discarded, or unused
furniture, appliances, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or
equipment and any property of any kind on any street, alley, or public place.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 ACCUMULATION OF LUMBER, JUNK, AND OTHER MATERIALS.
   (A)   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to allow the accumulation of
lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, or any other material unless place on
open racks that are elevated not less than eight inches above ground, and
evenly piled or stacked so that such material will not afford harborage for
rodents.
   (B)   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to allow the accumulation of junk,
old iron, or parts of motor vehicles, campers, trailers, tractors, or other
like property.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 OFFENSIVE, FOUL, OR VICIOUS SMELLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, within the limits of the
municipality to permit or suffer any public nuisance involving offensive, foul
or vicious smelling substances upon his or her property.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 PUBLIC NUISANCE NOT LEGALIZED BY LAPSE OF TIME.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance, amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(SDCL § 21-10-4)
§ 90.12 LIABILITY OF SUCCESSIVE OWNERS FOR CONTINUING NUISANCE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon, or in the use of, such property, created by a former owner, is
liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.
(SDCL § 21-10-8) Penalty, see §
90.99
NUISANCE VEGETATION
§ 90.20 CERTAIN WEEDS AND PLANTS DECLARED NUISANCES.
   The following named weeds and plants shall be deemed dangerous and unhealthy
and are declared to be nuisances: ragweed; pulsey; pigweed; nettle; thistle of
any kind; sunflower; goldenrod; tumbleweed; burdock; cocklebur; sandbar; wild
oats; sticktight; milkweed; mustard; and any and all other variety or weeds and
vegetation deemed to be noxious, obnoxious, dangerous, and unhealthy or deemed
to be a nuisance by the building official and all other weeds and grasses
growing upon any lot or parcel of land in the municipality to a greater height
than 12 inches or which have gone or are about to go to seed.
§ 90.21 DUTY TO CORRECT.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant, person in charge, or owner of any lot
or parcel of land in the municipality to keep such lot, to include any abutting
municipal right-of-way, commonly known as the municipal boulevard, free of such
nuisance vegetation by cutting, spraying, or removal, as may be appropriate.
Penalty, see §
90.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.35 NOTICE TO OWNER OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   If any nuisance, source of filth, cause of sickness, or condition
which endangers the public health is found on any property, the county health
officer shall, by written notice served personally or by mail upon the property
owner, describe the nuisance or condition found to exist and any corrective
action to be taken by the owner of the property.
   (B)   The written notice shall inform the owner of the property that he or
she shall either take the stated corrective action or file a written request
for hearing within 30 days from the date of service of the notice. The notice
shall further state if the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the
notice, the health officer shall proceed to have the nuisance or condition
complained of abated at the expense of the property owner.
(SDCL § 34-16-19)
§ 90.36 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE; REMOVAL OF NUISANCE; COSTS.
   If an owner of property fails to comply with the requirements of a notice
served pursuant to SDCL § 34-16-19, the health officer shall proceed to have
the nuisance, source of filth, cause of sickness or condition which endangers
the public health removed from the property or abated and report the cost of
the removal or abatement to the municipality. The cost of such removal or
abatement shall be assessed and charged against the property on which the
nuisance or condition was located in the manner that other taxes are collected.
(SDCL § 34-16-20)
§ 90.37 HEARING; TIME; ISSUANCE OF ORDER; APPEAL.
   Any hearing requested pursuant to SDCL § 34-16-19 shall be held during an
open session of the governing body and shall be held no later than 45 days
after filing the request for hearing. Following hearing, the governing body
shall issue an appropriate order, including a statement of any corrective
action which the board deems necessary. A decision of the governing body may be
appealed to the circuit court in accordance with the provisions of SDCL Chapter
7-8.
(SDCL § 34-16-21)
§ 90.38 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE, NOTICE REQUIRED, TAXING COST OF ABATEMENT, CIVIL
ACTION.
   (A)   A public nuisance may be abated without civil action by any public
body or officer as authorized by law. Any municipality may defray the cost of
abating a public nuisance by taxing the cost thereof by special assessment
against the real property on which the nuisance occurred or against the real
property abutting or adjoining the unrepaired sidewalk as set forth in §
94.32 of this title. If the nuisance abated is an unsafe or dilapidated
building, unrepaired sidewalk, junk, trash, debris, or similar nuisance arising
from the condition of the property, the municipality may commence a civil
action against the owner of the real property for its costs of abatement in
lieu of taxing the cost by special assessment.
   (B)   Any private person may abate a public nuisance which is specially
injurious to that person or any private nuisance injurious to that person by
removing or if necessary destroying that which constitutes the nuisance without
committing a breach of the peace or doing unnecessary injury. If a private
nuisance results from a mere omission of the wrongdoer, and cannot be abated
without entering upon the wrongdoer’s land, reasonable notice shall be given to
the wrongdoer before entering to abate it.
(SDCL § 21-10-6)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who maintains or commits any public nuisance, the
punishment for which is not otherwise prescribed, or who intentionally does not
perform any legal duty relating the removal of a public nuisance, may be
punished by not more than 30 days in jail or a fine not to exceed $500, or
both.
   (B)   It shall be a violation for any person who has been served with
personal notice by a law enforcement agency concerning the condition of such
person’s property to fail to abate the public nuisance within 60 days of
receipt of the personal notice.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Storing, parking, or leaving vehicles declared a nuisance
   
91.03   Exceptions
   
91.04   Presence on private property prohibited
   
91.05   Racing or antique vehicles
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle as deemed hereinabove which is
left unattended on any public street, alley, public place, or parking lot
within the municipality for a longer period than 24 hours without notifying the
chief of police and making arrangements for the parking of such motor vehicle.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any car bodies, wrecked cars, abandoned and unusable
cars, car bodies or equipment of any type, except in authorized junk vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf-
carts, campers, and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the municipality which is
privately owned and which is not public property as defined herein.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, alley, or highway, or boulevard which shall
include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and also means any other
publicly owned property or facility.
   REMOVAL AGENCY. Any public body, private or nonprofit organization
authorized by the municipality to remove and salvage abandoned or inoperable
motor vehicles.
   VEHICLE. Any conveyance which is designed to travel along the ground or in
the water and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, pull trailers, go-
carts, golf carts, boats, campers, and trailers.
§ 91.02 STORING, PARKING, OR LEAVING VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   The presence of an abandoned, discarded, wrecked, burned, dismantled,
inoperable, junked, or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private
or public property is hereby declared a nuisance, which may be abated as such
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful to keep or place any of such vehicles or vehicle parts:
      (1)   Upon public streets or property except on an emergency basis; or
      (2)   Upon private property of any person owning, in charge of, or in
control of any real property in the municipality, whether as an owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee, or otherwise, for longer than 14 days unless it is within a
carport, fully enclosed building or structure. A tarpaulin, tent, or other
similar temporary structure shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of
this section.
   (C)   In no event shall an inoperable vehicle that constitutes an imminent
health, safety, or fire hazard be kept located on any premises.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   One inoperable vehicle kept on private property without being shielded
from public view if licensed and kept on a private driveway. If this inoperable
vehicle is in a state of externally visible disrepair or disassembly, it shall
not be kept on the private driveway for longer than 14 days;
   (B)   Filing stations, automobile repair shops, or any other motor vehicle
related business in compliance with applicable municipal ordinances may place
inoperable vehicles being repaired or offered for sale on the premises; or
   (C)   Junkyards operated and maintained in compliance with municipal
ordinances.
§ 91.04 PRESENCE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   No person owning, in charge of, or in control of any real property within
the municipality, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise,
shall allow any abandoned or junk motor vehicle of any kind to remain on such
property longer than 30 days.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 RACING OR ANTIQUE VEHICLES.
   No owner or occupant of private property shall have an uncovered motor
vehicle in an inoperable condition specifically adopted or designed for
operation on drag strips or raceways or an uncovered motor vehicle retained on
private property for antique collection purposes.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: LITTER
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Throwing or depositing in or upon streets, sidewalks, or public or
private places
   
92.03   Sweeping into gutters, streets, or other public places
   
92.04   Litter not contained prohibited
   
92.05   Hauling
   
92.06   Construction sites
   
92.07   Loading or unloading options
   
92.08   Distribution of handbills
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the storage,
distribution, handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature.
   LITTER. Any quantity garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, debris, or other waste
material including, but not limited to, cans, bottles, jars, treated or
untreated paper, wrappings, ashes, cigarettes, cardboard, rags, yard clippings,
leaves, grass, wood, glass, crockery, dead animals, scrap metal, salvaged
metal, and motor vehicle parts that is not in a container.
   LITTER TO BE CONTAINED. Any litter which is not enclosed within a building
or placed securely in a container designed or reasonably adapted for use as a
place for storing litter for the purpose of collection for disposal.
§ 92.02 THROWING OR DEPOSITING IN OR UPON STREETS, SIDEWALKS, OR PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any litter in or upon any street, sidewalk,
or other public place or any private property except in public or private
containers designed and intended for the collection of litter. Persons placing
litter in such containers shall do so in such manner as to prevent its being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public
place or private property.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 SWEEPING INTO GUTTERS, STREETS, OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public
place within the municipality any accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 LITTER NOT CONTAINED PROHIBITED.
   Any person being the owner, tenant, or person in control of any private
property shall at all time maintain the premises free of litter that is not
contained.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 HAULING.
   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless such vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents, or litter from
falling, being blown, or otherwise being deposited upon any street, alley,
other public place, or any private property.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   No person being the owner or person in charge of any property upon
which a structure is being constructed or demolished shall permit the
accumulation of litter that is not contained upon such property or permit
litter therefrom to become blown or scattered upon such property or any
property or public place.
   (B)   No person being the owner of any property upon which a structure is
being constructed or demolished shall fail to provide adequate containers to
hold all litter produced upon such property or otherwise appearing thereon.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 LOADING OR UNLOADING OPTIONS.
   No person owning or having charge of any premises upon which objects or
materials are being loaded upon or unloaded from any vehicle or other device
for conveyance shall permit any litter that is not contained resulting from
such loading or unloading to accumulate upon such property or to be blown or
scattered upon such property or any other property or public place.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.
   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any street,
sidewalk, or public place nor shall any person throw, deposit or place any
handbill upon any vehicle without the specific and immediate consent of the
person having charge of such vehicle. This section shall not prohibit the
handing out of handbills to persons willing to receive such handbill.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be punishable by not more
than 30 days in jail or a fine not to exceed $500 or both.
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
CHAPTER 93: ANIMALS
Section
General
   
93.001   Authority
   
93.002   Definitions
   
93.003   Animal control officer
Vicious Animals
   
93.020   Ownership of vicious dog
   
93.021   Vicious dog defined
   
93.022   Injury to person trespassing; teasing dog; attempting to commit crime
   
93.023   Determination that animal is a vicious dog
Rabies Control
   
93.040   Vaccination required
   
93.041   Report of rabies
   
93.042   Impoundment of animal that has bitten or attacked
   
93.043   Confinement of pet after attack upon person
   
93.044   Confinement of pet bitten by animal suspected of having rabies
   
93.045   Destruction of animal required
Licensing
   
93.060   Licensing of dogs and cats required
   
93.061   Application for license certificate and tag
Miscellaneous Regulations
   
93.075   Keeping of animals
   
93.076   Disturbing the peace
   
93.077   Stray, abandoned, or unkept animals
   
93.078   Number of pets limited
   
93.079   Responsibility
   
93.080   Running at large prohibited
   
93.081   Neglect, abandonment, mistreatment of animal
   
93.082   Cruelty to animals
   
93.083   Unattended animals
Impoundment
   
93.095   Authority to impound
   
93.096   Notice to owner
   
93.097   Redemption of animal by person other than owner
   
93.098   Disposition of unredeemed animals
   
93.099   Costs
Administration and Enforcement
   
93.115   Enforcement; authority
   
93.116   Interference with enforcement
   
93.117   Failure to comply with a warning ticket
   
93.118   Record keeping requirements
   
93.119   Payment of fees and charges; stopping payment or issuing bad check
prohibited
 
   
93.999   Penalty
GENERAL
§ 93.001 AUTHORITY.
   This municipality shall have the power to regulate or prohibit the running
at large of dogs, animals, and poultry, to establish pounds, appoint
poundmasters, and regulate the impounding of animals, and to impose a tax or
license on dogs running at large pursuant to SDCL § 9-29-12.
§ 93.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. Giving up with the intent of never again regaining one’s
interests in, or rights to, an animal other than placing ownership with a
responsible party.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, or fish, except humans.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. An individual, approved by the governing body, with
police authority, whose duty it is to apprehend animals withing the
jurisdiction of this chapter whose owner are in violation of this chapter. The
police department shall also act as animal control officers.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A building and facilities therein approved by the governing
board and the health authority for the impounding of animals.
   ANTI-ESCAPE. Any housing, fencing, or device which a guard dog cannot go
over, under, through, or around.
   AT LARGE.
      (1)   An animal when off or away from the premises and not under the
control of the owner, possessor, keeper, agent, servant, or a member of its
immediate family by a leash.
      (2)   An animal when on the premises of the owner, possessor, keeper,
agent, or servant if not attended by a competent person unless that animal is
chained, restrained, enclosed, or confined in a manner preventing it from
leaving the premises.
   CONTRACTED AGENT. The person, organization, governmental agency, or
corporation with whom the municipality and/or county contracts to perform
animal control functions.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal that through long association with humans, has
been bred to a degree which has resulted in genetic changes affecting the
temperament, color, conformation, or other attributes of the species to an
extent that makes it unique and different from wild individuals of its kind.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. An animal has been EXPOSED TO RABIES if it has been
bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal known to be or suspected of being
infected with rabies.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog that is utilized to protect commercial property, or is
housed unattended on commercial property at any time other than normal business
hours, except that such definition shall not apply to pet stores, boarding
kennels, veterinary offices, and animal shelters.
   HANDLER. A person who is responsible for or capable of controlling the
operations of a guard dog.
   HUMANE SOCIETY INVESTIGATOR. An individual, approved by the governing body,
with police authority, whose duty it is to apprehend animals within the
jurisdiction of this chapter, whose owners are in violation of this chapter.
   IMPOUNDMENT. Taking physical control and custody of an animal.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises or portion thereof where four or more dogs,
cats, rabbits, or other household/domesticated animals, six months of age or
older, are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for, in return for any
compensation, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
   NEUTERED DOG/CAT. Any male dog/cat which has undergone surgery to prevent
reproduction, whose owner can provide proof of surgery.
   OWNER. Any person harboring or keeping an animal and who is the head of the
household of the residence of the owner or manager in charge of the
establishment or premises at which an animal remains or returns to. An animal
shall be deemed harbored if it is fed or sheltered for 20 consecutive days.
(SDCL § 40-12-4)
   PET. Any dog, cat, or other species of carnivore kept for domestication or
display.
(SDCL § 40-12-4)
   RESTRAINT. A leash or chain, not longer than six feet in length, held by a
competent person, or enclosing an animal within a vehicle being driven or
parked on the streets, or keeping the animal within the property limits of its
owner or keeper.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. Any dog owned by any state, county, or municipal police
department or any state of federal law enforcement agency which has been
trained to aid law enforcement officers and is actually being used for law
enforcement purposes, or any properly trained dog certified by a licensed
seeing-eye or hearing-ear dog agency and actually being used by a visually or
hearing impaired person.
   SHELTER MANAGER. The owner and/or supervisor of the animal shelter, either
as an employee of the municipality or a contractor with the municipality. The
individual is charged, together with the police department, with the overall
enforcement of this chapter, and performs the professional services required in
the care, treatment, or euthanization of the animals being handled.
   SPAYED DOG/CAT. Any female dog/cat which has undergone surgery to prevent
conception, whose owners can provide suitable proof of such surgery.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal(s) other than domestic dogs and cats, which in a
wild state are carnivorous or which because of their nature or physical make up
are capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings,
including, but not limited to, animal(s) which belong to the cat family, snakes
which are poisonous or otherwise present a risk of serious physical harm of
death to human beings as a result of their nature or physical makeup, and all
raccoons, skunks, foxes, bears, coyotes, wolverines, badgers, lions, and
tigers.
§ 93.003 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   The animal control officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and
may issue citations for violations of this chapter or may issue warning tickets
requiring correction of a violation.
VICIOUS ANIMALS
§ 93.020 OWNERSHIP OF VICIOUS DOG.
   Any person owning or keeping a vicious dog as defined in SDCL §§ 40-34-13
through 40-34-15, has committed a public nuisance and is subject to the
provisions of SDCL §§ 21-10-5 and 21-10-9.
(SDCL § 40-34-13)
§ 93.021 VICIOUS DOG DEFINED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, a VICIOUS DOG is:
      (1)   Any dog, which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner
approaches in apparent attitude of attack, or bites, inflicts injury, assaults,
or otherwise attacks a human being upon the streets, sidewalks or any public
grounds or places; or
      (2)   Any dog which, on private property, when unprovoked, in a vicious
or terrifying manner approaches in apparent attitude of attack, or bite, or
inflicts injury, or other wise attacks a mailman, meter reader, serviceman,
journeyman, delivery man, or other employed person who is on private property
by reason of permission of the owner or occupant of such property or who is on
private property by reason a course of dealing with the owner of such private
property.
(SDCL § 40-34-14)
   (B)   Every vicious dog and every dog which has the habit of barking or
howling in the night, or one that habitually chases and barks at vehicles
disturbing and annoying any person or neighborhood, or one that shall injure or
destroy any lawn, garden, shrubbery, flowers or vines, is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, and no person shall keep or harbor any such dog.
§ 93.022 INJURY TO PERSON TRESPASSING; TEASING DOG; ATTEMPTING TO COMMIT CRIME.
   No dog may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by any
person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises
occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or who was teasing, tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a
crime.
(SDCL § 40-34-15)
§ 93.023 DETERMINATION THAT ANIMAL IS A VICIOUS DOG.
   (A)   When the animal control officer determines that an animal is vicious,
he or she shall notify the owner of such declaration in writing that such
animal must be registered as a vicious animal withing five business days after
the receipt of such written notice. The notice shall be served either in person
or by mailing such notice by certified mail.
   (B)   The owner of an animal that has been declared vicious shall make
application to the animal control office to register such vicious animal and
shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The owner of the animal shall notify the animal control officer of
the following:
         (a)   Ownership of the animal;
         (b)   Name, address, and telephone number of new owner;
         (c)   Address change of the owner or of any change in where the animal
is housed;
         (d)   A change in the health status of the animal; and
         (e)   Death of the animal.
      (2)   If the animal is indoors, the animal shall be under the control of
a person over 18 years old.
      (3)   If the animal is outdoors and attended, the animal shall be
muzzled, on a leash no longer than six feet and under the control of a person
over 18 years of age.
      (4)   If the animal is outdoors and unattended, the animal must be locked
in an escape-proof kennel approved by the animal control officer.
      (5)   The minimum standard for fencing, pens, or similar structures are
the following:
         (a)   Fencing materials shall not have opening with a diameter of more
than two inches; in the case of a wooden fence, the gaps shall not be more than
two inches.
         (b)   Any gates within in such pen or structure shall be lockable and
of such design to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the animal.
         (c)   The required pen or structure shall have secure sides and a
secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the side, the
sides shall be imbedded into the ground or concrete.
         (d)   The pen or structure must protect the animal from the elements.
         (e)   The pen or structure may be required to have double exterior
walls to prevent the insertion of fingers, hands, or other objects.
      (6)   The animal shall be permanently identified by injecting an
identification microchip into the animal using standard veterinary procedures
and practices. The number and the veterinarian who injected the microchip is to
be reported to the animal control officer.
      (7)   A universal sign denoting a vicious animal shall be displayed on
the kennel or enclosure and on a place visible from the sidewalk or road
adjacent to the property where the animal is kept.
      (8)   The owner shall carry $100,000 liability insurance covering the
medical and/or veterinary costs resulting from the vicious actions or any other
damage the animal may do or cause to be done. Proof of such insurance shall be
filed with the animal control officer.
      (9)   The owner shall present proof of current rabies vaccination and
current municipal license of the animal to the animal control officer.
      (10)   The owner shall present proof to the animal control officer that
the animal has been altered to prevent reproduction.
   (C)   The vicious animal shall be impounded by the animal control officer at
the owner’s expense until such time as all provisions of division (B) of this
section have been complied with.
   (D)   If the provisions of division (B) of this section have not been met,
the animal shall be seized and euthanized in a humane manner.
   (E)   (1)   Any vicious animal found off the premises of its owner, other
than provided for in this chapter, shall be seized by the animal control
officer or any police officer and impounded. If the animal cannot be captured,
it shall be destroyed.
      (2)   If the animal has been running at large, or bites a person, or
bites another animal, that animal control officer or any police officer may
order the owner to deliver the animal to the shelter within 24 hours and the
owner ordered to appear in court to show cause why the animal shall not be
destroyed. If the owner of the animal fails to deliver the animal as ordered,
the animal control officer or any police officer shall use such means as
necessary to impound the animal.
RABIES CONTROL
§ 93.040 VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any dog, cat, or other animal susceptible to rabies, held as a pet in
this municipality, that is six months of age or older, is required to be
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian or other qualified
individual approved by the health authority. All subsequent rabies vaccinations
as required by the health authority shall also be given at the appropriate
intervals.
   (B)   Any owner of a dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies that is
acquired by birth, purchase, or adoption shall have that animal vaccinated
within one month of such acquisition or when that animal reaches the age of six
months.
§ 93.041 REPORT OF RABIES.
   Any person who knows of an animal infected with rabies shall report the same
to the animal control officer with a description of the animal and the name and
address of the owner, if known.
§ 93.042 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMAL THAT HAS BITTEN OR ATTACKED.
   (A)   When an owner of an animal has been notified that animal has bitten or
attacked any person, within 24 hours, that owner shall place the animal under
the care and control of the animal control officer for a period of not less
than ten days.
   (B)   At the end of the ten-day period, the animal control officer shall
examine that confined animal and if cleared, the animal may be reclaimed by the
owner. The owner is to pay all expenses incident to the confinement and
examination.
   (C)   If, during confinement, the animal shows signs of rabies or it is
known that animal has been exposed to rabies, then that animal may be confined
in excess of the ten-day period and for as long a period as is necessary to
determine a diagnosis.
   (D)   Any animal that has bitten or attacked and cannot be captured, may be
destroyed in such a way as not to destroy the head so that it may be submitted
to a laboratory for a rabies examination.
   (E)   (1)   Within 24 hours of the bite, if an owner of the animal that has
bitten or attacked can provide proof of a current rabies vaccination given
within 30 days prior to the date of the bite or attack, then he or she may
prevent the euthanization of the animal by order of the health authority or a
veterinarian from the board of health.
      (2)   Any animal that has bitten any person may be euthanized by order or
the health authority, if in its opinion and based on sound medical judgements,
a greater risk is present if the animal is not euthanized. The health authority
shall take into consideration the following factors:
         (a)   History of the animal, including its exposure to rabies;
         (b)   Vaccination record of the animal;
         (c)   Health of animal;
         (d)   Nature, seriousness, and location of bite;
         (e)   Circumstances surrounding the bite, including whether or not the
bitten animal provoked it; and
         (f)   Tolerance of person bitten to vaccination treatments.
§ 93.043 CONFINEMENT OF PET AFTER ATTACK UPON PERSON.
   The department may serve written notice upon the owner of any dog or cat
which has attacked or bitten a person to confine the animal at the owner’s
expense upon his or her premises or at a municipal pound or other place
designated in the notice for a period of at least ten days after the animal has
attacked or bitten any person. The department may examine the animal at any
time within the ten-day period of confinement to determine whether such animal
shows symptoms of rabies. In the case of any pet other than a dog or cat, which
has attacked or bitten a person, the department may serve written notice upon
the owner of such animal that the owner shall have the animal euthanized
immediately and submit the brain to an approved laboratory for rabies
examination.
(SDCL § 40-12-5)
§ 93.044 CONFINEMENT OF PET BITTEN BY ANIMAL SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES.
   The department may serve written notice upon the owner of a dog or cat known
to have been bitten by an animal known or suspected of being affected by
rabies, requiring the owner to confine such dog or cat for a period of not less
than six months. However, if such dog or cat had been properly treated with an
antirabic vaccine, confinement shall be for a period of not less than three
months. In the case of any pet other than a dog or cat, the department may
serve written notice upon the owner of such animal that the owner shall have
the animal euthanized immediately.
(SDCL § 40-12-6)
§ 93.045 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMAL REQUIRED.
   If the animal control officer determines that rabies exists in any animal,
the board may kill such animal and any animal there is reason to believe an
animal or person has been bitten by any animal affected with rabies.
LICENSING
§ 93.060 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS REQUIRED.
   Each owner of a dog or cat that is the age of six months or over, within 30
days of the acquisition of the animal or within 30 days of the animal turning
that age, shall have that animal licensed. Proof of rabies immunization and the
proper fee shall be required at the time application for such licenses is made.
§ 93.061 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE CERTIFICATE AND TAG.
   (A)   Every owner of a dog or cat residing within the municipality shall
submit an application for a license for each animal owned that is six months of
age or older. A renewal application shall be submitted within one year of the
issuance of the initial application and annually thereafter.
   (B)   Upon proper receipt of the application, a certificate and tag shall be
issued to the owner of the animal. The certificate shall be in possession of
the owner and the license shall be affixed to the licensed animal at all times.
If there is a change of ownership, loss, or death of the animal, the owner
shall notify animal control of the event within ten days.
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§ 93.075 KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The keeping of animals shall not be on such a scale so as to create a
nuisance. This prohibition includes the domestic fowl of the order Galliformes
and Gallinaceous (fowl-like birds), and the order Anseriformes (water fowl).
   (B)   Nothing is this sections shall prohibit the keeping of the domestic
cat (Felis catus), the European polecat (Mustela putorius foro) otherwise known
as the ferret, or the domestic dog (Canis familiaris), as long as the licensing
or permit procedures and all other provisions of this chapter are followed.
   (C)   It is considered a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to
keep and maintain (other than the care and treatment of injured or abandoned
birds and animals by people licensed for that purpose) or sell native fur
bearers, bears, mountain lions, bobcats, lynx, panthers, endangered species,
exotic cats, or venomous snakes.
§ 93.076 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   The owner or custodian of an animal shall not allow the animal to
create a disturbance by making loud noises at any time of the night or day.
   (B)   Any animal control officer or police officer may remove and impound
any animal which is disturbing the peace when the owner of animal cannot be
located. A notice advising the owner of the impoundment shall be left on the
premises.
   (C)   Any person having custody or control of any female dog or cat in heat
shall be required to keep such dot or cat confined in a building, secure
enclosure, veterinary hospital, or boarding kennel so that it cannot attract or
come into contact with another animal on public or private property except for
controlled breeding purposes.
§ 93.077 STRAY, ABANDONED, OR UNKEPT ANIMALS.
   No person shall harbor or keep any stray animals. Animals known to be strays
shall be immediately reported to the animal control officer.
§ 93.078 NUMBER OF PETS LIMITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to have or to keep more than four domestic
pets over the age of six months, except birds and fish on any lot or premises
in the municipality, unless such person residing on or in the lot or premises
has a valid kennel license issued by the municipality. The humane society,
veterinarian offices, and retail pet stores are exempt from the provisions of
this section.
§ 93.079 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   No person shall create or maintain any condition or operate any
equipment or keep any animal, fowl, pet, or insect under his or her
jurisdiction in such a way that such condition or operation causes or likely to
cause the transmission of diseases from animals or insects to humans.
   (B)   No owner, caretaker, or attendant of an animal shall allow an animal
to defecate on public or private property other than his or her own. If such
animal does defecate upon public or private property, the owner, keeper,
caretaker, or attendant must immediately and thoroughly clean the fecal matter
from such property.
   (C)   Anyone walking an animal on public or private property other than his
or her own must carry with him or her visible means of cleaning up any fecal
matter left by the animal. Animals used in parades or involved in law
enforcement are exempt from this division (C).
§ 93.080 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have any animal which is owned, kept,
harbored, or allowed to be habitually in or upon the premises occupied by him
or her under his or her control to be at large and to go in or upon the private
premises of others or upon public property.
§ 93.081 NEGLECT, ABANDONMENT, OR MISTREATMENT OF ANIMAL.
   No person owning or responsible for the care of an animal may neglect,
abandon, or mistreat the animal, except that any person may abandon a feral cat
for which the person assumed responsibility with the sole purpose of spaying or
neutering the cat.
(SDCL § 40-1-2.3) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.082 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person may subject an animal to cruelty.
(SDCL § 40-1-2.4) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.083 UNATTENDED ANIMAL.
   (A)   A person may not leave any animal unattended in a standing or parked
motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the animal’s health or safety.
   (B)   A violation of this section is a class 2 misdemeanor carrying a $200
fine.
   (C)   A person found to be in violation of this section shall bear the costs
and fees associated with any required care, treatment, impounding, or kenneling
of the animal.
Penalty, see §
93.999
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 93.095 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND.
   The animal control officer or police officers have the authority to impound
any animal in violation of this chapter.
§ 93.096 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   The owner of any animal that has been impounded shall be notified within 24
hours of the impoundment of his or her animal, provided that name and address
of the owner can be reasonably ascertained.
§ 93.097 REDEMPTION OF ANIMAL BY PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER.
   If the owner of any animal that has been impounded fails to redeem such
animal, after the impoundment period, any other person may redeem the animal,
upon complying with any requirements of this chapter, may redeem the animal and
become the lawful owner.
§ 93.098 DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   (A)   If an impounded animal is wearing a license or other means of
identification, the animal shall be kept at the shelter for a period of five
days, excluding Sundays and holidays.
   (B)   If an animal is not wearing identification, it shall be confined for a
period of three days, excluding Sundays and holidays. The animal control
officer may dispose of the animal impounded in any humane manner.
§ 93.099 COSTS.
   (A)   An animal held or impounded shall be released to its owner or other
persons only after payment of daily boarding costs, any veterinarian fees, and
impoundment fees have been paid in full.
   (B)   Boarding costs, veterinarian fees, and impoundment fees are in
addition to any fines assessed for violation of this chapter.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 93.115 ENFORCEMENT; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police
department or the animal control officer.
   (B)   The animal control officer or police department may issue citations
for violations of any section of this title or may issue warning tickets
requiring correction of a violation.
§ 93.116 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   No person may hinder, delay, or obstruct any police officer or the animal
control officer in the performance of any duty under this chapter or seek to
release any animal in the custody of the animal control officer, except as
provided herein.
§ 93.117 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH A WARNING TICKET.
   It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the
provisions of requirements of a warning ticket lawfully issued under this
chapter.
§ 93.118 RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the shelter manager and the animal control officer
to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the licensing,
finding, impoundment, and disposition of all animals and owners coming into his
or her custody. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and shelter
manager to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite
cases provided to him or her and his or her investigation of the same. It shall
be the duty of the shelter manager to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and
detailed records of all monies belonging to the municipality.
§ 93.119 PAYMENT OF FEES AND CHARGES; STOPPING PAYMENT OR ISSUING BAD CHECK
PROHIBITED.
   No person may avoid payment of licenses or impoundment fees prescribed by
this chapter or charges for veterinarian services or rabies observation costs
incurred under this chapter, by stopping payment on any check or issuing an
insufficient funds check.
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not
more than $500 or by confinement not to exceed 30 days in the county jail, or
both fine and imprisonment.
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General
   
94.01   Authority
Streets
   
94.15   Authority over streets; improvements
   
94.16   Railroads
Sidewalks
   
94.30   Definition; municipal authority
   
94.31   Width and material of sidewalks; location
   
94.32   Failure to keep sidewalks in repair; liability
   
94.33   Notice to construct or repair sidewalk
   
94.34   Failure of owner to repair sidewalk
   
94.35   Assessment of sidewalk repair costs
   
94.36   Mailboxes
   
94.37   Discharge of rainwater
   
94.38   Sidewalk snow and ice control
   
94.39   Encroachments restricted
   
94.40   Encroachment, removal
GENERAL
§ 94.01 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Utility openings and lights in streets and alleys. This municipality
shall have power to regulate openings in streets or alleys for laying of gas or
water mains, sewers, tunnels, and drains, and the erecting of gas or electric
lights pursuant to SDCL § 9-30-1.
   (B)   Cleaning, removal of obstructions, injury, and the like. This
municipality shall have the power to regulate the use of sidewalks, streets,
alleys, wharves, parks, and public grounds, to provide for cleaning the same,
to prevent and remove obstructions and encroachments upon the same, to prevent
injury to the same, to regulate or prevent any practice having a tendency to
annoy persons frequenting the same, and to regulate or prohibit structures
under sidewalks and riding and driving thereon pursuant to SDCL § 9-30-2.
   (C)   Signs and advertising in public places. This municipality shall have
power to regulate and prohibit the use of streets, sidewalks, and public
grounds for signs, signposts, awnings, flying of flags or banners, posting of
bills and advertisements, the exhibition or carrying of banners, placards, or
advertisements, and the distribution of handbills pursuant to SDCL § 9-30-3.
   (D)   Traffic and sales in public places. This municipality shall have power
to regulate traffic and sales upon the streets and sidewalks and in public
places pursuant to SDCL § 9-30-4.
   (E)   Snow removal; weed removal; expense paid by special assessment. This
municipality shall have power to require the owner of abutting property to
remove snow and ice from sidewalks and weeds from parking, and to provide for
their removal and for taxing the expense thereof by special assessment against
the abutting property pursuant to SDCL § 9-30-5.
STREETS
§ 94.15 AUTHORITY OVER STREETS; IMPROVEMENTS.
   This municipality may lay out, establish, open, vacate, construct, alter,
widen, extend, improve, repair, grade, gravel, surface, pave, repave, bridge,
construct a viaduct upon or over, erect equipment for street lighting in and
otherwise improve, and establish and change the grade of roads, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds, and to regulate the making of openings
and connections therein and the erection of lights thereon as provided in SDCL
§ 9-45-1.
(SDCL § 9-45-1)
Cross-reference:
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
§ 94.16 RAILROADS.
   (A)   All railroad companies in this municipality shall make, keep open, and
repair their crossings of streets and public roads, and to make, keep open, and
repair ditches, drains, sewers, and culverts along and under their tracks, so
that drainage of adjacent property shall not be impeded and the right-of-way
shall be properly drained.
(SDCL § 9-35-8)
   (B)   This municipality may extend any street, alley, or highway over,
under, or across, or to construct any sewer, water pipe, or main under or
through any railroad track, right-of-way, or land of any railroad company
within the corporate limits pursuant to SDCL § 9-35-7.
SIDEWALKS
§ 94.30 DEFINITION; MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the term LOT includes tracts or
other parcels of land.
(SDCL § 9-46-4.2)
   (B)   Nothing contained in this subchapter limits or restricts any municipal
power or authority as set forth in SDCL Title 11.
(SDCL § 9-46-12)
§ 94.31 WIDTH AND MATERIAL OF SIDEWALKS; LOCATION.
   (A)   This municipality may, by ordinance, prescribe the width of sidewalks
and may establish different widths in different areas of the municipality and
determine the kind of material of which the sidewalk shall be constructed,
having regard to the business and amount of travel in the vicinity of each.
(SDCL § 9-46-1)
   (B)   This municipality may, by resolution, require the owner of real
property abutting or adjoining a public right-of-way or abutting or adjoining
public property containing a highway to construct a sidewalk in a location as
designated in the resolution.
(SDCL § 9-46-1.3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.32 FAILURE TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR; LIABILITY.
   Any owner of real property who fails to keep the sidewalks abutting or
adjoining the property in repair creates or maintains a public nuisance and the
owner is liable to the municipality for any damage or injury caused by neglect
and responsible for the costs of abating the public nuisance pursuant to SDCL §
21-10-6.
(SDCL § 9-46-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.33 NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   If the municipality deems it necessary that any sidewalk be
constructed, and after plans and specifications are filed with the finance
officer, the municipality shall draft a proposed resolution of necessity for
the sidewalk and shall schedule a public hearing on the resolution.
      (2)   The proposed resolution of necessity shall contain the proposed
location of the sidewalk to be constructed and the date by which the
construction must be completed. The proposed resolution may provide that:
         (a)   The owner of the real property abutting or adjoining the
sidewalk to be constructed shall construct the sidewalk and be responsible for
all cost of constructing the sidewalk commensurate with the benefit to the
property;
         (b)   The owner of the real property abutting or adjoining the
sidewalk to be constructed shall be assessed any definite, specified portion or
all of the cost of the sidewalk; or
         (c)   The municipality shall pay any definite, specified portion or
all of the cost of the sidewalk.
      (3)   The proposed resolution of necessity shall state that details,
plans, and specifications may be reviewed at the finance office during regular
office hours. Multiple sidewalks may be embraced by one resolution of necessity
if the requirements of this section are followed for each sidewalk set forth in
the resolution.
(SDCL § 9-46-2.1)
   (B)   Notice of hearing. The notice of hearing on the proposed resolution of
necessity shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall state that
the municipality will consider any objections to the proposed resolution by
owners of the property abutting or adjoining the sidewalk proposed to be
constructed. Notice of hearing on the proposed resolution of necessity shall be
published once, not less than ten nor more than 20 days before the hearing on
the resolution of necessity.
(SDCL § 9-46-2.2)
   (C)   Mailing. In addition to the published notice set forth in division (B)
of this section, the municipality, not less than ten nor more than 20 days
before the hearing on the proposed resolution, shall cause a copy of the notice
of hearing, set forth in division (B) of this section, to be mailed by first
class or certified mail to each owner of real property abutting or adjoining
the sidewalk proposed to be constructed. The mailed notice shall contain the
location of the sidewalk to be constructed and the date by which the
construction must be completed.
(SDCL § 9-46-2.3)
§ 94.34 FAILURE OF OWNER TO REPAIR SIDEWALK.
   If the sidewalk is not constructed in the manner and within the time set
forth in the resolution of necessity pursuant to §
94.33, the municipality may cause the sidewalk to be constructed and make
assessments for the sidewalk pursuant to §
94.35 of this subchapter.
(SDCL § 9-46-4)
§ 94.35 ASSESSMENT OF SIDEWALK REPAIR COSTS.
   If the municipality, pursuant to §
94.33(A) of this subchapter, deems it necessary that a sidewalk be constructed
and financed in total or in part by special assessment, the procedures set
forth in SDCL Chapter 9-43 shall be followed. A resolution of necessity adopted
pursuant to §
94.33(A) of this subchapter shall satisfy the requirements of SDCL § 9-43-82.
(SDCL § 9-46-4.1)
§ 94.36 MAILBOXES.
   Mailboxes are permitted to be located on or adjacent to a municipal street
curb or sidewalk provided that all other requirements as set out by the
municipality for installing the mailboxes are met.
(SDCL § 9-46-11)
§ 94.37 DISCHARGE OF RAINWATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the rainwater from any
building discharge on and over the sidewalks.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.38 SIDEWALK SNOW AND ICE CONTROL.
   (A)   (1)   The record owner of any building or ground within the
municipality fronting upon or adjoining a street where a sidewalk exists in
front of or adjoining such premises, shall clear or make arrangements to clear
the sidewalk in front of or adjoining such buildings and ground to the width of
the sidewalk within 24 hours after snow or ice has fallen or formed. Where it
is impossible to take the snow and ice from the walk by reason of its being
frozen to the sidewalk the record owner shall sprinkle or spread some suitable
material upon the same to prevent the walk from becoming slippery and dangerous
to travel.
      (2)   RECORD OWNER means the fee owner of real property as shown in the
records of the register of deeds. A CONTRACT PURCHASER of real property means
the record owner for the purpose of this section.
   (B)   If the record owner of any building or lot fails or neglects to remove
snow and ice from the sidewalk adjoining the property within 24 hours after the
same has fallen or formed, the municipal public works director or his or her
designee may arrange for an independent contractor to remove the snow and ice.
The municipality may also, at its discretion, remove the snow or ice if it
deems such action appropriate. In either case, the municipality shall be
entitled to a fee for the costs of arranging the removal plus the actual cost
paid to the contractor or, in the event the removal is done by municipality
employees, the record owner shall pay a sum as determined by the municipality
plus material per hour for each employee. Such sums shall be recoverable by the
same legal means as for the recovery of other nuisance abatements, including,
but not limited to, direct billing of the property owner, assessment of the sum
against the property itself, or by bringing an action against the property
owner. Each day the record owner fails to remove the snow and ice, after notice
as provided for in this section, shall constitute a separate violation of this
section and shall be subject to a civil fine, as set by the municipality, per
day for each separate violation.
§ 94.39 ENCROACHMENTS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, install, place, or
to permit the erection, construction, installation, placing of any encroachment
upon or above any portion of any residential sidewalk in the municipality.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.40 ENCROACHMENT, REMOVAL.
   Whenever any encroachment exists in violation of these provisions, written
notice shall be given the owner of record requiring removal within 14 days. If
the owner of record fails to remove the encroachment within the time specified
in the notice, the municipality shall remove the encroachment at the owner’s
expense.
CHAPTER 95: RECREATION FACILITIES
Section
Municipal Park
   
95.01   Authority
   
95.02   Control of park
   
95.03   Athletic facilities; fees; park fund
Sport Shooting Range
   
95.15   Definition
   
95.16   Operation and use of any sport shooting range
MUNICIPAL PARK
§ 95.01 AUTHORITY.
   This municipality shall have the authority to establish, improve, maintain,
and otherwise regulate public parks pursuant to SDCL §§ 9-38-1 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Budget of park boards, see SDCL §§ 9-38-42 and 9-38-44
§ 95.02 CONTROL OF PARK.
   Except as provided for by first or second class municipalities under a
commission form of government the public parks of every municipality, whether
within or without the limits of the municipality, shall be under the control
and supervision of the governing body thereof unless a park board shall have
been created as provided in this pursuant to SDCL Chapter 9-38.
§ 95.03 ATHLETIC FACILITIES; FEES; PARK FUND.
   (A)   A municipality may establish, maintain, and operate golf courses,
tennis courts, ball grounds, and other athletic amusements, and necessary
facilities in connection therewith, as a part of its park system, and charge
fees for the use thereof.
   (B)   All fees received under this section and any other money received for
use of the board including tax revenues which may be appropriated for park
purposes, shall be kept in a special park fund and shall be paid upon
requisition by the president and secretary of the board and warrant drawn and
executed as other warrants.
SPORT SHOOTING RANGE
§ 95.15 DEFINITION.
   A SPORT SHOOTING RANGE is an area designed and operated for the use of
rifles, shotguns, or pistols as a means of silhouette, skeet, trap, black
powder, or other sport shooting. A SPORT SHOOTING RANGE includes any shooting
range located on public or private land or operated by a private entity or by a
public entity, and a law enforcement shooting range.
(SDCL § 21-10-33)
§ 95.16 OPERATION AND USE OF ANY SPORT SHOOTING RANGE.
   (A)   The use or operation of a sport shooting range may not be enjoined as
a nuisance if the range is in compliance with those statutes, regulations, and
ordinances that applied to the range and its operation at the time when the
initial operation of the range commenced. The use or operation of a sport
shooting range may not be enjoined as a nuisance due to any subsequent change
in any statute, regulation, or ordinance pertaining to the normal operation and
use of sport shooting ranges.
(SDCL § 21-10-28)
   (B)   The use or operation of a sport shooting range may not be enjoined as
a nuisance by a person who acquires title to real property adversely affected
by the normal operation and use of a sport shooting range which commenced
operation prior to the time the person acquired title.
(SDCL § 21-10-29)
   (C)   The provisions of SDCL §§ 21-10-28 through 21-10-34 do not apply to
any recovery for any act or omission relating to the operation or use of any
sport shooting range based on negligent or willful or wanton misconduct.
(SDCL § 21-10-30)
   (D)   The provisions of SDCL §§ 21-10-28 through 21-10-34 do not apply if
there has been a substantial change in the primary use of the sporting range.
(SDCL § 21-10-31) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Significant threat to human life or private habitations, see SDCL § 21-10-
28.1
CHAPTER 96: NOISE
Section
   
96.01   Purpose and intent.
   
96.02   General restrictions
   
96.03   Permit for outdoor sound amplification equipment
   
96.04   Revocation of permit
   
96.05   Hearing; revocation; appeal
   
96.06   Exceptions to application of chapter
§ 96.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health,
safety, welfare, peace, quiet, and tranquility of the citizens of the
municipality and persons or visitors frequenting the municipality through the
reduction, control, and prevention of noise which is disruptive and constitutes
an annoyance to the citizens and persons.
§ 96.02 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   No person may:
   (A)   Make noise or play a musical instrument audible to an adjacent
business or residence or use sound equipment in public between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., except as authorized by the chief of police;
   (B)    Operate any jack hammers or heavy equipment within 600 feet of a
residence, church, hospital, hotel, or motel between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
   (C)   Operate sound equipment in a vehicle audible or causing vibration 30
feet from the equipment; or
   (D)   Make loud or disturbing or offensive noises with any mechanical
devices operated by compressed air and used for purposes of assisting braking
on any semi-tractor, logging truck, or other motor vehicle except for the
aversion of imminent danger.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.03 PERMIT FOR OUTDOOR SOUND AMPLIFICATION EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, any person, partnership,
association, corporation or business desiring to use or operate any
loudspeaker, public address system or other sound amplifying equipment
outdoors, or indoors, but designed to project the sound outdoors, must first
obtain a permit from the municipal police department which will then be brought
forth to the governing board for approval. The permit may authorize the use or
operation of the sound amplifying equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
10:00 a.m.
   (B)   The application for the permit shall be filed with the police
department and shall provide the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of both the owner and the
user of the sound amplifying equipment;
      (2)   The license number of the motor vehicle, if any, upon which the
equipment is to be used;
      (3)   The general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is
to be used; and
      (4)   The dates and location of the proposed operation of the equipment.
   (C)   The permit may contain conditions as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter and any other ordinances of the municipality as
may be in effect when the permit is issued.
§ 96.04 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or terminated by the chief
of police if the noise which is produced under the permit becomes unreasonably
loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, disruptive, or annoying to residents or
other persons within the municipality.
§ 96.05 HEARING; REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)    If the municipality determines that facts exist for revocation
of a permit, the municipality shall notify the permitee in writing of the
intent to revoke the permit, including the grounds therefor, by personal
delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most
current business address on file with the municipality. Within five working
days of receipt of the notice, the permitee may provide to the chief of police
or person appointed by the municipality, in writing, a response that shall
include a statement of reasons why the permit should not be revoked. Within
three days of the receipt of the permitee’s written response, the chief of
police or person appointed by the municipality shall notify the permitee in
writing of the hearing date on permitee’s revocation proceeding.
         (2)   Within ten working days of the receipt of permitee’s written
response, the chief of police or person appointed by the municipality shall
conduct a hearing at which the permitee shall have the opportunity to be
represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf.
If a response is not received by the chief of police or person appointed by the
municipality in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the chief of police
or person appointed by the municipality finds that grounds exist for
revocation, the decision shall become final five days after the chief of police
or person appointed by the municipality sends, by certified mail, written
notice that the permit has been revoked. The notice shall include a statement
advising the permitee of the right to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
         (3)   If the chief of police or person appointed by the municipality
finds that no grounds exist for revocation of a permit, then within five days
after the hearing, the chief of police or person appointed by the municipality
shall withdraw the intent to revoke the permit, and shall so notify the
permitee in writing by certified mail of that action and shall
contemporaneously issue the permit.
   (B)   When a decision to revoke a permit becomes final, the permitee whose
permit has been revoked, shall have the right to appeal the action to a court
of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal,
challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the municipality’s enforcement of the
revocation, the municipality shall immediately issue the permitee a provisional
permit. The provisional permit shall allow the permitee to continue operation
of the business and will expire upon the court’s entry of a judgment on the
permitee’s action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the
municipality’s enforcement.
§ 96.06 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The following shall be exceptions to the application of this noise
regulations chapter:
   (A)   Parades, community events, festivals, band concerts;
   (B)   Emergency vehicles, and for emergency purposes such as police, fire,
and ambulance sirens or warning devices and loudspeakers used in connection
with crimes, disasters, or emergencies;
   (C)   An employee of a governmental entity engaged in the employee’s
official duty; and
   (D)   Church bells and chimes.
CHAPTER 97: PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Permit; required; application
   
97.03   Permit; issuance
   
97.04   Permit; contents
   
97.05   Permit; denial; appeal procedure
   
97.06   Deviation from permit
   
97.07   Permit; revocation
   
97.08   Use of sirens by emergency vehicles participating in parade
   
97.09   Insurance requirements
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any scheduled walk, demonstration, procession, march, or motorcade
consisting of persons, animals, vehicles, or a combination thereof having a
common purpose, design, designation, or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public thoroughfare, which does not comply with normal and
usual traffic regulations and controls.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any planned assembly, block party, demonstration, rally, or
gathering of a group of 25 or more persons, animals, vehicles, or a combination
thereof, in a public space that:
      (1)   Has a common purpose, design or goal and:
         (a)   Which substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrians or
vehicular travel on public streets;
         (b)   Which involves a temporary and exclusive use of a public space;
or
         (c)   Involves a substantial deviation from the public space’s current
use.
      (2)   SPECIAL EVENTS do not include the following:
         (a)   Parades;
         (b)   The use of public space by governmental agencies acting within
the scope of their authority;
         (c)   Funeral processions; or
         (d)   Picnics or gatherings in reserved spaces within public parks
which are reserved in advance through the municipality or any designated
department.
§ 97.02 PERMIT; REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, manage, or participate in any parade or
special event unless a permit has been issued in accordance with this chapter.
If a permit is issued, no person shall conduct, manage, or participate in any
parade or special event which is in violation of the terms or conditions of the
permit.
   (B)   A permit must be applied for in writing on a form obtained from the
municipality or any designated department and shall be filed at least 72 hours
prior to the commencement of any parade or special event, unless an exception
to the deadline is granted by the municipality or as provided in division (D)
of this section. Late applications may be accepted at the discretion of the
municipality or designee. The application shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of any individual, group,
association, firm, or corporation requesting the permit, and the applicable
title or office of the person so applying;
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person(s)
responsible for the organization, coordination, and conduct of the proposed
activity;
      (3)   Time and date of commencement and termination of the proposed
activity;
      (4)   A detailed narrative and timeline nature and purpose of the parade
or special event, including a description of all activities, schedule of
events, and all other pertinent information;
      (5)   A detailed event site plan mapping the physical areas for the
event;
      (6)   The anticipated maximum number of persons, vehicles, bands, floats,
and other units of persons, horses, or other animals to participate; and
      (7)   Such other reasonably relevant information as the municipal staff
may request for investigation of the application.
   (C)   The applicant shall submit nonrefundable permit fee(s) to be set by
resolution of the governing body with the application. Additional fees approved
by resolution of the governing body may also be required. If the municipality
or its designees determine that the event requires or utilizes municipal
resources beyond what is reasonable for a parade or special event, staff may
deny the permit or may charge the applicant additional fees equivalent to the
municipality’s cost to provide the resources. Such fees may include
municipality cost to provide barricades, police presence, sanitation, waste
removal, picnic tables, and the like, and may be billed before the permit is
issued or after the parade or special event occurs.
   (D)   Demonstrations as defined below may be issued a special event or
parade permit, as applicable. The municipality or its designee may consider an
application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time
to process and investigate the permit application and to obtain municipal
services for the event and if the circumstance that gave rise to the event
application did not reasonably allow the applicant to apply within the time
prescribed in division (B) of this section. A DEMONSTRATION under this section
is defined a parade or special event which involves a rally, picketing,
speechmaking, march, vigil, religious service, or similar gathering that
primarily involves the communication or expression of opinions, grievances, or
personal views.
§ 97.03 PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Special event and parade permit considerations. The municipal
officials reviewing all permit applications shall evaluate the following
considerations in deciding on each application:
      (1)   Whether the event promotes the community as a whole;
      (2)   Whether the event provides positive civic and economic benefit;
      (3)   The impact upon neighboring business and properties;
      (4)   The frequency of closures of streets/public spaces for parades and
special events;
      (5)   Other events or activities that are permitted at the same time and/
or location;
      (6)   The applicant’s conduct and compliance in sponsoring prior events;
      (7)   The health, safety, and public welfare of event participants and
the impact of the event on the health, safety, and public welfare of all
citizens;
      (8)   If applicable, whether the applicant conformed to all permit
requirements and the provisions in this chapter in holding any previous parades
or special events; and
      (9)   The financial and practical ability of the applicant to conduct the
proposed parade or special event in conformance with the provisions of the
permit and this chapter.
   (B)   Parade permit.
      (1)   The municipality or its designee may issue a parade permit after
evaluating the application, such other information as may otherwise be
obtained, and the considerations in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   No parade permit shall be issued if:
         (a)   The proposed activity will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of traffic;
         (b)   The proposed activity will require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the municipality to properly police the activity
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
municipality;
         (c)   The proposed activity will require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
municipality other than that to be occupied by the activity and other areas
contiguous thereto;
         (d)   Any concentration of persons, animals, units, floats, or
vehicles at assembly points of the proposed activity will unduly interfere with
proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous
to the assembly areas;
         (e)   There is reason to believe that the proposed activity will not
move from its point of origin to its point of termination, expeditiously and
without unreasonable delay;
         (f)    Other similar scheduled activities for which permits have been
issued will conflict with the activity proposed in the permit application;
         (g)   Applicant supervision for the proposed activity is inadequate,
or volunteer/staff support for the parade is insufficient;
         (h)   The parade does not follow the standard parade route designated
by the municipality, unless the municipality finds that a deviation from this
route is substantially justified;
         (i)   The parade will adversely affect adjacent or neighboring
properties by causing excessive noise or creating a nuisance;
         (j)   The parade will be conducted primarily for the purpose of
private monetary gain or commercial advertisement; or
         (k)   The parade will fail to comply in any respect with the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (C)   Special event permit.
      (1)   The municipality or its designee may issue a special event permit
after evaluating consideration of the application, such other information as
may be otherwise obtained, and the considerations in division (A) of this
section.
      (2)   No special event permit shall be issued if;
         (a)   The proposed activity will substantially interrupt the normal
and customary use of the public space;
         (b)   The proposed activity will impose an unreasonable burden upon
the police department, fire department, or ambulance service;
         (c)    The proposed activity is scheduled to be held at an
inappropriate time and or in an inappropriate location;
         (d)    Other similar scheduled activities for which permits have been
issued will conflict with the special event proposed in the permit application;
         (e)   Applicant supervision for the proposed activity is inadequate or
insufficient volunteer/staff support for the proposed event is insufficient;
         (f)   The special event will cause unreasonable injury or damage to
the public space requested;
         (g)   The event will involve such a number of persons or activities as
will exceed the reasonable capacity of the public space requested;
         (h)   The special event will cause unreasonable adverse effects on
adjacent or neighboring properties by causing excessive noise or creating a
nuisance;
         (i)   The special event will be conducted primarily for the purpose of
private monetary gain or commercial advertisement; or
         (j)   The special event will fail to comply in any respect with the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law.
§ 97.04 PERMIT; CONTENTS.
   (A)   The permits provided in this chapter shall include all information in
the application and shall be signed by the municipal official, as appropriate,
or their designees with a signed copy kept with the application on file in the
municipal office issuing the permit. The permit may include any terms or
conditions necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and
welfare and for the protection of the public space to be utilized.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued until the insurance required under this
chapter has been filed with the municipality.
   (C)   Issuance of a permit shall not constitute municipal endorsement or
sponsorship of the parade or special event. No permittee shall represent,
advertise, promote, or otherwise publish any claim of municipal endorsement or
sponsorship of the parade or event unless the municipality authorizes such a
claim by explicitly endorsing or sponsoring the parade or special event.
§ 97.05 PERMIT; DENIAL; APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to file a written appeal of the
denial of a permit to the governing body not later than seven days after notice
of denial. The reason for the denial shall be provided in writing.
§ 97.06 DEVIATION FROM PERMIT.
   No person organizing, conducting, coordinating or participating in any
activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall deviate from or alter any of the terms, conditions, or contents
of the permit without the express permission of the municipal official issuing
the permit or its designee.
§ 97.07 PERMIT; REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
municipal official issuing the permit or his or her designee in the following
circumstances:
   (A)   The violation by the permittee of any applicable provisions, terms, or
conditions of the permit or of state law or ordinance;
   (B)   The event is causing or expected to cause physical damage to persons
or property;
   (C)   The event is interfering or will interfere with fire or police
protection, or an emergency arises making it impossible to assign necessary
personnel to the special event needed to protect the public safety;
   (D)   The event is creating or threatening to create a health hazard;
   (E)   Information is obtained after the permit is issued from which the
municipality may reasonably conclude that the permit should have been denied;
or
   (F)   The municipality finds that the insurance required by §
97.09 has lapsed or has been cancelled.
§ 97.08 USE OF SIRENS BY EMERGENCY VEHICLES PARTICIPATING IN PARADE.
   Emergency vehicles participating in any parade or special event shall not
sound sirens except when and if any emergency should arise and the vehicle must
clear the area.
§ 97.09 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Special event and parade organizers shall provide adequate insurance
coverage with designated limits as required by the municipal official issuing
the permit. However, the municipal official issuing the permit may waive this
requirement with the approval of the municipal attorney or other designated
officer. The insurance policy shall name the municipality and its
representatives as an additional insured.
 
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   TRADE REGULATION AND LICENSING
      
111.   AUCTION SALES
      
112.   PAWNBROKERS
      
113.   REGULATION AND LICENSING OF LIQUOR OPERATIONS
      
114.   AMUSEMENTS
CHAPTER 110: TRADE REGULATION AND LICENSING
Section
Peddlers and Transient Merchants
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License requirement
   
110.03   Application procedure
   
110.04   Standards for issuance
   
110.05   Revocation procedure
   
110.06   Standards for revocation
   
110.07   Appeal procedure
   
110.08   Exhibition of identification
   
110.09   Municipal policy on soliciting
   
110.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
110.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
110.12   Prohibited solicitation
Miscellaneous Regulations
   
110.25   Soliciting telecommunication services; exemption
   
110.26   Secondhand and junk stores
   
110.27   Delivery persons, taxi drivers, and porters
   
110.28   Tattooing and body piercing
   
110.29   Exhibitions, shows, and amusements
Statutory reference:
   Family day care homes; regulation and standards of care, see SDCL § 9-29-26
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the municipality and
who, in the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure,
vehicle, or any place within the municipality.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the municipality.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the municipality.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this subchapter shall be as set
from time to time by the governing body.
   (C)   No license issued under this subchapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall expire 90 days after
the date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this subchapter shall file an
application with the clerk. This application shall be signed by the applicant
if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a
corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide information concerning
the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the municipality;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) of this section, or the person identified in division (A)(3)
of this section has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the
nature of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) of this section:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this subchapter shall attach
to their application, if required by the municipality, credentials from the
person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing
the applicant to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) of this
section, a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days
prior to the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of
contagious or communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done any of the following
will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 110.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this subchapter may be revoked by the
clerk after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
110.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 110.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this subchapter may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this subchapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
§ 110.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
110.04 or
110.06 shall have the right to appeal to the governing body. The appeal shall
be taken by filing with the governing body, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The governing body shall set
the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
110.05.
   (B)   The order of the governing body after the hearing shall be final.
§ 110.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this subchapter
shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event
more than one place within the municipality shall be used to conduct the
business licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed
under this subchapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed Peddler or
Licensed Solicitor”, the expiration date of the license, and the number of the
license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such time as he or
she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.09 MUNICIPAL POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the municipality that the
occupants of the residences in the municipality shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective
residences.
§ 110.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   NO SOLICITORS INVITED
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third of an inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the chief of police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 110.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the municipality upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in §
110.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
110.10.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate and license transient merchants, peddlers, see SDCL §
9-34-7
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§ 110.25 SOLICITING TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for hawkers, peddlers, solicitors, pawnbrokers,
ticket scalpers, and employment agencies to conduct business without out first
applying for and receiving a license to conduct such business.
   (B)   This section does not apply to the peddling or soliciting of
telecommunications services subject to the provisions of SDCL §§ 49-13-1 et
seq. or 49-31-1 et seq.
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, see SDCL § 9-34-18
§ 110.26 SECONDHAND AND JUNK STORES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a secondhand store or junk store
without first applying for and receiving a license from the municipality.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for secondhand or junk stores to purchase and/or
receive from a minor any article without the written consent of the minor’s
parents or guardians.
(SDCL § 9-34-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.27 DELIVERY PERSONS, TAXI DRIVERS, AND PORTERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any parcel delivery person, bus drivers, cab
drivers, taxi drivers, porters, and others in similar occupations to engage in
such occupations without first applying for and receiving a license from the
municipality.
(SDCL § 9-34-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.28 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING.
   (A)   Any municipality may regulate the practice of tattooing, saline tattoo
removal, and body piercing by licensing practitioners of tattooing, saline
tattoo removal, or body piercing; inspecting tattoo, saline tattoo removal, and
body piercing establishments; and establishing standards for sanitation that
are at least as stringent as those adopted by the department of health under
SDCL § 34-1-17.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BODY PIERCING. To place a permanent or temporary foreign object in a
person’s body for a decorative or other nonmedical purpose by a person not
directly under the supervision of a licensed physician as defined by SDCL § 36-
4-11.
      SALINE TATTOO REMOVAL. Inserting a saline solution in skin to lighten or
remove an existing tattoo. The term does not include the use of other acids or
of lasers as described in SDCL § 36-4-8.2.
      TATTOOING. To make marks or designs into the skin by puncturing it and
inserting indelible colors. The term includes microblading and similar
techniques used to partially or fully simulate natural hair.
(SDCL § 9-34-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.29 EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS, AND AMUSEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to conduct exhibitions, shows and amusements
without first applying for and obtaining a license from the municipality.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: AUCTION SALES
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Requirements
   
111.03   Exempt sales
   
111.04   Auction receipts
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUCTION SALE. The offering for sale or selling of personal property to the
highest bidder or offering for sale or selling of personal property at a high
price and then offering the personal property at successive lower prices until
a buyer is secured.
(SDCL § 37-14-2)
§ 111.02 REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements of this chapter are in addition to and not in lieu of any
other state or local license.
(SDCL § 37-14-5)
§ 111.03 EXEMPT SALES.
   The provisions of this chapter do not extend to the sale at public auction
of livestock, farm machinery, or farm produce or any other item commonly sold
at farm sale, to any auction sale held under authority of or under the
supervision and direction of any court of this state, or to any person, firm,
or corporation who has been engaged in business in this state for a period of
at least one year, conducting a closing out or stock reduction sale of the
business.
(SDCL § 37-14-4)
§ 111.04 AUCTION RECEIPTS.
   (A)   Any money that an auction cashier receives on behalf of a client from
an auction sale shall be deposited in a separate account maintained for auction
sale proceeds only.
(SDCL § 37-14-18)
   (B)   Any money that an auction cashier receives on behalf of a client from
an auction sale shall be given to the client within 20 working days of the
auction sale. This section does not apply to any bad check or if there is a
prior written agreement between the client and the cashier.
(SDCL § 37-14-19)
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to any livestock
auction agency licensed pursuant to SDCL Chapter 40-15 or to any real estate
sale.
(SDCL § 37-14-20)
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
112.01   Excessive interest
   
112.02   Sale of pledge during time for redemption
   
112.03   Conduct of business without license
   
112.04   Refusal to disclose purchaser and price of article sold
   
112.05   Refusal to exhibit stolen goods
§ 112.01 EXCESSIVE INTEREST.
   No pawnbroker who receives goods in pledge for loans shall charge any rate
of interest above that allowed by law.
(SDCL § 37-16-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02 SALE OF PLEDGE DURING TIME FOR REDEMPTION.
   No pawnbroker shall sell any article received by him or her in pledge before
the time to redeem the same has expired.
(SDCL § 37-16-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE.
   All pawnbrokers in this municipality shall apply for and receive a license
to carry on the business of a pawnbroker pursuant to SDCL § 9-34-8.
(SDCL § 37-16-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 REFUSAL TO DISCLOSE PURCHASER AND PRICE OF ARTICLE SOLD.
   Any pawnbroker shall not refuse to disclose the purchaser and price received
by him or her for any article received by him or her in pledge and subsequently
sold.
(SDCL § 37-16-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.05 REFUSAL TO EXHIBIT STOLEN GOODS.
   Any pawnbroker and junk dealer who, having received any goods which have
been stolen, shall not refuse to exhibit them upon demand during usual business
hours to the owner of such goods or his or her agents authorized to demand an
inspection.
(SDCL § 37-16-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: REGULATION AND LICENSING OF LIQUOR OPERATIONS
Section
General
   
113.01   Definitions
Licensing and Sales
   
113.15   Permanent licenses
   
113.16   Temporary licenses and permits
   
113.17   Off-sale licenses to operate within municipality
   
113.18   On-sale licenses
   
113.19   Convention facility on-sale licenses
   
113.20   Malt beverage licenses
   
113.21   Times when sales prohibited
   
113.22   Application for license
   
113.23   Hearing on application
   
113.24   Renewal of license
   
113.25   Transfer of license
   
113.26   Distribution of license and transfer fees and penalties
   
113.27   Off-sale licensees permitted to provide free samples; no additional
license required; restrictions
   
113.28   Off-sale delivery license
   
113.29   Manufacture, sale, or possession of powdered, condensed, or
concentrated alcohol prohibited; exceptions
   
113.30   Quantity discounts and cash discounts permitted
Municipal Liquor Operations
   
113.45   Municipal application and renewal
   
113.46   Management of municipal liquor licenses
   
113.47   Operating agreements
   
113.48   Municipality holding required license authorized to serve food,
prepared food, and beverages
Age Requirements
   
113.60   Sale to prohibited persons
   
113.61   Minors on premises
   
113.62   Exception to prohibition on sales or service by persons under 21 years
old
Cross-reference:
   Compatible and incompatible offices, see §
31.08
Statutory reference:
   Licensing policies and procedures, see SDCL §§ 35-2-1 et seq.
GENERAL
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages as
defined SDCL Title 35.
   BULK CONTAINER. Any package, or any container within which container are one
or more packages.
   CARRIER. A person who for hire transports passengers and who sells or
furnishes to passengers for consumption alcoholic beverages aboard any means of
conveyance or allows passengers to consume the passenger’s own alcoholic
beverages aboard the conveyance.
   CIDER. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice of
apples or pears that contains not less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not
more than 10% of alcohol by weight, including flavored, sparkling, or
carbonated cider.
   CONTROLLING INTEREST IN. An ownership interest in the licensee of 10% or
more.
   DEPARTMENT. Department of revenue of the State of South Dakota.
   DISPENSER. A duly licensed physician, dentist, veterinarian, osteopath,
podiatrist, chiropractor, or pharmacist; or a druggist, sanitarium, hospital,
clinic, educational institution, industrial company, or industrial corporation
who purchases alcohol for scientific and medicinal purposes only.
   DISTILLED SPIRITS. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions
and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use containing not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by weight.
   MALT BEVERAGE. A beverage made by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or decoction, or combination of both, in potable brewing water, of malted
barley with hops, or their parts, or their products, or any other similar
product, and with or without other malted cereals, and with or without the
addition of unmalted or prepared cereals, other carbohydrates or products
prepared therefrom, and with or without the addition of carbon dioxide, and
with or without other wholesome products suitable for human consumption
containing not less than 0.5% of alcohol by weight.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who owns, has a controlling interest in, operates,
or aids in operating any establishment for the brewing, production, bottling,
or blending of any alcoholic beverage, whether occurring within or without this
state.
   MINIBAR. Any closed container, either refrigerated or nonrefrigerated,
having restricted access to the interior by means of a locking device that
requires the use of a key, magnetic card, or similar device, or controlled by
the licensee at all times.
   MUNICIPALITY. Any incorporated city or town, and any unincorporated platted
town having a United States post office. However, the subsequent withdrawal of
a United States post office does not affect the right of established liquor
licenses to be continued, renewed, or transferred and does not prevent the
owner or bona fide lessee of the licensed premises from receiving a renewal or
reissuance of such license.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of any alcoholic beverage, for consumption off the
premises where sold.
   ON-SALE. The sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption only upon the
premises where sold.
   ON-SALE DEALER. Any person who sells, or keeps for sale, any alcoholic
beverage for consumption on the premises where sold.
   PACKAGE. The bottle or immediate container of any alcoholic beverage.
   PACKAGE DEALER. Any person other than a manufacturer, or wholesaler, who
sells, or keeps for sale, any alcoholic beverage for consumption off the
premises where sold.
   POPULATION. Number of inhabitants as determined by the last preceding
federal census.
   POWDERED, CONDENSED, OR CONCENTRATED ALCOHOL. An alcoholic product that is
created using a process that reduces the alcohol to a concentrated form and
that allows the alcohol to be reconstituted with water or other liquid.
   RELATIVE. Any person who is a husband, wife, son, daughter, brother, sister,
father, or mother.
   RETAIL LICENSE. An on-sale or off-sale license issued under the provisions
of SDCL Title 35.
   RETAILER or RETAIL DEALER. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for
other than resale.
   SALE. The transfer, for consideration, of title to any alcoholic beverage.
   SECRETARY. The secretary of revenue of the State of South Dakota.
   SERVE. The taking of an order for an alcoholic beverage and intentionally
delivering the alcoholic beverage to a customer for the purpose of consumption
on the licensed premises and the customer takes physical possession of the
alcoholic beverage.
   TRANSPORTATION COMPANY or TRANSPORTER. Any common carrier or operator of a
private vehicle transporting or accepting for transportation any alcoholic
beverages, but not including transportation by carriers in interstate commerce
where the shipment originates outside of the state and is destined to a point
outside of the state.
   WHOLESALER. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to retailers for
resale.
   WINE. Any beverage made from the fermentation of grapes, grape juice, other
fruit bases, or honey, with or without adding alcoholic beverages; without
rectification, except for the purpose of fortification; and contains not less
than 0.5% and not more than 24% alcohol by volume.
(SDCL § 35-1-1)
LICENSING AND SALES
§ 113.15 PERMANENT LICENSES.
   The following are the fees to be paid for the various classes of licenses:
SDCL § 35-4-2 DivisionClass of License Fees
SDCL § 35-4- Class of       Fees
2 Division    License
(2)           Wholesalers    $5,000
(3)           Off-sale       Not more than $300
              Off-sale       Not to exceed $500
              (Renewal)
              On-sale in
(4)           municipalities Not less than $1 for each person residing within the municipality as measured
              of various     by the last preceding federal census
              classes
              Renewal fee    Not to exceed $1,500
              Off-sale
              licenses
(5)           issued to      Not less than $250
              municipalities
              under local
              option
                             Not less than the amount the nearest municipality to the applicant is charging
              On-sale        for a like license. The renewal fee shall be the same as is charged for a like
              licenses       license in the nearest municipality. If the municipality to which the
(6)           issued outside applicant is nearest holds an on-sale license, pursuant to SDCL § 35-3-13 and
              of             does not charge a specified fee, then the fee shall be the minimum amount that
              municipalities could be charged as if the municipality had not been authorized to obtain on-
                             sale licenses pursuant to SDCL § 35-3-13. The renewal fee shall be the same as
                             could be charged for a like license in the nearest municipality
(8)           Transportation $25
              companies
(9)           Carrier        $100
                             The fee licenses all conveyances the licensee operates in this state
              On-sale
              dealers (at
(11)          publicly       $250
              operated
              airports)
              Wine and cider
              retailers,
              being both
(12)          package        $500
              dealers and
              on-sale
              dealers
              Convention     Not less than $1 for each person residing within the municipality as measured
(13)          facility (on-  by the last federal census
              sale)
              Renewal fee    Not to exceed $1,500
(15)          Wholesalers of $400
              malt beverages
              Malt beverage
              and wine
              produced by a
              farm winery
(16)          licensee,      $300
              being both
              package
              dealers and
              on-sale
              dealers
              Retail on
(21)          premises       $250
              manufacturer
 
(SDCL § 35-4-2)
§ 113.16 TEMPORARY LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The municipality is authorized to issue the following licenses.
   (A)   Airport license to be used for convention or entertainment purposes.
      (1)    Any municipality with a population in excess of 35,000 which
operates an airport pursuant to SDCL Chapter 50-7 and holds a license pursuant
to SDCL §§ 35-4-14, shall also be authorized to use the license at any bona
fide convention activity or entertainment activity including, but not limited
to, any theatrical or musical performance, rodeo or traveling show if the event
is held at a convention hall.
      (2)   The selling, serving, or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage may
not occur earlier than one hour before the commencement of the event, or at any
time after the event is concluded. All sales must occur within areas designated
for that purpose.
   (B)   Five-day convention hall licenses.
      (1)   Such license shall be issued without regard to population
limitations established by law.
      (2)   Any municipality with a population exceeding 100,000 or any
municipality hosting an annual event attended by 100,000 or more people may
issue an on-sale license to be operated at a sporting event held at a publicly
owned sports arena or facility seating a minimum of 1,000 persons. Before a
license may be issued in a municipality hosting an annual event, the municipal
finance officer shall estimate the previous year’s attendance and provide the
estimate to the governing body.
      (3)   Any license issued pursuant to this division (B) may be issued for
a period not to exceed five consecutive days and will expire at 12:00 midnight
on the fifth day after issuance.
      (4)   No public hearing is required if the individual applying for the
license holds an on-sale alcoholic beverage license in the municipality or
holds an operating agreement for municipal on-sale alcoholic beverage license.
No person who holds an operating agreement for a municipal license pursuant to
SDCL § 35-4-14.1 may receive a license pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Special malt beverage retailer’s license and special retail on-sale
wine dealer’s license.
      (1)    This license may be issued to any civic, charitable, educational,
or fraternal organization in conjunction with a special event.
      (2)   The fee is $5 per day for a period not to exceed 15 consecutive
days.
      (3)   This license shall be issued in the same manner as other malt
beverage licenses, except that the state does not have to grant approval and
the license fee remains in the municipality.
   (D)   Spiking permit.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a person to consume any intoxicating liquor or
mix an alcoholic beverage in any public place other than an on-sale
establishment.
      (2)   The governing body may grant authorization for persons to consume
or blend alcoholic beverages on property that is publicly owned or owned by a
nonprofit corporation. The permit period shall not exceed 24 hours and the
hours or authorization shall not exceed those permitted for on-sale licenses.
   (E)   Organizational special events. The municipality may issue a special
events temporary on-sale liquor license if the applicant is recognized as an
exempt organization under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, and the licensee
holds a malt beverage retailer license within the municipality. The license may
be issued for a period of time not to exceed two consecutive days.
§ 113.17 OFF-SALE LICENSES TO OPERATE WITHIN MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   No more than three off-sale licenses issued pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2
(3) and (5) may be issued under SDCL Chapter 35 to operate in a municipality of
1,000 or less. Above this population limit, no more than one license may be
issued for every additional 1,500 of population or fraction thereof.
   (B)   The number of off-sale licenses may not be less than the total number
of licenses allowable as of July 1, 1981, which have never been revoked or not
reissued.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, POPULATION means an amount equal to the
population estimates published by the United States Census Bureau for each
even-numbered year, except for the decennial year. For a decennial year,
population is equal to the amount determined by the decennial federal census.
   (D)   If a license issued pursuant to this section exceeds the number of
licenses permissible in accordance with the decennial federal census, the
license may not be revoked or denied renewal solely because issuance of the
license exceeded the permissible number.
(SDCL § 35-4-10)
§ 113.18 ON-SALE LICENSES.
   (A)   Pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-11, if not fixed by ordinance, the governing
board of the municipality may on or before September 1 in each year, by
resolution, determine the number of on-sale and off-sale licenses it will
approve for the ensuing calendar year, and the fees to be charged for the
various classifications of licenses.
   (B)   The number of on-sale licenses issued may not exceed three each for
the first 1,000 of population or fraction thereof and not exceed one each of
such licenses for each additional 1,500 of population or fraction thereof.
   (C)   The number of licenses allowable may not be less than the total number
of licenses allowable or issued as of July 1, 1981. The municipal governing
board shall at such meeting establish the fee for on-sale licenses pursuant to
state law. The fee applies to all the on-sale licenses issued in the ensuing
calendar year. The quotas established in this section do not apply to licenses
issued pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(12) and (16).
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, population is equal to the
population estimates published by the United States Census Bureau for each
even-numbered year, except for the decennial year. For a decennial year,
population is equal to the amount determined by the decennial federal census.
No license issued pursuant to this section that exceeds the number of licenses
that would have been issued upon the decennial federal census may be denied or
revoked solely by reason that the license issued exceeds the number of licenses
authorized by the decennial federal census.
(SDCL § 35-4-11)
§ 113.19 CONVENTION FACILITY ON-SALE LICENSES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of SDCL § 35-4-11, each municipality
may issue two convention facility on-sale licenses pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2
(13) for convention facilities substantially constructed within the two years
following issuance of the license or previously completed.
   (B)   If located in a municipality with a population of 20,000 or greater,
the hotel-motel convention facility shall be used and kept open for the hosting
of large groups of guests for compensation and shall have at least 100 rooms
that are suitable lodging accommodations and convention facilities with seating
for at least 400 persons.
   (C)   If located in a municipality with a population of less than 20,000,
the hotel-motel convention facility shall have at least 40 rooms that are
suitable lodging accommodations and convention facilities with seating for at
least 150 persons.
   (D)   If a municipality’s population changes, the facility is only required
to meet the criteria established by this section for the license at the time
the license was originally issued.
(SDCL § 35-4-11.2)
§ 113.20 MALT BEVERAGE LICENSES.
   The municipality may issue as many malt beverage licenses as it deems
necessary.
§ 113.21 TIMES WHEN SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No on-sale or off-sale licensee, licensed under SDCL § 35-4-2(3), (4),
(5), (6), (9), (11), or (13) may sell, serve, or allow to be consumed on the
premises covered by the license, alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. or on Sunday after 2:00 a.m., on Memorial Day after 2:00
a.m., or at any time on Christmas Day. However, this municipality may, by
ordinance, allow the sale, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages on
Sundays, Christmas Day and/or Memorial Day.
(SDCL § 35-4-81)
   (B)   No on-sale or off-sale licensee licensed under SDCL § 35-4-2(12) and
(16) may sell, serve, or allow to be consumed on the premises covered by the
license, any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(SDCL § 35-4-81.2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.22 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for any license shall be on the form prescribed by the
department of revenue. All applications for retail licenses, except those cited
in SDCL § 35-2-1.1 shall be submitted to the governing body. The municipality
shall approve or disapprove the application based on the grounds that the
applicant is a suitable person and that the proposed location is suitable.
   (B)   The governing body shall review the following factors in determining
whether or not a video lottery machine shall be permitted in establishments
issued an on-sale alcoholic beverage license pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(12) and
(16):
      (1)   The number of current establishments currently licenses for video
lottery;
      (2)   The proximity of the business to other establishments licensed for
video lottery;
      (3)   The type of business and manner in which the applicant proposes to
operate it;
      (4)   The location of the business in relation to other businesses,
residential areas, or activities within the same general area;
      (5)   The extent to which minors frequent a business connected to the one
proposed; and
      (6)   The effect the proposed business has on economic development.
   (C)    The governing body is to certify on each application filed with the
department for a license granted under SDCL § 35-4-2(12) and (16) whether the
business premises is authorized for video lottery machine placement.
   (D)   An existing video lottery license may not be denied renewal or
transfer based upon the criteria set out in division (B) of this section. The
lottery may issue a video lottery license to those establishments certified
pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the
municipality may not restrict the number of alcoholic beverage licenses issued
under SDCL § 35-4-2(12) and (16) and certified for video lottery to a number
less than those licensed as video lottery establishments on March 1, 1994.
(SDCL § 42-7A-64)
§ 113.23 HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   The municipality shall hold a hearing on the application for a
license. Notice of the hearing must be published one time, one week prior to
the hearing in the official newspaper. Any resident who requests written notice
of the hearing must be notified accordingly.
   (B)   (1)   If the application is denied after the hearing, the fee is
returned to the applicant. If after the hearing, the application is granted,
the fee is deposited in the general fund and the application is forwarded to
the secretary of the department, who can accept or reject the application.
      (2)   If the application is for a malt beverage license, only one-half of
the fee is deposited in the general fund. The other one-half is forwarded to
the secretary of the department.
   (C)   A license cannot be reissued to the same applicant for a one-year
period if the license has not been actively used by the applicant during the
previous two years.
§ 113.24 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   If the applicant already holds a license and is applying for the same
class of license at the same location for the next license year, then only the
approval of the governing body is necessary to issue the license for the new
year.
   (B)   One copy of the application is forwarded to the department and a new
card will be issued by the department with an appropriate expiration date. The
mayor or chairperson the governing board shall sign the new card in the lower
right hand corner to properly validate the card.
§ 113.25 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The procedure for a transfer of license is the same as for application
for a new license. The fee for a transfer is $150. An affidavit of bulk sale
and the existing license card must be submitted with the application for
transfer.
   (B)   The application to transfer the license shall only be permitted if all
municipal and state sales and use taxes incurred by the licensee as a result of
the operation have been paid, and all property taxes, which are the liability
of the licensee are paid or are not delinquent.
§ 113.26 DISTRIBUTION OF LICENSE AND TRANSFER FEES AND PENALTIES.
   Fifty percent of all license and transfer fees received pursuant to SDCL §
35-4-2(16) shall remain in the municipality in which the licensee paying the
fee is located. If the licensee is located outside the corporate limits of a
municipality, 50% of the fees remain in the county in which the licensee is
located. The remainder of all license and transfer fees and penalties received
shall be credited to the state general fund.
(SDCL § 35-4-2.11)
§ 113.27 OFF-SALE LICENSEES PERMITTED TO PROVIDE FREE SAMPLES; NO ADDITIONAL
LICENSE REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A licensee holding a license pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(3) or (5) may
provide samples of malt beverages, wine, cider, distilled spirits, liqueurs,
and cordials to the general public without obtaining an additional license. The
licensee may only offer as samples the malt beverages, wine, cider, distilled
spirits, liqueurs, and cordials that the licensee currently has in stock and is
offering for sale to the general public.
   (B)   The malt beverage, wine, cider, distilled spirits, liqueur, and
cordial samples shall be dispensed at no charge and shall be consumed on the
licensed premises during the permitted hours of off-sale.
   (C)   No sample of malt beverage or cider may be larger than three fluid
ounces. No sample of wine may be larger than 50 milliliters and no sample of
distilled spirits, liqueur, or cordial may be larger than 25 milliliters.
(SDCL § 35-4-10.2)
§ 113.28 OFF-SALE DELIVERY LICENSE.
   (A)   A licensee licensed pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(3) or (5) may apply for
an off-sale delivery license as provided by SDCL § 35-4-2(23) to deliver
alcoholic beverages to a consumer within the boundaries of the municipality
that issued the off-sale license. The alcoholic beverage for delivery shall be
purchased in person and on-site at the licensee’s off-sale premises. The
minimum purchase of alcoholic beverages shall be $150.
   (B)   The delivery shall be made during hours of operation pursuant to SDCL
§ 35-4-81.2 by an employee of the licensee who is at least 21 years old. The
employee shall obtain the signature of a person 21 years old or older before
delivery of the shipment. The employee shall request that the person signing
for the delivery display a valid age-bearing photo identification document
issued by this state, another state, or the federal government verifying that
the person is 21 years old or older. Documentation verifying the identification
of the person signing for the delivery shall be retained by the licensee for
one year.
(SDCL § 35-4-127)
§ 113.29 MANUFACTURE, SALE, OR POSSESSION OF POWDERED, CONDENSED, OR
CONCENTRATED ALCOHOL PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Unless specifically allowed in this section, the manufacture, sale, or
possession of alcohol in a powdered, condensed, or other concentrated form as
defined in §
113.01 or the sale or possession of an alcoholic beverage that is reconstituted
from alcohol in a powdered, condensed, or other concentrated form is
prohibited.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to the following:
      (1)   Any hospital that possesses a product defined in SDCL § 35-1-1(17A)
and that possession is primarily used for conducting scientific research; or
      (2)   Any state institution, private college or university, or
pharmaceutical or biotechnical company that possesses a product defined in §
113.01 and that possession is primarily used for conducting bona fide research.
(SDCL § 35-4-128)
§ 113.30 QUANTITY DISCOUNTS AND CASH DISCOUNTS PERMITTED.
   A retailer, as defined in §
113.01 of this chapter, may offer quantity discounts or cash discounts to a
consumer for the purchase of alcoholic beverages. Any quantity discount or cash
discount offered by a retailer to a consumer shall comply with the provisions
of SDCL § 35-4-129.
(SDCL § 35-4-130)
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR OPERATIONS
§ 113.45 MUNICIPAL APPLICATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Any applicant for a new retail license, except as set forth in SDCL §
35-2-1.1, or the transfer of an existing license shall submit an application to
the governing body of the municipality in which the applicant intends to
operate, or if outside the corporate limits of a municipality, to the governing
body of the county in which the applicant intends to operate. The applicant
shall submit the required fee with the application. The governing body may
approve the application for a new retail license or the transfer of an existing
license if the governing body considers the applicant suitable to hold the
license and the proposed location is suitable.
   (B)   The governing body may disapprove an application for a new retail
license or the transfer of an existing license issued under SDCL § 35-4-2(4),
(6), or (13) if:
      (1)   The approval of the application permits a person, corporation, or
business entity to possess more than one-third of the licenses available to be
issued in the jurisdiction; and
      (2)   The governing body determines that possession of more than one-
third of licenses available is not in the public interest.
   (C)   Any application for the reissuance of a retail license may be approved
by the municipal or county governing body without a hearing unless in the past
year the licensee or one or more of the licensee’s employees have been
subjected to a criminal penalty for violation of the alcoholic beverage control
law or the license has been suspended.
(SDCL § 35-2-1.2)
§ 113.46 MANAGEMENT OF MUNICIPAL LIQUOR LICENSES.
   (A)   The governing body shall operate and conduct the municipal liquor
establishment and if necessary, shall set the prices to be charged on all sales
of liquor.
   (B)   Gross receipts are to be submitted to the municipal finance officer
and disbursements from the fund shall only be made with presentation of
verified vouchers.
   (C)   The municipality shall keep a separate accounting of all transactions
involving purchases, sales, and inventories conducted under each license.
   (D)   A municipality that holds an off-sale license pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-
2(5) is eligible for a license under SDCL § 35-4-2(16) and any municipality
holding a license under SDCL Chapter 35-4 is eligible for a retailer’s license
under SDCL § 35-4-2.
   (E)   Upon termination of the license, the governing board shall liquidate
the business operated and the assets of the business in such a manner as may be
determined by resolution, and is consistent with law.
§ 113.47 OPERATING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Licenses.
      (1)   On-sale and off-sale license.
         (a)   Any municipality that has obtained a license under SDCL Title 35
may issue licenses pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(12) and (16).
         (b)   If a municipality has been issued an off-sale license only, the
governing body may approve or disapprove applications for on-sale licenses
issued pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(4). If a municipality has been issued an on-
sale and off-sale license, the governing body may, by resolution, enter into an
operating agreement with any person for the specific purpose of operating an
on-sale establishment or an off-sale establishment, or both for the
municipality.
(SDCL § 35-4-19)
      (2)   Malt beverage license. The municipality may also enter into an
operating agreement with an individual to operate a malt beverage license that
the municipality owns.
      (3)   Off-sale license only. If a municipality has been issued an off-
sale license only, the governing body may, by resolution, enter into an
operating agreement with the manager of a legitimate operating business concern
for the specific purpose of operating the off-sale establishment for the
municipality.
(SDCL § 35-4-22)
   (B)   Provisions of agreement. An operating agreement under SDCL § 35-4-19
shall include:
      (1)   The manager is responsible for all operating expenses, including
taxes, insurance, and license fees, if any;
      (2)   The manager may dispense only alcoholic beverages supplied by the
municipal off-sale establishment;
      (3)   The agreement shall be for a period not to exceed five years with
the provision of one extension also not to exceed five years in the discretion
of the governing body;
      (4)   The agreement may be canceled by 90 days’ written notice by either
party;
      (5)   The manager shall pay for all alcoholic beverages supplied by the
municipal off-sale establishment, the actual cost price, the transportation
charges and markup, and any additional compensation or fee as may be mutually
agreed upon by both parties; and
      (6)   A complete and detailed record shall be maintained by the
municipality of all alcoholic beverages supplied the on-sale manager. All
alcoholic beverages shall be evidenced by prenumbered invoices prepared in
triplicate showing the date, quantity, brand, size, and actual cost as set
forth in division (B)(5) of this section. The invoices shall bear the signature
of the on-sale manager or the manager’s authorized representative. One copy of
the invoice shall be retained by the off-sale establishment, one copy shall be
retained by the on-sale establishment, and one copy shall be filed with the
municipal auditor or clerk. All copies shall be kept as permanent records and
made available for reference and audit purposes.
(SDCL § 35-4-21)
   (C)   Purchase on credit. An operator may not purchase alcoholic beverages
on credit.
   (D)   Number of operating agreements. The number of operating agreements the
municipality may have is limited to the number of licenses a municipality can
issue.
§ 113.48 MUNICIPALITY HOLDING REQUIRED LICENSE AUTHORIZED TO SERVE FOOD,
PREPARED FOOD, AND BEVERAGES.
   Any municipality holding a license pursuant to SDCL Title 35 may serve or
provide for the service of food, prepared food, and beverages at any
establishment operating under such license.
(SDCL § 9-12-20)
AGE REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.60 SALE TO PROHIBITED PERSONS.
   (A)   No licensee may sell or serve any alcoholic beverage to any person who
is obviously intoxicated.
   (B)   However, no licensee is civilly liable to any injured person or the
injured person’s estate for any injury suffered, including any action for
wrongful death, or property damage suffered because of the intoxication of any
person due to the sale or consumption of any alcoholic beverage in violation of
the provisions of this section.
(SDCL § 35-4-78) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.61 MINORS ON PREMISES.
   No on-sale or off-sale licensee may permit any person less than 21 years old
to loiter on the licensed premises or to sell, serve, dispense, or consume
alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises
(SDCL § 35-4-79) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.62 EXCEPTION TO PROHIBITION ON SALES OR SERVICE BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS
OLD.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
113.61, any on-sale or off-sale licensee may permit persons 18 years or older
to sell or serve alcoholic beverages if less than 50% of the gross business
transacted by the establishment is from the sale of alcoholic beverages, or the
licensee or an employee of the licensee that is at least 21 years of age is on
the premises when the alcoholic beverage is sold or served.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term, TO SELL OR SERVE ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES, includes tending bar or drawing, pouring, or mixing alcoholic
beverages. Any person tending bar or drawing, pouring, or mixing alcoholic
beverages pursuant to this section must be certified by a nationally recognized
alcohol management program.
(SDCL § 35-4-79.4)
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Application
   
114.04   Supplemental items; license fee
   
114.05   Application procedure
   
114.06   Waiver of requirements
   
114.07   Violation of application/license
   
114.08   Activity facilities
   
114.09   Official supervision
   
114.10   Additional law enforcement
   
114.11   Traffic and parking
   
114.12   Cleanup; damage
   
114.13   Disorderly conduct; disturbances
   
114.14   Alcoholic beverage regulations
   
114.15   Days and hours of operation
 
   
114.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to license, regulate pool and billiard rooms and bowling alleys,
see SDCL § 9-34-14
   Authority to license, regulate shows and amusements, see SDCL § 9-34-13
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OUTDOOR. Not totally enclosed within a building or other structure; and
ENCLOSED shall mean totally surrounded by walls, roof, or other enclosure so as
to prevent the escape of the noise or sound of whatever is going on within.
Open windows, doors, or the like that allow the noise or sound to escape and
potentially disturb the peace of anyone else shall cause the activity within to
constitute an outdoor activity.
   OUTDOOR DANCE, CONCERT or SIMILAR ENTERTAINMENT. Any such event or happening
whether on private or public property, whether the same is a private or
exclusive event or open to the public, and whether the same is free of charge
or subject to charge, admission, or cover fee or similar cost or reimbursement,
whether direct or indirect, whatsoever. OUTDOOR DANCE, CONCERT or SIMILAR
ENTERTAINMENT shall be liberally construed, and the governing body shall be the
final interpreter as to whether any event of happening shall fit within the
definition of OUTDOOR DANCE, CONCERT or SIMILAR ENTERTAINMENT.
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, corporation, organization, or other entity shall manage, hold,
conduct, or otherwise maintain any outdoor dance, concert, or similar
entertainment within the municipal limits of the municipality or within one
mile of the municipal limits of the municipality, without first obtaining a
license therefore, as provided herein.
§ 114.03 APPLICATION.
   Any applicant for the license described in §
114.02 shall file an application with the governing body (or, if the event is
to be on public property under the jurisdiction of a municipal park and
recreation board, the application shall be filed with the board) at least 30
days prior to the proposed event, and the application shall contain the
following information:
   (A)   Applicant’s name, and street and mailing address;
   (B)   If applicant is a corporation, names and street and mailing addresses
of all officers and directors;
   (C)   If applicant is a partnership, names and street and mailing addresses
of all partners;
   (D)   If applicant is a noncorporate organization or other joint venture,
names and street and mailing addresses of all officers, if any, all directors,
if any, and if there are no officers nor directors, names and street and
mailing addresses of at least three primary or responsible persons of the
organization or venture, all of whom must sign the application;
   (E)   Location or place of the event, including street address, if any, and
the parameters or boundaries, with specificity, including exits;
   (F)   Date(s) of the event;
   (G)   Proposed time(s) and hours of operation;
   (H)   Type of entertainment (dance, concert, or other) with specificity,
including name of band or other entertainment;
   (I)   Approximate or projected number of people who may attend the event(s);
   (J)   Whether alcoholic beverages will be sold, served, consumed, or
otherwise provided;
   (K)   If alcoholic beverages are to be present, whether underage persons
will be allowed to attend;
   (L)   If alcoholic beverages are present and underage persons are allowed,
applicant’s specific plan to provide proper barriers or separation as required
by statutory law;
   (M)   The number of security persons and their type, kind or level of
training, experience or expertise;
   (N)   The number, kind, and location(s) of restroom facilities and trash
receptacles;
   (O)   The plan for parking and traffic flow, (including parking locations)
and regulation, with specificity;
   (P)   The plan for cleanup following the event, including the number of
persons involved, the means and method of disposal of trash and refuse, the
location of dumping and the proposed deadline that cleanup will be completed;
and
   (Q)   Any other information that may be required by the governing board.
§ 114.04 SUPPLEMENTAL ITEMS, LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license applicant, in addition to the application, shall submit at
the same time a certificate or other proof of liability insurance in the amount
(s) and coverage(s) that the governing board (or municipal park and recreation
board) may require; and shall also submit at the same time a security, damage,
cleanup, and reimbursement deposit in the form of a bond in favor of the
municipality, or a cashier’s check or money order made payable to the
municipality, or cash, in the amount required by the governing board (or
municipal recreation board).
   (B)   The applicant may also be required to submit additional documents or
items in support of or in verification of the application.
   (C)   Finally, the applicant shall, at the same time, submit an application/
license fee of $100.
§ 114.05 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Following submission of the application and all other required items
and documents and application/license fee, the applicant shall meet with the
public safety committee (or jointly with such committee and the appropriate
committee of the municipal recreation board), to answer any questions, provide
any additional or supplemental information, to receive suggestions or to
otherwise work out any details to the satisfaction of the applicant and
applicable committee.
   (B)   Following one or more committee meetings, the application shall then
be considered by the governing board (or municipal park and recreation board)
who shall hear the recommendation of the committee and may hear from the
applicant.
   (C)   Following governing body meetings, the governing body may approve the
application, approve the application with amendments, or reject the
application.
   (D)   Approval, if any, of the application as is, or as amended, shall
constitute the license sought.
§ 114.06 WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS.
   The governing body (or municipal park and recreation board) shall have the
right to waive any requirement otherwise contained in the application,
including the insurance, deposit or license fee, or an appropriate amount or
percentage thereof, if in its judgment the minimal size of the event or the
type of the event or the charitable or civic nature of the event or
organization holding or promoting the same warrant any such waiver.
§ 114.07 VIOLATION OF APPLICATION/LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any applicant or any person acting on behalf of any
applicant to violate any provision of his, her, or its application or
requirement of the license issued pursuant thereto.
§ 114.08 ACTIVITY FACILITIES.
   The applicant shall provide appropriate and safe facilities for the activity
or event, including such lighting, restroom facilities, trash receptacles and
exits as may be warranted by the estimated crowd size or as otherwise required
by the appropriate municipal authorities.
§ 114.09 OFFICIAL SUPERVISION.
   The public safety committee of the governing body (and, if applicable, the
municipal park and recreation board) and the law enforcement agency or unit of
the governing body shall have supervision of all outdoor dances, concerts, or
similar entertainment. As such, they, along with the governing body, shall have
authority to make revisions and changes in the application and in the manner of
carrying out the applied-for activity.
Cross-reference:
   Recreation facilities, see
Ch. 95
§ 114.10 ADDITIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   The public safety committee and the municipality’s law enforcement agency
may deem it necessary to provide or contract for additional law enforcement for
the municipality or for the area around the event site, at or about the time(s)
of the event. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to pay for such
additional enforcement, without question; and the amount therefore may be
projected and included in the deposit amount to be submitted with the
application, or the municipality may require an additional deposit to be made
to cover such additional law enforcement cost prior to the date(s) of the
proposed event.
Cross-reference:
   Police, see
Ch. 33
§ 114.11 TRAFFIC AND PARKING.
   (A)   The applicant shall ensure that all public rights-of-way, streets,
alleys, sidewalks and other regularly traveled grounds, including private
driveways and driveway approaches are kept open and not blocked, even
temporarily, unless prior specific permission has been granted by the
appropriate municipal authorities.
   (B)   In addition, the applicant shall ensure that no event parking is
allowed on and along any such public right-of-way nor in any public park or
otherwise on any public property without prior specific permission from
municipal authorities.
   (C)   The applicant shall, if required by the municipality, post appropriate
signs to prohibit the blocking of traffic and/or to prohibit unauthorized or
unlawful parking, and any other appropriate signs required by the municipality.
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 94
   Traffic and parking, see Title VII
§ 114.12 CLEAN-UP; DAMAGE.
   The applicant shall be responsible for all cleanup and trash removal on the
event site and in the surrounding area. In addition, the applicant shall be
responsible for damage to any municipal property, including, but not limited
to, tables, chairs, benches, trees, shrubbery, flowers, and the like on the
event site and in the surrounding area.
Cross-reference:
   General offenses, see
Ch. 130
   Offenses against property, see
Ch. 133
§ 114.13 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; DISTURBANCES.
   The applicant and applicant’s representatives shall cooperate fully with the
security people and law enforcement officers in matters of crowd control, and
especially in the event of potential disturbances or disorderly conduct or
similar activity.
Cross-reference:
   General offenses, see
Ch. 130
§ 114.14 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REGULATIONS.
   Applicant shall obey all alcoholic beverage laws and if alcoholic beverages
are served, sold, or otherwise provided or present, and if underage persons are
invited or present, applicant shall specifically follow and obey all laws with
regard to the separation of underage persons from those of age.
Cross-reference:
   Regulation and licensing of liquor operations, see
Ch. 113
§ 114.15 DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicant shall operate the event(s) only on the day(s) and during
the hours approved by the appropriate municipal authorities.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the municipality no outdoor
dances, concerts, or similar entertainment events at which alcoholic beverages
will be sold, served, consumed, provided or otherwise present shall not be held
on the following days nor during or after the following hours:
      (1)   Christmas Day;
      (2)   If on Christmas Eve, not after 12:00 midnight;
      (3)   Memorial Day, except if the event is held the day or evening before
Memorial Day, the event shall not run beyond 1:00 a.m. of Memorial Day;
      (4)   Sundays, except if the event is held on a Saturday or Saturday
evening, the event shall not run beyond 1:00 a.m. of the Sunday following the
Saturday event;
      (5)   If on a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, the event shall
not run beyond 1:00 a.m. of the following morning;
      (6)   If on a Friday, the event shall not run beyond 1:00 a.m. of the
following morning;
      (7)   If on a Saturday, the event shall not run beyond 1:00 a.m. of the
following morning; and
      (8)   Outdoor dances, concerts, or similar entertainments are generally
discouraged on all nights except Friday and Saturday, if the event shall run
past 11:00 p.m.
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any applicant or any person acting on behalf of any
applicant, or for any other person to violate any provision of this chapter. If
any applicant or any person acting on his or her behalf or any other person
does violation the provisions of this chapter, they may be fined an amount not
to exceed $200 and imprisoned no longer than 30 days or both.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
134.   WEAPONS
      
135.   OFFENSES INVOLVING INJURY OR DANGER TO THE PERSON
      
136.   FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General
   
130.01   State crimes adopted
Offenses Against the Administration of Government
   
130.15   Refusal to aid police
   
130.16   Assault against an officer
   
130.17   Obstructing an officer
   
130.18   Interference with officers
   
130.19   Failure to stop; escape
   
130.20   False reporting to authorities
   
130.21   Impersonation of police officer
Miscellaneous Offenses
   
130.35   Cruelty to animals
   
130.36   Poisoning
   
130.37   Abandoning of animal
   
130.38   Trapping of animals
   
130.39   Hunting prohibited
   
130.40   Railroad trains not to block street
   
130.41   Smoking in public or place of employment prohibited
   
130.42   Malicious mischief
   
130.43   Wells and cisterns covered
   
130.44   Open burning
   
130.45   Curfew for minors enforced
   
130.46   Endangering life, health, or morals of minors
   
130.47   Electronic cigarettes
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
GENERAL
§ 130.01 STATE CRIMES ADOPTED.
   The provisions of SDCL Title 22 are herein adopted by reference and shall be
enforced by the police officers of this municipality. It shall be unlawful to
violate any of the provisions of Chapter 130.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Police, see
Ch. 33
OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 130.15 REFUSAL TO AID POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful to fail to promptly aid the police in the discharge of
their duties when called upon by any police officer to do the same.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 ASSAULT AGAINST AN OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful to attempt assault or strike any officer of the
municipality while such officer is in the discharge of his or her duty or to
attempt to or knowingly cause bodily injury to a law enforcement officer or
public officer engaged in the performance of his or her official duties.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Provisions on assault, see SDCL §§ 22-18-1 et seq.
§ 130.17 OBSTRUCTING AN OFFICER.
   Except as provided in SDCL §§ 22-11-4 and 22-11-5, any person who, by
threatening to use violence, force, or physical interference or obstacle,
intentionally obstructs, impairs, or hinders the enforcement of the criminal
laws or the preservation of the peace by a law enforcement officer or jailer
acting under color of his or her official authority, or intentionally
obstructs, impairs, or hinders the prevention, control, or abatement of fire by
a firefighter acting under color of his or her official authority, is guilty of
obstructing a law enforcement officer or jailer or firefighter.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any law enforcement
officers who is performing any official duty.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.19 FAILURE TO STOP; ESCAPE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse
to stop or flee when being signaled visually or audibly to do so.
      (2)   The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice,
emergency light, or siren.
      (3)   The officer giving the signal to stop shall be in uniform and shall
prominently display his or her badge of office.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to escape from lawful confinement or to assist
another in doing so.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.20 FALSE REPORTING TO AUTHORITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Knowingly cause a false fire or other emergency alarm to be
transmitted to, or within, any fire department, ambulance service, or other
government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or
property;
   (B)   Make a report or intentionally causes the transmission of a report to
law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official
concern, when he or she knows that it did not occur; or
   (C)   Make a report or intentionally causes the transmission of a report to
law enforcement authorities which furnishes information relating to an offense
or other incident within their official concern, when he or she knows that such
information is false.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Falsely reporting a threat, see SDCL § 22-11-9.2
§ 130.21 IMPERSONATION OF POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally impersonate any public
officer or employee, civil or military, or any firefighter or any person having
special authority by law to perform any act affecting the rights or interests
of another, or assumes, without authority, any uniform or badge by which such
officer, employee, firefighter, or person is usually distinguished, and in such
assumed character does any act where another person is injured or defrauded.
Penalty, see §
130.99
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
§ 130.35 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to engage in cruelty to animals. Any animal control
officer finding an animal or fowl mistreated as described in this section shall
have the power to lawfully enter the premises where the animal is kept and
demand to examine such animal and to take possession of such animal, when in
his or her opinion, the animal requires humane treatment.
(SDCL § 9-29-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 93
§ 130.36 POISONING.
   Unless recommended by the health authority, it shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully or maliciously administer or cause to be administered
poison of any sort whatsoever to any animal, the property of another, with the
intent to injure or destroy such animal or to destroy such animal, or to place
any poison or poisoned food where such is accessible to any such animal.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 93
§ 130.37 ABANDONING OF ANIMAL.
   No person shall abandon an animal in the municipality.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 93
§ 130.38 TRAPPING OF ANIMALS.
   No person without permission of the city health department shall set, allow
to be set, or use any trap for the purpose of catching any animal, which trap
could injure or kill any animal, except rodent traps in the interior of a
building, and except by persons employed by or agents of the city heath
department or city parks, recreation and forestry department for purposes of
the city’s health and welfare.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 93
§ 130.39 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall hunt game in the city.
      (2)   GAME means any wild bird or animal hunted for sport or for use as
food. HUNT means to pursue GAME while in possession of a firearm or weapon for
sport, food, or to kill.
   (B)   This section does not apply to peace officers or city animal control
officers in the discharge of their official duties.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.40 RAILROAD TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any
railroad or car to direct the operation of to operate the same in such a manner
as to prevent unnecessarily the use of any street for the purposes of travel
for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall
not apply to trains or cars in continuous motion.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.41 SMOKING IN PUBLIC OR PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)    No person may smoke tobacco product or carry any lighted tobacco
product in any public place or place of employment.
   (B)   A violation of this section is a petty offense.
(SDCL § 34-46-14)
§ 130.42 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, damage, deface, break, tamper
with or otherwise harm property, public or private, real or personal, not his
or her own.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.43 WELLS AND CISTERNS COVERED.
   No person owning or in control of any property shall allow upon any such
property any well, cistern, vault, or other pit except the same be covered by a
good, safe, and substantial covering made of iron or lumber, and securely
fastened in such a manner that the same cannot be removed by children; provided
that any person may have upon his or her premises a well closed by a high board
fence or other substantial enclosure at least five feet high. Any type of well
uncovered to without a fence is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 90
§ 130.44 OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall kindle, or maintain any open bonfire, campfire, or rubbish
fire within the corporate limits of this municipality, without a permit from
the fire department, volunteer fire department, governing body or appropriate
department, with the exception of barbecue grills.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.45 CURFEW FOR MINORS ENFORCED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 14 years of age
to be upon the streets or sidewalks during the period between the hours of 12:
01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, or some
responsible person over the age of 21 years, or a member of his or her family
18 years or older, or unless he or she has a justifiable excuse therefor. It
shall also be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any person under the age
of 14 to allow the person to be upon the streets or sidewalks during the period
between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, or some responsible person over the age of 21 years or a
member of his or her family 18 years or older, or unless the person has a
justifiable excuse therefor. All times referred to herein are local times.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Strip search for curfew violation prohibited, see SDCL § 26-11-1.1
§ 130.46 ENDANGERING LIFE, HEALTH, OR MORALS OF MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any person having the care, custody, control, or
confidence of, or influence over, any child to willfully cause or permit the
life of the child to be endangered, or the health of the child to be injured,
or the morals of the child to be impaired; or to willfully cause or permit the
child to be placed in the a situation, business or occupation that its life,
health or morals shall be endangered; or to willfully abandon the child; or to
torture, torment, cruelly punish or willfully or negligently deprive of
necessary food, clothing or shelter, or in any other manner injure the child
unnecessarily.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.47 ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Includes vapor product.
      VAPOR PRODUCT. Any noncombustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that
can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form. The
term, vapor product, includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that
is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic smoking device, or similar
product or device. The term VAPOR PRODUCT does not include any product approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as tobacco cessation
products and marketed and sold solely for that purpose.
(SDCL § 34-46-20)
   (B)   Prohibited. No person may sell a vapor product other than in an
unopened package originating with the manufacturer and depicting the warning
labels required by federal law, or sell a vapor product through self-service
display other than a display that is:
      (1)   A vending machine permitted under SDCL § 34-46-2(5); or
      (2)   Located in a tobacco specialty store.
(SDCL § 34-46-21) Penalty, see
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
131.01   Disorder and disturbances
   
131.02   Disorderly conduct
   
131.03   Unlawful assembly
   
131.04   Refusal to disperse or refrain from riot or unlawful assembly
   
131.05   Loud and raucous noise
 
   
131.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Amusements, see
Ch. 114
   Local provisions, see Title XVII
§ 131.01 DISORDER AND DISTURBANCES.
   The municipality shall have power to provide for keeping and preserving the
peace and quietness of the municipality, to prevent disorderly conduct, to
prohibit public intoxication, and to prevent and suppress riots, affrays,
noises, disturbances, and disorderly assemblies in any place.
Statutory reference:
   General authority, see SDCL § 9-29-3
§ 131.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   Any person who intentionally causes serious public inconvenience, annoyance,
or alarm to any other person, or creates a risk thereof is guilty of disorderly
conduct by engaging in the following:
   (A)   Engaging in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior;
   (B)   Making unreasonable noise;
   (C)   Disturbing any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful
authority; or
   (D)   Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   Any person who assembles with two or more persons for the purpose of
engaging in conduct constituting riot or aggravated riot or who, if being
present at an assembly that either has or develops such a purpose, remains
there with intent to advance that purpose is guilty of unlawful assembly.
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 REFUSAL TO DISPERSE OR REFRAIN FROM RIOT OR UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to, during a riot or unlawful assembly,
intentionally disobey a reasonable public safety order to move, disperse, or
refrain from specified activities in the immediate vicinity of the riot.
   (B)   A PUBLIC SAFETY ORDER is an order designed to prevent or control
disorder, or promote the safety of persons or property, issued by a law
enforcement officer or a member of the fire or military forces concerned with
the riot or unlawful assembly.
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or allow or
cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise. Quieter standards are
expected during nighttime hours.
      (2)   (a)   For purposes of this section, LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE shall
mean any sound that, because of its volume level, duration and character,
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the
municipality.
         (b)   This term includes the types of noise generated by the
activities enumerated in division (C) of this section, except as may be
excluded in division (D) of this section. The term shall be limited to LOUD AND
RAUCOUS NOISE heard in any occupied residential unit which is not the source of
the noise or upon the yard or driveway of such occupied residential unit, upon
the public sidewalks and streets, school or public building or upon the grounds
thereof while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of the public as
invitees or licensees, and in any event from a location not less that 50 feet
from the source of the noise, measured in a straight line from the radio,
loudspeaker, voice, or other noise source.
   (B)   Prohibited noise from a gathering of people.
      (1)   No person in possession and present in any premises shall make or
cause or allow to be made or allow to be continue any loud and raucous noise
resulting from a gathering of people. Quieter standards are expected during
nighttime hours.
      (2)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, the term
LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE resulting from a gathering of people shall mean any
sound that, because of its volume level, duration and character, annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of
reasonable persons or ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the
municipality.
         (b)   The term includes the types of noise generated by the activities
enumerated in division (C) of this section, except as provided in division (D)
of this section. The term shall be limited to LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE heard in
any occupied residential unit which is not the source of the noise or upon the
yard or driveway of such occupied residential unit, upon the public sidewalks
of any streets, in any public park, in any school or public building or upon
the grounds thereof while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of the
public as invitees or licensees, and in any event, from a location not less
than 50 feet from the source of the noise, measured in a straight line from the
radio, loudspeaker, voice or other noise source.
   (C)   Activities. The following acts, subject to the exceptions in division
(D) of this section are declared to be public nuisances in violation of
divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      (1)   Radios, amplifiers, phonographs, and other devices for producing or
reproducing sound. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or
operated any radio, amplifier, musical instrument, tape player, compact disc,
compact tape, or phonograph or other device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to cause loud and raucous noise; and
      (2)   Yelling, shouting, and prolonged sounds by people. Yelling,
shouting, whistling, or singing, or any prolonged sounds made by people at any
time or place so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 9:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
   (D)   Exceptions. The term LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE does not include noise or
sound generated by the following:
      (1)   Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls;
      (2)   Radios, sirens, horns, and bells on police, fire, and other
emergency response vehicles;
      (3)   Activities on or in municipal and school athletic facilities and on
or in publicly owned property and facilities, provided that such activities
have been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agent;
and
      (4)   Fire alarms and security alarms, prior to the giving of notice and
a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises
served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm.
Penalty, see §
131.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 90
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
132.01   Gambling and lotteries
   
132.02   Public indecency
   
132.03   Sale or distribution of obscene matter
   
132.04   House of ill repute; abatement
   
132.05   Social host; underage drinking
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 GAMBLING AND LOTTERIES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to engage in, run, or allow gambling in any
form with cards, dice, or other implements or devices of any kind wherein
anything valuable is wagered upon the outcome.
      (2)   It shall also be unlawful to keep any establishment, place,
equipment, lotteries, or apparatus for such gambling or allow any agents or
employees to engage in the same for such purpose.
      (3)   Any person who knowingly lets any establishment, structure, place,
equipment, or apparatus for such gambling violates this section.
   (B)   The municipality shall have the right to enter any place where any
such activity is practiced or allowed to be practiced, and seize and destroy
any instrument, device, or thing used for such purpose found therein.
   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to any lottery owned and
operated by this state.
Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit gambling, see SDCL § 9-29-5
§ 132.02 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   A person commits the crime of public indecency if the person, with an
immoral purpose, exposes his or her anus or genitals in a public place where
another may be present who will be offended or alarmed by the person’s act.
Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE MATTER.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or exhibit any obscene or immoral publication,
print, film, picture, or illustration.
Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 HOUSE OF ILL REPUTE; ABATEMENT.
   Whoever shall own, lease, establish, maintain, or operate any place for the
purposes of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution is guilty of a nuisance and
the place, including ground, and all contents are declared a nuisance and shall
be enjoined and abated as provided in SDCL §§ 21-10-11 through 21-10-20.
(SDCL § 21-10-10) Penalty, see §
132.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see Ch. 90
§ 132.05 SOCIAL HOST; UNDERAGE DRINKING.
   (A)   Social host defined. For purposes of this section, the term SOCIAL
HOST means anyone who hosts a social gathering and knowingly condones the
illegal consumption of alcohol by underage persons on property that the host
controls.
(SDCL § 35-9-13)
   (B)   Social host prohibited from permitting consumption of alcoholic
beverages by person under age 18. No person, acting as a social host, may,
knowingly, permit any person under the age of 18 to illegally consume any
alcoholic beverage, regardless of the source of the alcoholic beverage, on or
at the premises of the person acting as social host.
(SDCL § 35-9-9)
   (C)   Social host prohibited from permitting consumption of alcoholic
beverages by person age 18, 19, or 20. No person, acting as a social host, may,
knowingly, permit any person aged 18, 19, or 20 to illegally consume any
alcoholic beverage, regardless of the source of the alcoholic beverage, on or
at the premises of the person acting as social host.
(SDCL § 35-9-10)
   (D)   Defense. It is a defense against a conviction for a violation of SDCL
§§ 35-9-9 and 35-9-10 that, immediately upon learning of the illegal
consumption, the social host or an agent of the social host took effective and
appropriate action to stop the illegal consumption and to secure or to attempt
to secure the contraband alcoholic beverages.
(SDCL § 35-9-11)
   (E)   Social host’s lack of physical presence not a defense. It is not a
defense of a violation of divisions (B) and (C) of this section that the social
host was not physically present on or at the premises if the social host knew
that illegal consumption of alcoholic beverages would occur in his or her
absence.
(SDCL § 35-9-12) Penalty, §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
133.01   Intentional damage to property
   
133.02   Interference with municipal property
   
133.03   Injuring signs
   
133.04   Connections of franchised cable television company
   
133.05   Connection with utilities
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 INTENTIONAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally injure, damage, or
destroy public property without the lawful consent of the appropriate governing
body having jurisdiction thereof, or private property in which other persons
have an interest, without the consent of the other persons.
Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL § 22-34-1
§ 133.02 INTERFERENCE WITH MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb or in any manner interfere with
any building, water tower, bridge or structure belonging to the municipality
without being authorized to do so by the municipality, and it shall also be
unlawful to interfere, deface or damage any such structure.
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 INJURING SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or to obliterate,
either wholly or partially any sign, sign board, card placed, posted, extended,
or erected by the city.
Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 CONNECTIONS OF FRANCHISED CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY.
   It shall be unlawful to connect or disconnect or otherwise tamper with any
service connection of any franchised cable television company without the
express, prior approval from a designated agent of the cable television
company.
Penalty, see §
133.99
Cross-reference:
   General regulations, see Title IX
   Public works, see Title V
§ 133.05 CONNECTION WITH UTILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to connect or cause to be connected with any main
service pipe, wire, or other conductor of any gas, water, electrical energy,
any pipe, wire, or other device for the purpose of obtaining gas, water, or
electrical current, without first obtaining prior approval from a designated
agent of the appropriate entity.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person with the intent to defraud,
connect, or cause to be connected with any meter installed, for the purpose of
registering the amount of gas, water, or electricity supplied to any customer
any pipe, wire, or other device or disconnect, change in any manner, interfere
with any such meter or pipe or appliance connected therewith, that the meter
will not measure or register the full amount of gas, water, or electricity
supplied to any customer.
Penalty, see §
133.99
Cross-reference:
   General regulations, see Title IX
   Public works, see Title V
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 134: WEAPONS
Section
   
134.01   Carrying concealed weapon
   
134.02   Reckless discharge of firearm or shooting of bow and arrow
   
134.03   Air rifles and slingshots
   
134.04   Discharging weapons
   
134.05   Possession of pistols by minors prohibited
   
134.06   Minors prohibited from carrying concealed pistol except with parent or
guardian
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPON.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall carry any concealed weapon such as, but not
limited to, slingshot, brass knuckle or knuckle or other material or any
sandbag, dagger, Bowie knife, dirk knife, or other dangerous or deadly weapon
or any instrument or device, when used is likely to produce death or great
bodily harm unless he or she shall have a valid permit for the same pursuant to
SDCL Chapter 23-7.
      (2)   No person shall carry any weapon concealed in a vehicle while
operating the vehicle unless he or she shall have a valid permit for the same
pursuant to SDCL Chapter 23-7.
   (B)   Any police officer or parole officer may wear or carry weapons
necessary for him or her to carry out his or her official duties.
Penalty, see §
134.99
Statutory reference:
   Concealment of weapon with intent to commit felony, see SDCL § 22-14-8
   Lawful possession of concealed firearm, see SDCL § 9-14-44
   Lawful possession of dangerous weapon, see SDCL § 9-14-15
   Permit to carry concealed pistol, see SDCL § 23-7-7
§ 134.02 RECKLESS DISCHARGE OF FIREARM OR SHOOTING OF BOW AND ARROW.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Recklessly discharge a firearm or recklessly shoot a bow and arrow;
   (B)   Set a device designed to activate a weapon upon being tripped or
approached, and leave it unmarked or unattended by a competent person; or
   (C)   Have in his or her possession a loaded firearm while he or she is
intoxicated.
Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 AIR RIFLES AND SLINGSHOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle or slingshot
within the limits of the municipality.
Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.04 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   It shall be a violation for any person who willfully discharges any type of
air gun, BB-gun, arrow, including target arrows, or other weapon, or throws any
missile in any public place where there is any person to be endangered thereby,
although no injury to any person shall ensue.
Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.05 POSSESSION OF PISTOLS BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person under the age of 18 years may knowingly possess
a pistol.
(SDCL § 23-7-44)
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of division (A) of this section are not
applicable to a minor and a criminal prosecution for possession of a pistol
brought after transfer pursuant to SDCL Chapter 26-11 is not applicable to a
minor if the minor had the prior written consent of the minor’s parent or
guardian to possess the pistol, and:
      (1)   The minor was on premises owned or leased by the minor or the
minor’s parent, guardian, or immediate family member;
      (2)   The minor was in the presence of a licensed or accredited gun
safety instructor; or
      (3)   The pistol was being used for farming, ranching, hunting, trapping,
target shooting, or gun safety instruction.
(SDCL § 23-7-45)
   (C)   Age of minority; calculation of age. Minors are natural male persons
and natural female persons under 18 years of age. The periods thus specified
must be calculated from the first minute of the day on which persons are born,
to the same minute of the corresponding day completing the period of minority.
(SDCL § 26-1-1)
   (D)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section is subject to the
penalties set forth in SDCL § 23-7-44.
Statutory reference:
   Proceedings on offense for which child not subject to delinquency, SDCL §
26-11-1
§ 134.06 MINORS PROHIBITED FROM CARRYING CONCEALED PISTOL EXCEPT WITH PARENT OR
GUARDIAN.
   A person who is under the age of 18 years of age may not carry a concealed
pistol except in the presence of a parent or legal guardian.
(SDCL § 23-7-71) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES INVOLVING INJURY OR DANGER TO THE PERSON
Section
   
135.01   Threatening or harassing phone calls
 
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 THREATENING OR HARASSING PHONE CALLS.
   It is unlawful for a person to use a telephone for any of the following
purposes:
   (A)   To call another person with intent to terrorize, intimidate, threaten,
harass, or annoy such person by using obscene or lewd language or by suggesting
a lewd or lascivious act;
   (B)   To call another person with intent to threaten to inflict physical
harm or injury to any person or property;
   (C)   To call another person with intent to extort money or other things of
value; or
   (D)   To call another person with intent to disturb him or her by repeated
anonymous telephone calls or intentionally failing to replace the receiver or
disengage the telephone connection.
Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 136: FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
136.01   Definition
   
136.02   Sale and use limited
   
136.03   Transporting explosive substances
§ 136.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Includes those items enumerated in SDCL § 34-37-5, but shall not
include nor apply to ammunition for firearms nor to dynamite and devices for
exploding the same used in any industry.
§ 136.02 SALE AND USE LIMITED.
   It shall be unlawful to use any fireworks within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 136.03 TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVE SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall transport on the streets or in public places any quantity of
explosive substances or blasting powder so as to endanger the safety of the
public.
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Generally
   
150.01   Authority for zoning and planning
   
150.02   Planning commission
   
150.03   Building code
   
150.04   When building code ordinance not adopted
   
150.05   Disclosure of information of energy efficiency of residential building
to buyer; alternative disclosure
   
150.06   Violations
Contractors
   
150.20   Requirements of contractors
Cross-reference:
   Local provisions for building regulations, planning commission and
ordinances, see Title XVII
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 90
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt codes, see SDCL § 9-33-4.1
   Fire protection and safety regulations, see SDCL Chapter 9-33
GENERALLY
§ 150.01 AUTHORITY FOR ZONING AND PLANNING.
   (A)   The municipality shall have the power to regulate zoning and planning
pursuant to SDCL § 11-4-1 and therein for the purpose of promoting health,
safety, or the general welfare of the community the governing body may regulate
and restrict the height, number of stories, and size of building and other
structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of the yards,
courts, and other open spaces; the density of population; and the location and
use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, flood
plain, or other purposes.
(SDCL § 11-4-1)
   (B)   For violations of SDCL Chapter 11-4, see §
150.06.
§ 150.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Pursuant to SDCL § 11-6-2, the municipality shall create a planning and
zoning commission to develop and implement a comprehensive plan and the zoning
regulations in each of the municipality’s districts. The municipality shall
appropriate a fund for the expenditures of the commission and further set out
the qualifications of the members, mode of appointment, tenure of office,
compensation, powers, duties and rules governing such board.
§ 150.03 BUILDING CODE.
    If the governing body of any local unit of government adopts any ordinance
prescribing standards for construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, and
demolition of any building other than a residential structure as defined in
SDLC § 11-10-12, the ordinance shall comply with the 2021 edition of the
International Building Code as published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated. The governing body may amend, modify, or delete any portion of
the International Building Code before enacting such an ordinance. Additional
deletions, modifications, and amendments to the municipal ordinance may be made
by the governing body and are effective upon their adoption and filing with the
municipal finance officer. Additional deletions, modifications, and amendments
to the county ordinance may be made by the governing body, and are effective
upon their adoption and filing with the county auditor. No ordinance may apply
to mobile or manufactured homes as defined in SDCL Chapter 32-7A that are
constructed in compliance with the applicable prevailing standards of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development at the time of
construction. No ordinance may require that any fire sprinkler be installed in
a single-family dwelling. No ordinance may apply to any specialty resort or
vacation home establishment as defined in SDCL Chapter 34-18 that is
constructed in compliance with the requirements of Group R-3 of the 2021
edition of the International Building Code.
(SDCL § 11-10-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.04 WHEN BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE NOT ADOPTED.
   The design standard for construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, and
demolition of any building commenced after July 1, 2021, within the boundaries
of any local unit of government that has not adopted an ordinance prescribing
such standards pursuant to SDCL § 11-10-5 shall be based on the 2021 edition of
the International Building Code as published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated. Each local unit of government may adopt an ordinance allowing
local administration and enforcement of the design standard. The provisions of
this section do not apply to any residential structure as defined in SDCL § 11-
10-12, mobile or manufactured home, or farmstead and any accessory structure or
building thereto.
   For purposes of this section the term, FARMSTEAD, means a farm or ranch,
including any structure or building located on the land. The provisions of this
section do not apply to any mobile or manufactured home as defined in SDCL
Chapter 32-7A that is used for purposes other than residential that is
constructed in compliance with the applicable prevailing standards of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development at the time of
construction if the structure complies with applicable accessibility standards
for the occupancy intended. The provisions of this section do not apply to any
specialty resort or vacation home establishment as defined in SDCL Chapter 34-
18 that is constructed in compliance with the requirements of Group R-3 of the
2021 edition of the International Building Code.
(SDCL § 11-10-6)
§ 150.05 DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
TO BUYER; ALTERNATIVE DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Except as provided by division (B) of this section, any person,
building, or selling a previously unoccupied new residential building which is
a single-family or multifamily unit of four units or less shall disclose to the
buyer or prospective buyer information regarding the energy efficiency of the
residential building. The completed disclosure form shall be provided prior to
the signing of the contract to purchase and prior to closing if changes have
occurred or are requested, and at any other time upon request. For new
residential buildings that are completed and suitable for occupancy but unsold,
the completed disclosure form shall be made available to the buyer or
prospective buyer by the builder or seller when the residence is shown and at
any other time upon request. The disclosure shall be made on a form prepared
and disseminated by the South Dakota Real Estate Commission.
(SDCL § 11-10-8)
   (B)   If the new residential building is subject to both the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and the Safety Standards Act pursuant to the
42 U.S.C. § 5403 and the Federal Trade Commission regulation on labeling and
advertising of home insulation pursuant to 16 C..F.R. §
460.16, both as in effect on January 1, 2009, the builder or seller may
disclose, instead of the information required by division (A) of this section,
the information regarding the new residential building that is required to be
disclosed pursuant to the federal act and regulation.
(SDCL § 11-10-9)
Statutory reference:
   Disclosure statement, see SDCL § 11-10-10
§ 150.06 VIOLATIONS.
   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or
land is used in violation of SDCL Chapter 11-10 or of any ordinance or other
regulation made under authority conferred thereby, the proper local authorities
of the municipality, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about such premises.
(SDCL § 11-4-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONTRACTORS
§ 150.20 REQUIREMENTS OF CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Contractors doing work in or for the municipality are required to do
the following prior to starting work.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, CONTRACTORS would include any
individual being hired to construct any structure or remodel any structure,
install or repair any sewer or water lines, to do any excavating or landscaping
or construct or repair any item such as a fence, road, drive, and the like.
      (1)   The contractor shall be aware of the building permit process and
file one or make sure the individual he or she is working for has done so.
Building permits can be filed at the municipal finance office and are at no
cost by either the contractor or a private individual.
      (2)   If doing any digging, excavating, landscaping, or trenching, the
contractor shall call the SD One Call 48 hours prior to work or if an
emergency, call and identify it as such to be able to start work immediately,
as per SDCL § 49-7A.
      (3)   The contractor shall file proof of insurance with the municipal
finance officer if working on any public land (county, city, school, state,
water district, and the like) or if working in any right-of-way along municipal
streets.
TITLE XVII: LOCAL LEGISLATION
   Chapter
      
170.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
171.   ADMINISTRATION
      
172.   PUBLIC WORKS
      
173.   TRAFFIC CODE
      
174.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
175.   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
176.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
177.   LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 170: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   [Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title I of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 171: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   [Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title III of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 172: PUBLIC WORKS
Section
   [Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title V of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 173: TRAFFIC CODE
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title VII of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 174: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title IX of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 175: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title XI of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 176: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title XIII of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 177: LAND USAGE
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title XV of this code of ordinances
PARALLEL REFERENCES FOR SOUTH DAKOTA BASIC CODE
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
SDCL Cite Code Section
SDCL Cite                   Code Section
Chapter 1-16A               34.43
Chapter 1-16B               34.43
Chapter 1-16G               34.43
Chapter 1-16H               34.43
Chapter 1-16J               34.43
Chapter 1-25                30.019;
                            30.106
1-25-1                      Ch. 30
1-25-1 et seq.              30.019
1-25-1.1                    30.061
1-25-11                     30.019
Chapter 1-26                53.09
1-27-19                     31.03
3-4-8                       31.19
3-4-9                       31.17
3-5-14                      30.084
3-17-6                      31.15
3-19-2                      30.005
Chapter 5-12                34.43
                            34.34;
                            34.37;
5-18A                       34.43;
                            34.44;
                            34.45;
                            34.46
5-18A-1                     Ch. 34
5-18A-3                     34.33
5-18A-4                     34.34
5-18A-5                     34.33;
                            34.34
5-18A-6                     34.33;
                            34.35
5-18A-7                     34.33;
                            34.35
5-18A-8                     34.33;
                            34.36
5-18A-9                     34.33;
                            34.37
5-18A-10                    34.36;
                            34.37
5-18A-11                    34.33;
                            34.38
5-18A-12                    34.39
5-18A-13                    Ch. 34
                            34.34;
5-18A-14                    34.35;
                            34.40;
                            34.43
5-18A-15                    34.41
5-18A-16                    34.42
5-18A-22                    34.43
5-18A-37                    34.35
                            Ch. 34;
                            34.34;
                            34.37;
5-18B                       34.43;
                            34.44;
                            34.45;
                            34.46
                            Ch. 34;
                            34.34;
                            34.37;
5-18C                       34.43;
                            34.44;
                            34.45;
                            34.46
5-18C-3                     34.44
5-18C-6                     34.46
5-18C-8                     34.45
                            Ch. 34;
                            34.34;
                            34.37;
5-18D                       34.43;
                            34.44;
                            34.45;
                            34.46
5-18D-6                     34.45
5-18D-17 through 5-18D-24   34.35
5-21-1                      34.32;
                            34.44
5-21-1.1                    34.32
5-21-3                      34.32
5-21-4                      34.32
6-1-1                       34.31
6-1-17                      30.004
6-5-5                       35.02
Chapter 6-8B                34.70
6-8B-4                      32.03
Chapter 6-13                35.01
6-13-1                      35.01
Chapter 7-8                 90.37
Chapter 7-25A               113.17
                            10.04;
Title 9                     30.001;
                            50.01;
                            51.01
9-1-1                       10.02;
                            10.04
9-1-5                       34.30
9-2-1                       30.002
9-2-2                       30.002
9-7-3                       30.017
9-7-5                       30.018
9-7-6                       30.019
9-7-7                       30.020;
                            34.03
9-8-1 et seq.               30.080
9-8-1                       30.035
9-8-1.1                     30.035
9-8-2                       30.036
9-8-3                       30.035;
                            34.03
9-8-4                       30.037
9-8-5                       30.036;
                            30.039
9-8-7                       30.038
9-8-8                       30.040
9-8-10                      30.041
9-8-11                      30.042
9-8-12                      30.043
9-8-13                      30.044
9-9-1                       30.055
9-9-2                       30.056
9-9-3                       30.056
9-9-6                       30.058
9-9-7                       30.057
9-9-9                       30.064
9-9-11                      30.061
9-9-12                      30.061
9-9-14                      30.062
9-9-14.1                    30.063
9-9-16                      30.062
9-9-18                      30.065
9-9-19                      30.065
9-9-20                      30.06
9-9-20 through 9-9-24       30.065
9-9-21                      30.065
9-9-22                      30.065
9-9-23                      30.065
9-9-24                      30.065
9-9-25                      30.066
9-9-26                      30.066
9-9-27                      30.066
9-10-4                      30.080
9-10-5                      30.080
9-10-6                      30.080
9-10-7                      30.081
9-10-8                      30.086
9-10-9                      30.083
9-10-10                     30.087
9-10-11                     30.085;
                            30.088
9-10-12                     30.088
9-10-13                     30.089
9-10-14                     30.084
9-10-15                     30.082
9-10-18                     30.090
9-10-19                     30.091
Chapter 9-11                30.015
9-11-10                     30.109
9-11-11                     30.001
Chapter 9-12                Ch. 30
                            50.25;
9-12-1(2)                   51.05;
                            51.21
9-12-2                      Ch. 34
9-12-3                      31.09
9-12-3.1                    31.09
9-12-6                      10.04;
                            32.02
9-12-20                     113.48
                            30.020;
                            30.040;
Chapter 9-13                30.062;
                            30.086;
                            32.05
9-13-6                      30.003;
                            32.02
9-13-7                      30.003;
                            32.05
9-13-9                      30.003
9-13-13                     30.003;
                            32.02
9-13-14                     30.003;
                            32.03
                            30.003;
9-13-14.1                   30.017;
                            30.037;
                            30.058
                            30.003;
                            30.017;
                            30.036;
9-13-14.2                   30.037;
                            30.058; 
                            30.060;
                            32.03
9-13-14.3                   30.003
9-13-21                     32.01
9-13-24                     32.06
9-13-28                     32.06
9-14-2                      30.035;
                            30.056
9-14-3                      31.01
9-14-4                      31.02
9-14-5                      31.10;
                            31.18
9-14-10                     31.16
9-14-16                     31.08
9-14-16.1                   31.08
9-14-17                     31.03
9-14-18                     31.03
9-14-19                     31.03
9-14-20                     31.03
9-14-22                     31.05
9-14-24                     31.06
9-14-27                     31.07
9-14-28                     31.09
9-14-30                     31.09
9-14-30 through 9-14-35     31.09
9-14-31                     31.09
9-14-33                     31.09
9-14-34                     31.09
9-14-35                     31.09
9-14-42                     31.35
9-14-44                     134.01
9-14-45                     134.01
Chapter 9-18                Ch. 31
Chapter 9-19                50.01;
                            51.01
9-19-1                      10.04
                            10.99;
                            70.99;
9-19-3                      90.99;
                            92.99;
                            93.999
9-19-5                      30.105
9-19-6                      30.105
9-19-7                      30.106
9-19-7.1                    30.106
9-19-8                      30.106
9-19-9                      30.106
                            30.035;
9-19-10                     30.110;
                            34.03
9-19-11                     30.110
9-19-13                     30.107
9-19-14.1                   30.108
9-19-15                     30.108
9-19-16                     30.108
9-19-17                     30.108
Chapter 9-21                51.53
9-21-2                      34.02
9-21-7                      34.05
9-21-15                     34.05;
                            50.03
9-21-16                     50.03
9-21-19                     34.20
9-21-32                     34.56
9-21-34                     30.082
9-21-34.1   30.082       30.082
9-22-1 et seq.              31.04
9-22-2                      31.04
9-22-23                     34.01
9-23-1                      34.06
9-23-2                      34.06
9-25-12                     34.70
9-25-13                     34.70
9-25-13 through 9-25-16     34.70
Chapter 9-26                51.06
9-29-3                      131.01
9-29-5                      132.01
9-29-11                     130.35
9-29-12                     93.001
9-29-13                     90.01
9-29-16                     33.01
9-29-17                     30.081
9-29-19                     33.01
9-29-26                     Ch. 110
9-30-1                      94.01
9-30-2                      94.01
9-30-3                      94.01
9-30-4                      94.01
9-30-5                      94.01
9-31-1 through 9-31-5       70.02
9-32-10                     52.09
9-32-11                     Ch. 52
Chapter 9-33                Ch. 150
9-33-4.1                    Ch. 150
9-34-7                      110.12
9-34-8                      112.03
9-34-9                      110.26
9-34-10                     110.27
9-34-13                     Ch. 114
9-34-14                     Ch. 114
9-34-17                     110.28
9-34-18                     110.25
9-35-7                      94.16
9-35-8                      94.16
Chapter 9-38                95.02
9-38-1 et seq.              95.01
9-38-42                     34.01;
                            95.01
9-38-44                     34.01;
                            95.01
Chapter 9-40                51.55
                            50.05;
                            50.06;
Chapter 9-43                51.07;
                            51.35;
                            51.65
9-43-82                     94.35
9-45-1                      94.15
9-46-1                      94.31
9-46-1.3                    94.31
9-46-2                      94.32
9-46-2.1                    94.33
9-46-2.2                    94.33
9-46-2.3                    94.33
9-46-4                      94.34
9-46-4.1                    94.35
9-46-4.2                    94.30
9-46-11                     94.36
9-46-12                     94.30
9-47-1                      50.01
9-47-2                      50.02
9-47-3                      50.03
9-47-4                      50.04
9-47-5                      50.05
9-47-6                      50.06
9-47-8                      50.07
9-47-17                     50.25
9-47-18                     50.08
9-47-20                     50.45
9-47-22                     50.46
9-47-22 through 9-47-26     50.51
9-47-23                     50.47
9-47-24                     50.48
9-47-25                     50.49
9-47-26                     50.50
9-47-27                     50.51
9-47-28                     50.52
Chapter 9-48                51.56
9-48-1                      51.02
9-48-2                      51.01
9-48-3                      51.03
9-48-4                      51.04
9-48-5                      51.05
9-48-6                      51.06
9-48-7                      51.07
9-48-15                     51.65
9-48-16                     51.35
9-48-17                     51.36
9-48-18                     51.37
9-48-20                     51.20
9-48-26                     51.50
9-48-27                     51.51
9-48-28                     51.52
9-48-29                     51.53
9-48-30                     51.54
9-48-31                     51.55
9-48-32                     51.08
9-48-32.1                   51.56
9-48-53                     51.21
Chapter 9-55                34.55
9-55-2                      34.55
9-55-3                      34.55
10-12-7                     34.04
                            34.21;
Chapter 10-45               34.22;
                            34.57
                            34.21;
Chapter 10-46               34.32;
                            34.57
Chapter 10-46A              34.32
Chapter 10-46B              34.32
Chapter 10-52               34.21;
                            34.57
Chapter 10-52A              34.22
itle 11                     94.30
Chapter 11-4                150.01
11-4-1                      150.01
11-4-7                      150.06
11-4-8                      30.106
11-6-2                      150.02
Chapter 11-10               150.06
11-10-5                     150.03
11-10-6                     150.04
11-10-8                     150.05
11-10-9                     150.05
11-10-12                    150.03;
                            150.04
Chapter 11-11               34.43
12-1-2.1                    32.04
12-4-5.2                    32.02
Chapter 12-6                32.05
Chapter 12-19               32.01
12-25-30                    32.04
Chapter 12-27               Ch. 32;
                            32.04
21-10-1                     90.02
21-10-2                     90.02
21-10-3                     90.02
21-10-4                     90.11
21-10-5                     93.020
21-10-6                     90.38;
                            94.32
21-10-8                     90.12
21-10-9                     93.020
21-10-10                    132.04
21-10-11 through 21-10-20   132.04
21-10-28                    95.16
21-10-28 through 21-10-34   95.16
21-10-28.1                  95.16
21-10-29                    95.16
21-10-30                    95.16
21-10-31                    95.16
21-10-33                    95.15
itle 22                     130.01
                            10.99;
                            70.99;
22-6-2(2)                   90.99;
                            92.99;
                            93.999
22-11-4                     130.17
22-11-5                     130.17
22-11-9.2                   130.20
22-14-8                     134.01
22-18-1 et seq.             130.16
22-25-14                    90.04
22-34-1                     133.01
23-7                        134.01
23-7-7                      134.01
23-7-44                     134.05
23-7-45                     134.05
23-7-71                     134.06
Chapter 23A-35              70.12
26-1-1                      134.05
Chapter 26-11               134.05
26-11-1                     134.05
26-11-1.1                   130.45
31-1-5(1) through 31-1-5(4) 73.03
31-28-7                     71.058
31-30-1                     90.05
itle 32                     70.03
32-5-76                     72.07
32-5-76.1                   72.07
32-5-76.2                   72.07
32-5-98                     71.003
Chapter 32-7A               150.03;
                            150.04
32-12-11                    71.002
32-12-12                    71.002
32-12-22                    71.001
32-12-22.1 through 32-12-28 71.001
32-14-1                     70.01
32-14-1(27)                 73.03
32-14-5                     71.013
32-15-17                    73.02
32-20-1                     71.014
32-20-2                     71.014
32-20-6.5                   70.09
32-20-13                    71.014
32-20-14                    71.014
32-20A-1                    73.01
32-20A-2                    73.02
32-20A-3                    73.03
32-20B-2                    74.01
32-20B-3                    74.01
32-20B-4                    74.02
32-20B-5                    74.03
32-20B-6                    74.04
32-20B-7                    74.05
32-20B-8                    74.05
32-20B-9                    74.06
32-20B-10                   74.06
32-20B-11                   74.06
32-20B-12                   74.06
32-20B-13                   74.06
32-20B-14                   74.06
32-20B-15                   74.06
32-21-3.1                   71.058
32-24-1 et seq.             71.012
32-26-1                     71.025
32-26-2                     71.026
32-26-3                     71.027
32-26-6                     71.028
32-26-7                     71.028
32-26-8                     71.028
32-26-9                     71.028
32-26-13                    71.050
32-26-14                    71.053
32-26-15                    71.051
32-26-16                    71.008
32-26-17                    71.070
32-26-18                    71.052;
                            71.071
32-26-18.1                  71.072
32-26-19                    71.052;
                            71.071
32-26-20                    71.073
32-26-21.1                  70.08
32-26-22                    71.074;
                            74.04
32-26-22.1                  74.04
32-26-23                    71.075
32-26-24                    71.076
32-26-26                    71.030
32-26-26 through 32-26-39   71.025
32-26-26.1                  71.037
32-26-27                    71.031
32-26-28                    71.032
32-26-31                    71.033
32-26-34                    71.035
32-26-35                    71.034
32-26-36                    71.029
32-26-37                    71.036
32-26-40                    71.006
32-26-43                    71.004
32-26-44                    71.011
32-26-46                    70.11
32-26-47.1                  70.11
32-26-47.2                  70.11
32-26-48                    70.12
32-29-2.1                   71.054
32-29-2.2                   71.055
32-29-3                     71.056
32-29-4                     71.057
32-29-5                     71.058
32-30-2                     72.01
32-30-2.1                   72.03
32-30-2.2                   72.03
32-30-2.2 through 32-30-2.4 72.03
32-30-2.5                   70.07
32-30-5                     72.02
32-30-6                     72.04
32-30-6.1                   72.05
32-30-6.2                   72.06
32-30-11.1                  72.07
32-30-11.3                  72.07
32-30-11.4                  72.08
32-30-11.6                  72.07
32-30-20                    71.009
32-31-7                     71.007
32-31-8                     71.010
32-33-18                    71.005
32-34-3                     71.090
32-34-3.1                   71.091
32-34-4                     71.092
32-34-6                     71.093
32-34-7                     71.091
32-34-8                     71.094
32-34-9                     71.094
32-35-43.1                  71.005
34-1-17 et seq.             110.28
34-16-19                    90.35—
                            90.37
34-16-20                    90.36
34-16-21                    90.37
Chapter 34-18               150.03;
                            150.04
34-37-5                     136.01
Chapter 34-38               53.01;
                            53.08
34-38-26                    53.01
34-38-28                    53.02
34-38-29                    53.03
34-38-31                    53.04
34-38-32                    53.05
34-38-33                    53.06
34-38-34                    53.07
34-38-38                    53.08
34-38-39                    53.09
34-46-2(5)                  130.47
34-46-14                    130.41
34-46-20                    130.47
34-46-21                    130.47
Chapter 34A-2               51.04
34A-7-6 et seq.             52.09
34A-7-14                    52.09
34A-7-15                    52.09
                            113.01;
itle 35                     113.17;
                            113.47;
                            113.48
35-1-1                      113.01
35-1-1 et seq.              34.22
35-1-1(17A)                 113.29
35-2-1 et seq.              Ch. 113
35-2-1.1                    113.22;
                            113.45
35-2-1.2                    113.45
35-3-13                     113.15
Chapter 35-4                113.46
35-4-2                      113.15
35-4-2(2)                   113.15
                            113.15;
                            113.17;
35-4-2(3)                   113.21;
                            113.27;
                            113.28
                            113.15;
35-4-2(4)                   113.21;
                            113.45;
                            113.47
                            113.15;
                            113.17;
35-4-2(5)                   113.21;
                            113.27;
                            113.28;
                            113.46
35-4-2(6)                   113.21
35-4-2(8)                   113.15
35-4-2(9)                   113.15;
                            113.21
35-4-2(11)                  113.15;
                            113.21
                            113.18;
35-4-2(12)                  113.21;
                            113.22;
                            113.47
                            113.19;
35-4-2(13)                  113.21;
                            113.45
35-4-2(15)                  113.15
                            113.18;
                            113.21;
35-4-2(16)                  113.22;
                            113.26;
                            113.46;
                            113.47
35-4-2(21)                  113.15
35-4-2(23)                  113.28
35-4-2.11                   113.26
35-4-10                     113.17
35-4-10.2                   113.27
35-4-11                     113.18;
                            113.19
35-4-11.2                   113.19
35-4-14                     113.16
35-4-14.1                   113.16
35-4-19                     113.47
35-4-21                     113.47
35-4-22                     113.47
35-4-78                     113.60
35-4-79                     113.61
35-4-79.4                   113.62
35-4-81                     113.21
35-4-81.2                   113.21;
                            113.28
35-4-127                    113.28
35-4-128                    113.29
35-4-129                    113.30
35-4-130                    113.30
35-9-9                      132.05
35-9-10                     132.05
35-9-11                     132.05
35-9-12                     132.05
35-9-13                     132.05
Chapter 35-12               113.15
36-4-8.2                    110.28
36-4-11                     110.28
36-18A                      31.06
37-14-2                     111.01
37-14-4                     111.03
37-14-5                     111.02
37-14-18                    111.04
37-14-19                    111.04
37-14-20                    111.04
37-16-1                     112.01
37-16-2                     112.02
37-16-3                     112.03
37-16-4                     112.04
37-16-5                     112.05
40-1-2.3                    93.081
40-1-2.4                    93.082
40-12-4                     93.002
40-12-5                     93.043
40-12-6                     93.044
Chapter 40-15               111.04
40-34-13                    93.020
40-34-13 through 40-34-15   93.020
40-34-14                    93.021
40-34-15                    93.022
42-7A-64                    113.22
Chapter 49-7A               150.20
49-13-1 et seq.             110.25
49-31-1 et seq.             110.25
49-34A-45                   34.57
Chapter 50-7                113.16
 
 
 
TITLE XVII: LOCAL LEGISLATION
   Chapter
      
170.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
171.   ADMINISTRATION
      
172.   PUBLIC WORKS
      
173.   TRAFFIC CODE
      
174.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
175.   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
176.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
177.   LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 170: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   [Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title I of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 171: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   [Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title III of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 172: PUBLIC WORKS
Section
   [Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title V of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 173: TRAFFIC CODE
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title VII of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 174: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title IX of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 175: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title XI of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 176: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title XIII of this code of ordinances
CHAPTER 177: LAND USAGE
Section
[Reserved for local legislation]
Editor’s note:
   See Title XV of this code of ordinances
 
