SIOUX FALLS, SOUTH DAKOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through local ordinance 67-25, passed 10-28-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588 www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent
ordinances of the City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
   Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, as
supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The
source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses
at the end thereof. By use of the parallel references tables appearing in the
back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1957 Code, as
supplemented, or any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, or any section
of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, which had a different section number and any
subsequent ordinance included herein.
   The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged, and the various
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. The Code
is organized into the following titles with chapters, subchapters, and
sections:
 
Charter                    Title IX General Regulations
Title I General Provisions Title XI Business Regulations
Title III Administration   Title XIII General Offenses
Title V Public Works       Title XV Land Usage
Title VII Traffic Code     Table of Special Ordinances
 
   Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to
relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations
and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of
this Code in the parallel references tables.
   Page Numbering System
   The titles in the Code are separately paginated for ease of supplementation.
If, for example, the city adds material to Title III during a supplement, then
the page numbers in Title III will shift accordingly and the page numbers in
the remaining titles (V through XV) will remain stable.
   Index
   The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item
has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay
phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language
generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous
cross-references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct
the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.
   Looseleaf Supplements
   A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and
supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication
will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly
edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new
pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with
instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the
obsolete pages.
   Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon
the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then
become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted
according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the
publisher that all amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid
misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for
historical reference purposes.
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 93-12
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SIOUX FALLS, SD, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING,
CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF SIOUX FALLS,
SOUTH DAKOTA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED
THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; AND PROVIDING FOR THE
MANNER OF AMENDING THE CODE.
WHEREAS, SDCL 9-19-16 authorizes the City to revise, amend, restate, codify,
and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore
adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in
book form;
WHEREAS, every 20 years, the City Charter Section 2.14 has authorized a general
compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the City of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form
(hereinafter "the recodification");
WHEREAS, the last recodifications occurred in 1972 and 1992, respectively;
WHEREAS, the present and permanent ordinances of the City are inadequately
arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance, which has
resulted in this recodification being conducted; and
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SIOUX FALLS, SD:
Section 1. Pursuant to SDCL 9-19-16 and the City Charter Section 2.14, the Code
entitled "The Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota," (hereinafter
"the Code") published by American Legal Publishing, consisting of Titles I,
III, V, VII, IX, XI, XIII, and XV, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance
except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in such Code;
provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty
incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds of or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase of sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 3. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted
of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the City shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days, or both. Each act of a violation and each day upon which any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided
by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to
the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in
the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City
may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief,
and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to
indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code,
will be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
Section 5. Ordinances adopted after January 1, 2013, which amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 6. The City shall publish the Ordinance, without attachment, after its
passage. The attachment is on file and available for inspection in the office
of the City Clerk.
Date adopted:    12/04/12
Mike T. Huether /s/
   Mayor
ATTEST:
Lorie Hogstad /s/
   City Clerk
CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   Printed herein is a charter resolution, as adopted at a special city
election held on September 13, 1994.
   Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes
following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the
provision remains unchanged from the original charter. Obvious misspellings
have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system
of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used.
Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Section
Article I. Powers of the City
   
1.01   Powers of the city
   
1.02   Construction
   
1.03   Intergovernmental relations
   
1.04   Limitations
   
1.05   New taxes
Article II. City Council
   
2.01   General powers and duties
   
2.02   Composition, eligibility, election, and terms
   
2.03   Mayor
   
2.04   Compensation; expenses
   
2.05   Prohibitions
   
2.06   Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies
   
2.07   Judge of qualifications
   
2.08   City clerk
   
2.09   Investigations
   
2.10   Independent audit
   
2.11   Procedure
   
2.12   Action requiring an ordinance
   
2.13   Ordinances in general
   
2.14   Updating the Code of Ordinances
Article III. Mayor
   
3.01   Executive power
   
3.02   Election and qualifications of mayor
   
3.03   Mayor’s duties and responsibility
   
3.04   Mayor’s power to veto legislation
Article IV. Departments, Offices, and Agencies
   
4.01   General provisions
   
4.02   Personnel system
   
4.03   Legal officer
   
4.04   Planning
Article V. Financial Procedures
   
5.01   Fiscal year
   
5.02   Submission of budget and budget message
   
5.03   Budget message
   
5.04   Budget
   
5.05   City council action on budget
   
5.06   Reserved
   
5.07   Amendments after adoption
   
5.08   Lapse of appropriations
   
5.09   Administration of the budget
   
5.10   Overspending of appropriations prohibited
   
5.11   Capital program
   
5.12   City council action on capital program
   
5.13   Public records
Article VI. Elections
   
6.01   City elections
   
6.02   Council districts: adjustment of districts
   
6.03   Initiative and referendum
Article VII. General Provisions
   
7.01   Conflicts of interest; board of ethics
   
7.02   Prohibitions
Article VIII. Charter Amendment
   
8.01   Proposal of amendment
   
8.02   Election
   
8.03   Adoption of amendment
Article IX. Transition/Separability Provision
   
9.01   Officers and employees
   
9.02   Departments, offices, and agencies
   
9.03   Pending matters
   
9.04   State and municipal laws
   
9.05   Schedule
   
9.06   Separability
PREAMBLE
   We the people of Sioux Falls in order to establish a more representative and
effective city government, do adopt this Charter in accordance with the Home
Rule power granted in Article IX of the Constitution of South Dakota.
ARTICLE I. POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 1.01 Powers of the city.
   The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the
constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were
specifically enumerated in this charter.
Section 1.02 Construction.
   The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed favorably in
support of the charter and the specific mention of particular powers in the
charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power granted
in this article.
Section 1.03 Intergovernmental relations.
   The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one (1) or more states or any state civil
division or agency, or the United States or any of its agencies.
   The city retains and reserves its right to Joint Exercise of Governmental
Powers as set forth in SDCL Title 1. Further the city adopts and ratifies each
and every contract and agreement entered into by virtue of that power under any
prior city organization or form of government.
Section 1.04 Limitations.
   Nothing in this charter shall be construed to permit the city to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Levy a personal or corporate income tax,
      (2)   Issue more liquor licenses,
      (3)   Permit increased gaming, or
      (4)   Incur additional debt,
unless and except to the extent otherwise authorized to any city established as
a SDCL Title 9 authorized form of city government.
Section 1.05 New taxes.
   Any new form or type of taxation which is approved by the city council must
be referred to a vote of the people before it can become effective. This does
not apply to new or increased fees or increases in existing taxes.
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
Section 2.01 General powers and duties.
   All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council, except as
otherwise provided by law or this charter, and the council shall provide for
the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed on the city by law. The council shall act as a part-time, policy making
and legislative body, avoiding management and administrative issues.
Section 2.02 Composition, eligibility, election, and terms.
   (a)   Composition. There shall be a city council composed of the mayor and
eight (8) members. Three (3) council members shall be nominated and elected by
the voters of the city at large, and five (5) shall be nominated and elected by
the voters of each of the five (5) council districts, as provided in article
VI.
   (b)   Eligibility. Only the registered voters of the city who have resided
in the city for at least six (6) months immediately prior to the date of
election shall be eligible to hold the office of council member or mayor.
Council members representing a district must also have resided in that district
for at least six (6) months immediately prior to the date of election.
   (c)   Election and terms. The terms of council members shall be four (4)
years beginning no later than whichever day the City Council meets during the
third week of May following the official canvass of any final council or
mayoral election, whichever is later, and shall continue until a successor has
been elected and takes office. No council member may serve more than two (2)
full or partial terms consecutively, unless a partial term was for 50 percent
or less of the full term then the council member may serve an additional two
full terms; however, a council member may immediately thereafter be eligible to
be a candidate for mayor. The two consecutive term limit shall apply regardless
of whether a council member has served as a district or an at large council
member or both.
(4-11-00, § A; 4-8-14, § A; 4-12-16, § A; 6-2-20, § A)
Section 2.03 Mayor.
   The mayor shall serve as a member of the city council. In the absence of the
mayor for purposes of city council meetings, the city council shall designate
one (1) of its members as acting mayor, with the duties but not the powers of
that office. In case of emergencies or for purposes of day-to-day
administrative duties and functions if the mayor is temporarily unavailable,
the mayor shall propose to designate an interim successor by executive order,
listing not less than three (3) nor more than seven (7) interim successors. The
selection of interim successors in the executive order shall be at the mayor’s
discretion from among department heads or city employees; however, the number
and order of proposed interim successor designees shall not be effective
without the advice and consent of the city council.
(4-13-04, § B)
Section 2.04 Compensation; expenses.
   The annual salary of the mayor and part-time council members is set in
section 9.05, and shall be automatically adjusted annually for inflation or
deflation, as determined by a generally accepted federal government index
(e.g., CPI-U). The mayor and council members shall receive their actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. The
mayor, but not the council members, shall participate in the city’s employee
benefits programs which are available to other management employees. Upon
taking office the mayor may elect to participate in the employees’ retirement
system, if allowed by ordinance, or may elect not to participate in the
employees’ retirement system.
(4-8-08, § A; 4-12-16, § B)
Section 2.05 Prohibitions.
   (a)   Holding other office. No council member shall hold any other elected
public office during the term for which the member was elected to the council.
No council member shall hold any other city office or city employment during
the terms for which the member was elected or appointed to the council. No
former council member shall hold any compensated appointive office or
employment with the city until two (2) years after the expiration of the term
for which the member was elected or appointed to the council. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the council or mayor from selecting any
current or former council member to represent the city on the governing board
of any regional, national, or other intergovernmental agency.
   (b)   Appointments and removal. Except as authorized by Charter Section
4.03, neither the city council nor any of its members shall in any manner
control or demand the appointment or removal of any city administrative officer
or employee whom the mayor or any subordinate of the mayor is empowered to
appoint, but the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss
with the mayor anything pertaining to appointment or removal of such officers
and employees.
   (c)   Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations under section 2.09, the council or its members shall deal
with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and
supervision of the mayor solely through the mayor and neither the council nor
its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly
or privately.
(4-13-04, § A; 4-8-08, § B; 4-12-22, § B)
Section 2.06 Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies.
   (a)   Vacancies. The office of mayor or of a council member shall become
vacant upon the person’s death, resignation, removal from office or forfeiture
of office in any manner authorized by law.
   (b)   Recall. The power of recall of the mayor and council members shall be
allowed as set forth in SDCL Title 9.
   (c)   Forfeiture of office. The mayor or a council member shall forfeit that
office if the mayor or council member[:]
      (1)   Lacks at any time during the term of office for which elected any
qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law,
      (2)   Violates any expressed prohibition in section 7.02 of this charter,
      (3)   Fails to maintain residency within city limits, or in the case of
council members elected by district, fails to maintain residency within that
district; however, any council member may complete their elected term of office
if residency outside their district is caused during their term of office by a
district adjustment pursuant to Section 6.02.
      (4)   Is convicted of a felony, or
      (5)   Fails to attend 50% of the regular monthly meetings of the council
during a fiscal year, or three consecutive regular monthly meetings of the
council, without being excused by the council.
   (d)   Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or in the city
council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, at the
next regular election following not less than 60 days upon the occurrence of
the vacancy, but the council by a majority vote of all its remaining members
shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected
to serve the remainder of the unexpired term takes office. If the council falls
to do so within 30 days following the occurrence of the vacancy, the city
election authorities shall call a special election to fill the vacancy, to be
held not sooner than 90 days and not later than 120 days following the
occurrence of the vacancy, and to be otherwise governed by law. Not
withstanding the requirement in section 2.11, if at any time the membership of
the council is reduced to less than six (6), the remaining members may by
majority action appoint additional members to raise the membership to six (6).
(4-13-04, § C)
Section 2.07 Judge of qualifications.
   The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of
its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their office. The council
shall have the power to set additional standards of conduct for its members
beyond those specified in the charter and may provide for such penalties as it
deems appropriate, including forfeiture of office. In order to exercise these
powers, the council shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths,
and require the production of evidence. A member charged with conduct
constituting grounds for forfeiture of office shall be entitled to a public
hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in one (1) or
more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days in
advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the council under this section shall
be subject to judicial review.
Section 2.08 City clerk.
   The city council shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the
title of city clerk. The city clerk shall give notice of council meetings to
its members and the public, keep the minutes of its proceedings and perform
such other duties as are assigned by this charter or by the council or by state
law.
Section 2.09 Investigations.
   The city council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and
the conduct of any city department, office, or agency and for this purpose may
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the
production of evidence. Failure or refusal to obey a lawful order issued in the
exercise of these powers by the council shall be a violation and punishable as
provided in state law.
Section 2.10 Independent audit.
   The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city
accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such
audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such
accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal
affairs of the city government or any of its officers. The council may, without
requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually or for a
period not exceeding three years, but the designation for any particular fiscal
year shall be made no later than 120 days before the expiration of such fiscal
year. If the state makes such an audit, the council may accept it as satisfying
the requirements of this section.
(4-11-00, § B)
Section 2.11 Procedure.
   (a)   Meetings. The council shall meet regularly at least once in every
month at such times and places as the council may prescribe by rule. If the
council meets more than once a month, it may designate which meeting is the
regular monthly meeting. If they don’t so designate one, the first meeting of
the month is the regular monthly meeting. Special meetings may be held on the
call of the mayor or of six (6) or more members and, whenever practicable, upon
no less than twelve hours notice to each member. All meetings shall be public,
except as allowed by state law.
   (b)   Rules and journal. The city council shall determine its own rules and
order of business and shall provide for keeping of an accurate journal of its
proceedings. This journal shall be a public record.
   (c)   Voting. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call
and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal. Five (5) members of the
council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time
to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and
subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the council. Each council
member shall have an equal vote; the mayor shall only vote as necessary to
break a tie. All actions of the council shall be by a majority of those
present, except no ordinances or any action calling for the expenditure of
money in excess of the state bids limits for municipalities or filling of
vacancies as set forth in section 2.06 shall be valid or binding unless adopted
by the affirmative vote of five (5) or more members of the council.
Section 2.12 Action requiring an ordinance.
   In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this
charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the city council shall be by
ordinance which:
      (1)   Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or
abolish any city department, office, or agency;
      (2)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or
regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;
      (3)   Levy taxes, or impose or increase fees;
      (4)   Grant, renew, or extend a franchise;
      (5)   Regulate the rate charged for its services as a public utility;
      (6)   Authorize the borrowing of money;
      (7)   Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease for a period
of longer than one (1) year of any real property of the city;
      (8)   Regulate land use and development;
      (9)   Actions to establish the conduct of elections; and
      (10)   Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted.
   Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done
either by ordinance or by resolution.
(Ref. of 5-7-96)
Section 2.13 Ordinances in general.
   City ordinances shall be introduced, published, enacted, recorded, and
codified as provided in state law; however, the city council may by ordinance
amend such requirements.
Section 2.14 Updating the Code of Ordinances.
   The Code of Ordinances must be updated at least every twenty years, pursuant
to the provisions of state law.
(4-12-16, § C)
ARTICLE III. MAYOR
Section 3.01 Executive power.
   The executive and administrative power of the city shall be vested in a
mayor.
Section 3.02 Election and qualifications of mayor.
   The mayor shall be elected for a term of four years by a direct vote of the
people at the regular city election. No mayor shall serve more than two (2)
full or partial terms consecutively, unless a partial term was for 50 percent
or less of the full term then the mayor may serve an additional two full terms;
however, the mayor may immediately thereafter be eligible to be a candidate for
council member. The mayor’s terms shall begin no later than whichever day the
City Council meets during the third week of May following the official canvass
of the mayor’s election and shall continue until a successor has been elected
and takes office.
(4-11-00, § C; 4-8-14, § B; 4-12-16, § D)
Section 3.03 Mayor’s duties and responsibility.
   The mayor shall, at the beginning of each calendar year, and may at other
times give the council information as to the affairs of the city and recommend
measures considered necessary and desirable. The mayor shall preside at
meetings of the council, represent the city in intergovernmental relationships,
appoint with the advice and consent of the council the members of the citizen
advisory boards and commissions, present an annual state of the city message,
and perform other duties specified by the council and by article III. The mayor
shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes
and by the governor for purposes of military law.
Section 3.04 Mayor’s power to veto legislation.
   Within four (4) business days after the adjournment of any council meeting,
the city clerk shall present to the mayor the record of proceedings of the
meeting and all ordinances and resolutions adopted at the meeting. The mayor,
within seven days of receipt of an ordinance or resolution, shall return it to
the city clerk with or without approval, or with a veto. If an ordinance or
resolution is vetoed, the mayor shall attach a written statement explaining the
reasons for the veto. Ordinances or resolutions vetoed by the mayor shall be
considered at the next regular meeting of the council, and the council may pass
the ordinance or resolution over the veto by the affirmative vote of six of its
members. The effective date of an ordinance or resolution passed over the
mayoral veto shall not be less than 20 days after the date of publication. The
mayor’s veto power shall extend to disapproving or reducing individual
appropriation items in the budget or any ordinance or resolution, except
appropriations for auditing or investigating any part of the executive branch.
The mayor shall not have the power to veto any emergency ordinance.
(4-11-00, § D)
ARTICLE IV. DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES, AND AGENCIES
Section 4.01 General provisions.
   (a)   Creation of departments. The mayor may establish city departments,
offices, or agencies in addition to those created by this charter by filing an
executive order which may also provide that any funds previously appropriated
to perform a function which is being transferred may thereby be transferred to
the new major organizational unit performing such function, with such order
becoming effective after the expiration of 25 days from the date it is filed,
unless action is taken to nullify the executive order by a vote of six (6) or
more members of the city council. The mayor may prescribe the functions of all
departments, offices, and agencies, except that no function assigned by this
charter to a particular department, office, or agency may be discontinued or,
unless this charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other.
   (b)   Direction by mayor. All departments, offices, and agencies under the
direction and supervision of the mayor shall be administered by one (1) or more
officers appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the
mayor. The appointment by the mayor of any director or head of any city
department shall only be effective with the advice and consent of the council.
The mayor may appoint one (1) person as the head of two (2) or more
departments.
(4-11-00, § E; 4-12-16, § E)
Section 4.02 Personnel system.
   (a)   Appointments and promotions. All appointments and promotions of city
officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness.
   (b)   Civil service system. The city council shall provide by ordinance for
the establishment, regulation, and maintenance of a civil service system
governing personnel policies necessary to effect the administration of the
employees of the city’s departments, offices, and agencies. The city council
shall provide by ordinance for classification and pay plans, examinations,
force reduction, removals, working conditions, provisional and exempt
appointments, in-service training, civil service appeal procedures to address
grievances of employees, and relationship with employee organizations.
(Ref. of 5-7-96)
Section 4.03 Legal officer.
   There shall be a legal officer of the city appointed by the mayor effective
with the advice and consent of five (5) or more members of the council.
Notwithstanding Charter Section
2.05(b), the legal officer may be removed by an affirmative vote of six (6) or
more members of the council or by the mayor with the consent of five (5) or
more members of the council. The consent of a majority of the council is not
required for the expiration of the legal officer's term of office that occurs
upon the mayor's expiration of term of office. The legal officer shall serve as
chief legal advisor to the city council, the mayor and all city departments,
offices and agencies, shall perform any other duties prescribed by state law,
by this charter or by ordinance, and shall handle or monitor the representation
of the city in legal proceedings. The role of the legal officer is to provide
counsel in the best interest of the city, not the interest of one inquiring
source.
(4-11-00, § F; 4-8-14, § C; 4-12-22, § B)
Section 4.04 Planning.
   Consistent with all applicable federal and state laws with respect to land
use, development, and environmental protection, the city council shall:
      (1)   Designate an agency or agencies to carry out the planning function
and such decision-making responsibilities as may be specified by ordinance;
      (2)   Adopt a comprehensive plan and determine to what extent zoning and
other land use control ordinances must be consistent with the plan; and
      (3)   Adopt development regulations, to be specified by ordinance, to
implement the plan.
ARTICLE V. FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
Section 5.01 Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of January and end
on the last day of December.
Section 5.02 Submission of budget and budget message.
   On or before the 1st day of August of each year, the mayor shall submit to
the city council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying
message.
(Ref. of 5-7-96)
Section 5.03 Budget message.
   The mayor’s message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in
terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of
the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the
budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies,
expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such changes,
summarize the city’s debt position and include such other material as the mayor
deems desirable.
Section 5.04 Budget.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this
charter, shall be in such form as the mayor deems appropriate. The city council
may require additional information or details about the mayor’s budget
proposal. The budget shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents;
shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax
levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing
fiscal year; and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual
and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual
income and expenditures of the preceding two (2) fiscal years. It shall
indicate in separate sections:
      (1)   The proposed goals and objectives and expenditures for current
operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by
organization unit, and program, purpose or activity, and the method of
financing such expenditures;
      (2)   Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing five (5) fiscal
years, detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable, and the
proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and
      (3)   The anticipated income and expense and profit and loss for the
ensuing year for each utility or other proprietary fund operated by the city.
   For any fund, the total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total
of estimated income plus the fund balance carried forward, exclusive of
reserves.
(4-13-04, § D; 4-8-08, § C; 4-13-10, § A)
Section 5.05 City council action on budget.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. The city council shall publish in one (1) or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city the general summary of the budget
and a notice stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the message and budget are
available for inspection by the public, and
      (2)   The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication,
for a public hearing on the budget.
   (b)   Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the city council
may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may
add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for an
estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase
the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than total estimated income.
   (c)   Adoption. The city council shall adopt the annual appropriation
ordinance for appropriated funds for the ensuing fiscal year on or before the
30th day of September of the fiscal year currently ending. The annual
appropriation ordinance shall make appropriations by fund and department or
organizational unit. It is not necessary to appropriate funds to be expended
from a proprietary or trust fund if the fund is not supported or subsidized by
revenue derived from the annual appropriated tax levy. However, an annual
budget for these funds shall be adopted by resolution on or before the 30th day
of September of the fiscal year currently ending and published at the same time
as publication of the annual appropriation ordinance. If the city council fails
to adopt the budget by this date, the budget proposed by the mayor shall go
into effect.
   (d)   The city council shall adopt any other ordinances required to
authorize new revenues or to amend the rates or other features of existing
taxes or other revenue sources.
(4-10-12, § B)
Section 5.06 Reserved.
(4-13-04, § E; 4-8-08, § D; 4-10-12, § B)
Editor’s note:
   The removal of this section was approved by the voters of Sioux Falls at a
municipal election held on April 10, 2012.
Section 5.07 Amendments after adoption.
   (a)   Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the mayor
certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of
those estimated in the budget or a sufficient fund balance, the city council by
ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of
such excess.
   (b)   Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property, or the public peace, the city council or mayor may make
emergency special appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency
ordinance or declaration. To the extent that there are no available
unappropriated revenues or a sufficient fund balance to meet such
appropriations, the council may by such emergency ordinance or declaration
authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to
time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not
later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the
emergency special appropriation was made.
   (c)   Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the mayor that the revenues or fund balances available will
be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been
authorized, the mayor shall report to the city council without delay,
indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by
the mayor and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council
shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or reduce
any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one (1) or more
appropriations.
   (d)   Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the
city council may by resolution transfer part or all of the unencumbered
appropriation balance from one (1) department or major organizational unit to
the appropriation for other departments or major organizational units. The
mayor may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balances among
programs within a department or organizational unit and shall report such
transfers to the council in writing prior to the next council meeting.
   (e)   Limitation; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance thereof. The emergency appropriations and reduction or
transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective
immediately upon adoption.
(Ref. of 5-7-96; 4-8-08, § E)
Section 5.08 Lapse of appropriations.
   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until expended, revised, or repealed; the purpose of any such
appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any
disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
Section 5.09 Administration of the budget.
   The city council shall provide by ordinance the procedures for administering
the budget.
Section 5.10 Overspending of appropriations prohibited.
   No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or
appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the
mayor or the mayor’s designee first certifies that there is a sufficient
unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation and that sufficient
funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the
obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or
incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter shall be
void and any payments made illegal. A violation of this provision shall be
cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment
or incurred such obligation. Such officer may also be liable to the city for
any amount so paid. Except where prohibited by law, however, nothing in this
charter shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or
making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by
the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease
providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, but only if such
action is made or approved by ordinance.
Section 5.11 Capital program.
   (a)   Submission to city council. The mayor shall prepare and submit to the
city council a five-year capital program no later than July 1 of each year for
consideration.
   (b)   Contents. The capital program shall include:
      (1)   A clear general summary of its contents;
      (2)   Identification of the five-year goals of the city;
      (3)   A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures
which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing,
with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each;
      (4)   Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement
or other capital expenditure;
      (5)   Method of financing, upon which each capital expenditure is to be
reliant;
      (6)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired;
      (7)   A commentary on how the plan addresses the financial sustainability
of the city and the region of which it is a part; and
      (8)   Methods to measure outcomes and performance of the capital plan
related to the long-term goals of the city.
   The above shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
(Ref. of 5-7-96; 4-8-08, § F)
Section 5.12 City council action on capital program.
   (a)   Notice and hearing. The city council shall publish in one (1) or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city the general summary of the
capital program and a notice stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the capital program are
available for inspection by the public, and
      (2)   The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication,
for a public hearing on the capital program.
   (b)   Adoption. The city council, by resolution, shall adopt the capital
program with or without amendment after public hearing and on or before the
30th day of September of the current fiscal year.
(Ref. of 5-7-96; 4-8-08, § G)
Section 5.13 Public records.
   Copies of the budget, capital program, and appropriation and revenue
ordinances shall be public records and shall be made available to the public
for review at suitable locations or by suitable means in the city.
(4-8-08, § H)
ARTICLE VI. ELECTIONS
Section 6.01 City elections.
   (a)   Regular elections. The regular city election shall be held in even
numbered years. Conduct of the election shall be in accordance with provisions
of state law. The date of the city election shall be set by ordinance as the
second Tuesday in April. The city may combine its election with that of the
Sioux Falls School Board.
   (b)   Registered voter defined. All citizens legally registered under the
constitution and laws of the State of South Dakota to vote in the city shall be
registered voters of the city within the meaning of this charter.
   (c)   Conduct of elections. All elections provided for by the charter shall
be conducted by the election authorities established by law. Candidates shall
run for office without party designation and shall declare whether seeking an
at-large or district seat. Candidates for district seats must reside within the
district. No person shall be eligible for elective municipal office unless a
nominating petition is first filed. Nominating petitions shall conform in all
respects to the provisions of South Dakota state law, except that the deadline
for filing shall be no later than 5:00 p.m. on the last Friday in February. The
mayoral and at-large council candidate nominating petitions shall be signed by
not less than 200 registered voters of the city. The council district
nominating petitions shall be signed by not less than 50 registered voters of
the city. Council district nominating petitions shall be signed by registered
voters who shall reside in the council district thereof, and who shall be
eligible to vote for the nominee. For the conduct of city elections, for the
prevention of fraud in such elections, and for the recount of ballots in cases
of doubt or fraud, the city council shall adopt ordinances consistent with law
and this charter, and the election authorities may adopt further regulations
consistent with law and this charter and the ordinances of the council. Such
ordinances and regulations pertaining to elections shall be publicized in the
manner of city ordinances generally.
(Ref. of 5-7-96; 4-8-08, § I; 4-13-10, § C)
Section 6.02 Council districts: adjustment of districts.
   (a)   Number of districts. There shall be five (5) city council districts.
   (b)   Districting commission; composition; appointment; terms; vacancies;
compensation.
      (1)   There shall be a districting commission consisting of five (5)
members. No more than three (3) commission members may belong to the same
political party. The city council shall appoint five (5) members, one member
from each of the city’s five (5) districts. These five (5) members shall, with
the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members, choose one of their members
who shall serve as chairperson.
      (2)   No member of the commission shall be employed by the city or hold
any other elected or appointed position in the city.
      (3)   The city council shall appoint the commission no later than one (1)
year and five (5) months before the first general election of the city council
after each federal decennial census. The commission’s term shall end upon
adoption of a districting plan, as set forth in section 6.02(c).
      (4)   In the event of a vacancy on the commission by death, resignation,
incapacity or moving out of the district within 30 days of his or her
appointment, the city council shall appoint a new member enrolled in the same
political party and from the same city district from which his or her
predecessor was selected, to serve the balance of the term remaining.
      (5)   No member of the districting commission shall be removed from
office by the city council except for cause and upon notice and hearing.
      (6)   The members of the commission shall serve without compensation
except that each member shall be allowed actual and necessary expenses to be
audited in the same manner as other city charges.
      (7)   The commission may hire or contract for necessary staff and may
require agencies of city government to provide technical assistance. The
commission shall have a budget as provided by the city council.
   (c)   Powers and duties of the districting commission; hearings;
submissions, and approval of plan.
      (1)   Following each decennial census or upon reliable evidence that the
city’s population has increased more than 15% since the last redistricting, the
commission shall consult the city council and shall prepare a plan for dividing
the city into districts for the election of council members. In preparing the
plan, the commission shall be guided by the criteria set forth in section 6.02
(d). The report on the plan shall include a map and description of districts
recommended.
      (2)   The commission shall hold one (1) or more public hearings not less
than 30 days before it submits the plan to the city council. The commission
shall make its plan available to the public for inspection and comment not less
than 30 days before its public hearing.
      (3)   The commission shall submit its plan to the city council not less
than nine (9) months before the first general election of the city council
after each decennial census.
      (4)   The plan shall be deemed adopted by the city council unless
disapproved within 21 days by the vote of the majority of all members of the
city council. If the city council fails to adopt the plan, it shall return the
plan to the commission with its objections, and with the objections of
individual members of the council.
      (5)   Upon rejection of its plan, the commission shall prepare a revised
plan and shall submit such revised plan to the city council no later than 21
days after the initial plan is rejected. Such revised plan shall be deemed
adopted by the city council unless disapproved within 14 days by the vote of
two-thirds of all of the members of the city council and unless, by a vote of
two-thirds of all of its members, the city council votes to file a petition in
the Circuit Court, Minnehaha County, for a determination that the plan fails to
meet the requirements of this charter. The city council shall file its petition
no later than 10 days after its disapproval of the plan. Upon a final
determination upon appeal, if any, that the plan meets the requirements of this
charter, the plan shall be deemed adopted by the city council and the
commission shall deliver the plan to the city clerk. The plan delivered to the
city clerk shall include a map and description of the districts.
      (6)   If in any year population figures are not available at least one
(1) year and five (5) months before the first general election following the
decennial census, the city council may by local law shorten the time periods
provided for districting commission action in subsections (2), (3), (4), and
(5) of this section.
   (d)   Districting plan; criteria. In preparation of its plan for dividing
the city into districts for the election of council members, the commission
shall apply the following criteria which, to the extent practicable, shall be
applied and given priority in the order in which they are herein set forth.
      (1)   Districts shall be equal in population except where deviations from
equality result from the application of the provisions hereinafter set forth,
but no such deviation may exceed five (5) percent of the average population for
all city council districts according to the figures available from the most
recent census.
      (2)   Districts shall consist of contiguous territory.
      (3)   No voting precinct (as set by the counties) shall be divided in the
formation of districts.
      (4)   The number of districts which include territory in more than one
(1) county shall be as few as possible.
      (5)   Consistent with the foregoing provisions, the aggregate length of
all district boundaries shall be as short as possible.
   (e)   Effect of enactment. The new city council districts and boundaries as
of the date of enactment shall supersede previous council districts and
boundaries for all purposes of the next regular city election, including
nominations. The new districts and boundaries shall supersede previous
districts and boundaries for all other purposes as of the date on which all
council members elected at that regular city election take office.
(4-13-10, § B)
Section 6.03 Initiative and referendum.
   The powers of initiative and referendum are hereby reserved to the electors
of the city. The provisions of the election law of the State of South Dakota,
as they currently exist or may hereafter be amended or superseded, shall govern
the exercise of the powers of initiative and referendum under this charter.
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 7.01 Conflicts of interest; board of ethics.
   (a)   Conflicts of interest. The use of public office for private gain is
prohibited. The city council shall implement this prohibition by ordinance.
Regulations to this end shall include but not be limited to: acting in an
official capacity on matters in which the official has a private financial
interest clearly separate from that of the general public; the acceptance of
gifts and other things of value; acting in a private capacity on matters dealt
with as a public official, the use of confidential information; and appearances
by city officials before other city agencies on behalf of private interests.
The appearance of impropriety shall be avoided. Municipal officials shall be,
at a minimum, restricted from conflict of interest to the same extent that
state public officials are bound by state law; provided however, that the city
council may adopt an ordinance setting a stricter standard.
   (b)   Board of ethics. The city council shall, by ordinance, establish an
independent board of ethics to administer and enforce violations of the
conflict of interest and financial disclosure ordinances as well as determine
violations of Sections 2.05 (a) and (b), 6.01(c), and 7.02 (a) (3), (4), and
(5) of this Charter and related ordinances. No member of the board may hold
elective or appointed office under the city or any other government or hold any
political party office. Insofar as possible under state law, the city council
shall authorize the board to issue binding advisory opinions, conduct
investigations on its own initiative and on referral or complaint, refer cases
for prosecution, impose administrative fines, and to hire independent counsel.
The city council shall appropriate sufficient funds to the board of ethics to
enable it to perform the duties assigned to it.
(4-13-04, § F; 4-8-08, § J; 4-10-12, § C)
Section 7.02 Prohibitions.
   (a)   Activities prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way
favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or
appointive city administrative office because of race, gender, sexual
orientation, age, disability, religion, country of origin, or political
affiliation.
      (2)   No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate,
mark, rating, or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment
under the provisions of this charter or the rules and regulations made
thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing
the impartial execution of such provisions, rules, and regulations.
      (3)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any
city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or
indirectly give, render, or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to
any person for or in connection with any test, appointment, proposed
appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion.
      (4)   No person shall knowingly or willfully solicit or assist in
soliciting any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political
party or political purpose to be used in conjunction with any city election
from any city employee.
      (5)   No city employee shall, directly or indirectly, contribute money or
anything of value to or render service in behalf of the candidacy of any
candidate for nomination or election to any city office. Elected officials and
spouses of city employees acting on their own behalf are exempt from this
prohibition. The expression of private or personal views concerning candidates
for political office is not prohibited hereby.
   (b)   Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be ineligible for a
period of five (5) years following such violation to hold any City elected or
appointed office or board. If the person violating this section is a city
officer or employee, said violation shall be sufficient cause for the
suspension, demotion or termination of employment of the officer or employee.
The city council may establish by ordinance any further penalties as it may
deem appropriate.
(4-11-00, § G; 4-13-04, §§ G, H; 4-12-16, § F)
ARTICLE VIII. CHARTER AMENDMENT
Section 8.01 Proposal of amendment.
   Amendments to this charter may be framed and proposed:
   (a)   In the manner provided by law, or
   (b)   By ordinance of the city council containing the full text of the
proposed amendment (except that sections 1.04, 1.05, 2.01, 2.02, 2.03, and 2.04
and article III cannot be so amended) and effective upon adoption, or
   (c)   By report of a charter commission created by ordinance; or
   (d)   By the voters of the city, when any 15 qualified voters initiate
proceedings to amend the charter by filing with the city clerk an affidavit
stating they will constitute the petitioners’ committee and be responsible for
circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and
addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are
to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed charter amendment. Promptly
after the affidavit of the petitioners’ committee is filed the clerk shall
issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners’ committee. The
petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation
the full text of the proposed charter amendment and must be signed by
registered voters of the city in the number of at least 5 percent of the total
number of registered voters at the last regular city election, or the number of
signatures required by state law, whichever is greater.
(6-2-20, § B)
Section 8.02 Election.
   Upon delivery to the city election authorities of the report of a charter
commission pursuant to section 8.01(c) or delivery by the city clerk of an
adopted ordinance proposing an amendment pursuant to section 8.01(b) or a
petition finally determined sufficient to propose an amendment pursuant to
section 8.01(d), the election authorities shall submit the proposed amendment
to the voters of the city at an election. Such election shall be announced by a
notice containing the complete text of the proposed amendment and published in
one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least 30 days
prior to the date of the election. If the amendment is proposed by petition,
the amendment may be withdrawn at any time prior to the thirtieth day preceding
the day scheduled for the election by filing with the city clerk a request for
withdrawal signed by at least two-thirds of the members of the petitioners’
committee. The election shall be held not less than 60 and not more than 120
days after the adoption of the ordinance or report or the final determination
of sufficiency of the petition proposing the amendment. If no regular election
is to be held within that period, the city council shall provide for a special
election on the proposed amendment; otherwise, the holding of a special
election shall be as specified in the state election law.
Section 8.03 Adoption of amendment.
   If a majority of the registered voters of the city voting upon a proposed
charter amendment vote in favor of it, the amendment shall become effective at
the time fixed in the amendment or, if no time is therein fixed, 30 days after
the initial canvas certifying its adoption by the voters.
ARTICLE IX. TRANSITION/SEPARABILITY PROVISION
Section 9.01 Officers and employees.
   (a)   Rights and privileges preserved. Nothing in this charter except as
otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges
of persons who are city officers, appointees, or employees at the time of its
adoption. State law governing Change of Employee Contributions or Benefits
shall apply to the city under this charter.
   (b)   Continuance of office or employment. Except as specifically provided
by this charter, if at the time this charter takes full effect an appointive
administrative officer or employee holds any office or position which is or can
be abolished by or under this charter, it shall continue until the taking
effect of some specific provision under this charter directing that the office
or position be eliminated.
   (c)   Personnel system. An employee holding a city position at the time this
charter takes full effect, who was serving in that same or a comparable
position at the time of its adoption, shall not be subject to competitive tests
as a condition of continuance in the same position but in all other respects
shall be subject to the personnel system provided for in section 4.02.
Section 9.02 Departments, offices, and agencies.
   (a)   Transfer of powers. If a city department, office, board, or agency is
abolished by this charter, the powers and duties given it by law shall be
transferred to the city department, office, board, or agency designated in this
charter, or if the charter makes no provision, designated by the city council.
   (b)   Property and records. All property, records, and equipment of any
department, office, board, or agency existing when this charter is adopted
shall be transferred to the department, office, board, or agency assuming its
powers and duties, but; in the event that the powers or duties are to be
discontinued or divided between units or in the event that any conflict arises
regarding a transfer, such property, records, or equipment shall be transferred
to one (1) or more departments, offices, boards, or agencies designated by the
city council in accordance with this charter.
Section 9.03 Pending matters.
   All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal administrative
proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of
this charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on, or dealt with by
the city department, office, board, or agency appropriate under this charter.
Section 9.04 State and municipal laws.
   (a)   In general. All city ordinances, resolutions, policies, orders, codes,
and regulations which are in force when this charter becomes fully effective
remain effective, except as stated in subsection (b).
   (b)   Exceptions. All city ordinances, resolutions, orders, and regulations
which are in force when this charter becomes fully effective are repealed to
the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation
of this charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto. To
the extent that the constitution and law of the State of South Dakota permit,
all laws relating to or affecting this city or its agencies, officers, or
employees which are in force when this charter becomes fully effective are
superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the
effective operation of this charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted
pursuant thereto.
   (c)   The term “city commission” in all city ordinances, resolutions,
policies, orders, and regulations which are in force when this charter becomes
fully effective is hereby replaced by the term “city council.”
Section 9.05 Schedule.
   (a)   First election. At the time of its adoption, this charter shall be in
effect to the extent necessary in order that the first election of mayor and
members of the city council may be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this charter. The first election shall be held on November 8, 1994 or the
first available Tuesday after that as determined by election officials. The
Sioux Falls city officials to be designated shall prepare and adopt temporary
regulations applicable only to the first election and designed to insure its
proper conduct and to prevent fraud and provide for recount of ballots in cases
of doubt or fraud.
   The term of the two at large council members receiving the most votes among
the at large candidates in the first election shall be four (4) years. The term
of the at large council member receiving the third largest vote counts among
the at large candidates shall be two (2) years.
   The terms of the two council members receiving the most votes among the five
(5) elected by the five (5) districts in the first election shall be four
years. The term of the other three council members elected by district shall be
two (2) years.
   The five (5) districts for the first election and until the redistricting
required after the 2000 census, shall be as follows:
      (1)   The southwest district shall be comprised of the following complete
precincts: 4-4, 4-5/6, 10-1/7, 10-3/5 and 11-1, 10-4, and 10-6.
      (2)   The southeast district shall be comprised of the following complete
precincts: 3-4, 3-6, 3-7/8, 3-9, 9-5, 9-6, 9-8/9, 10-2 and 12-1.
      (3)   The northwest district shall be comprised of the following complete
precincts: 4-3, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 6-1, 6-2, 7-1, 7-3, and 11-2/3.
      (4)   The northeast district shall be comprised of the following complete
precincts: 7-2, 7-4, 8-1, 8-2, 8-3, 9-1, 9-2, 9-4, and 9-7.
      (5)   The central district shall be comprised of the following complete
precincts: 1-1, 2-1, 2-2, 3-1, 3-2, 3-3, 3-5, 4-1, 4-2, 5-1, and 9-3.
   (b)   Time of taking full effect. The charter shall be in full effect for
all purposes on and after January 1, 1995.
   (c), (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   Initial expenses. The initial expenses of the mayor and city council
shall be paid by the city on vouchers signed by the mayor.
   (f)   Salary of mayor and council members. The mayor’s salary having been
established in the amount of $75,000 by this provision in 1995, each other
council member shall receive an annual salary in the amount of fifteen (15)
percent of the mayor’s salary. The mayor’s salary shall automatically be
adjusted annually for inflation or deflation with each other council persons
salary thereafter adjusted to be equal to fifteen (15) percent of the mayor’s
new adjusted salary. No meeting fees shall be paid to the mayor nor city
council members.
(Ref. of 5-7-96; 4-11-00, § H)
Section 9.06 Separability.
   If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of
the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter or
any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
application of the charter and its provision to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
CHARTER PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
References to Charter Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
SDCL Cite   Charter Section
title 1      1.03
title 9      1.04, 2.06
REFERENCES TO CHARTER ORDINANCES
   This table gives the location within the charter of ordinances amending the
charter.
Date   Section      Charter Section
3-20-1889         Char.
9-13-1994         Char.
5-7-1996 (Ref.)      2.12(7), 4.02(b), 5.02, 5.07(b), 5.11(a), 5.12(b), 6.01(a)
   Rpld   9.05(c), (d)
4-11-2000   A      2.02(c)
      B      2.10
      C      3.02
      D      3.04
      E      4.01(a)
      F      4.03
      G      7.02(a)(5)
      H      9.05(f)
4-13-2004   A      2.05(a)
      B      2.03
      C      2.06(c)(3)
      D      5.04(3)
      E      5.06(a)
      F      7.01(b)
      G      7.02(a)(5)
      H      7.02(b)
4-8-2008   A      2.04
      B      2.05
      C      5.04
      D      5.06
      E      5.07
      F      5.11
      G      5.12
      H      5.13
      I      6.01
      J      7.01
4-13-2010   A      5.04
      B      6.02
      C      6.01
4-10-2012   B      5.05
      B   Rpld   5.06
      C      7.01
4-8-2014   A      2.02
      B      3.02
      C      4.03
4-12-2016   A      2.02(c)
      B      2.04
      C      2.14
      D      3.02
      E      4.01(b)
      F      7.02(a)
6-2-2020   A      2.02(b)
      B      8.01(d)
4-12-22   B      2.05
      B      4.03
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.001   Title
   
10.002   Definitions and rules of construction
   
10.003   Corporate limits
   
10.004   Catchlines of sections
   
10.005   Ordinances saved from repeal
   
10.006   Publication and effect
   
10.007   William H. Lyon Fair Grounds exempted from operation of ordinances
   
10.008   Severability
   
10.009   Amendments to Code
   
10.010   Supplementation of Code; generally
   
10.011   Supplementation of Code; exclusion of special or temporary ordinances
   
10.999   General penalty; continuing violations
§ 10.001 TITLE.
   This ordinance, hereinafter also referred to as this Code, shall be known as
the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and may be so cited.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 16.201; 1992 Code, § 1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt revised ordinances, see SDCL 9-19-15, 9-19-16, 9-19-17
§ 10.002 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code, the following rules shall be observed and
the following definitions shall apply, unless the construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council.
   CITY. The term THE CITY or THIS CITY shall mean the City of Sioux Falls in
the County of Minnehaha and County of Lincoln, and the State of South Dakota.
   CODE. The term CODE or THIS CODE shall be taken to mean the Code of
Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota in their entirety, including each and
every section thereof. The entire CODE is intended by the city council to
constitute an ordinance in revision of the ordinances of the city, within the
meaning of SDCL 9-19-16 and 9-19-17.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which any act provided by this Code or
other ordinance is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the last is a holiday and then it also is excluded.
Fractions of a day are to be disregarded in computations which include more
than one day, and involve no questions of priority.
   COUNCIL. The words COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL shall mean the city council of
the City of Sioux Falls, constituting the governing body of the city.
   COUNTY. The term COUNTY or THIS COUNTY shall mean the County of Minnehaha
and the County of Lincoln, South Dakota.
   DUTIES PERFORMED BY AGENTS. Wherever in this Code any act is required to be
done by an officer in the line of his or her general duties or by a department
head or inspector, such shall be construed to permit the doing of that act by
the agent or subordinate of the person, provided that the agent or subordinate
is duly authorized and duly qualified to perform that act. This rule shall
apply also to license holders, where the act is not otherwise required to be
performed personally by the person, either by specific law or by the nature of
the act.
   GENERALLY. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to
effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof.
In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of the provisions, the GENERAL
shall yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction
shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular
mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in
their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and the
plural, the singular, except where a contrary intention plainly appears.
   OATH. The word OATH shall be construed to include an affirmation, and the
words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made in this Code to
a city officer, employee, department, board or commission by title only, this
shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of Sioux Falls”
and shall be taken to mean the officer, employee, department, board or
commission of this city having the title mentioned or performing the duties
indicated.
   PERSON. The word PERSON shall extend and be applied to associations,
companies, corporations, firms, partnerships, organizations and bodies politic
and corporate as well as to individuals and any other legal entities, or any
agent or employee thereof.
   SDCL. The South Dakota Codified Laws and acts amendatory thereof.
   SHALL, MAY. The word SHALL is a mandatory reference; the word MAY is a
permissible reference.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write, his
or her name being written near that mark, and written by a person who writes
his or her own name as a witness.
   STATE. The words THE STATE or THIS STATE shall be construed to mean the
State of South Dakota.
   TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   VARIATIONS IN PUNCTUATION; TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS; AND THE LIKE. No variation
in punctuation, either formal or informal, consistent or not, shall affect the
validity of this Code, nor shall obvious or apparent defects in spelling or
typography be construed as to invalidate any portion hereof, so long as the
purpose and intent of the section is clear.
   WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. In all cases where the words WHOLESALER or
WHOLESALE DEALER are used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined,
these terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of
resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities
direct to the consumer.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The words WRITTEN or IN WRITING shall be construed to
include typewriting and typewritten, printing and printed, except in the case
of signatures, and where the words are used by way of contrast to typewriting
and printing. WRITING may be made in any manner, except that when a person
entitled to require the execution of a WRITING demands that it be made with
ink, it must be so made.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 16.101; 1992 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.003 CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The words CORPORATE LIMITS or CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY are declared to be
such as have been and shall hereafter be legally established and amended by law
and ordinances of the city as shown on the official map thereof on file in the
planning and building services department which the map is incorporated in this
Code by reference and adopted as the official map showing the boundaries and
limits of the city.
(1992 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.004 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of those sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of these sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1992 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.005 ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   (a)   (1)   Nothing contained in this Code, nor in the ordinance adopting
this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any manner:
         A.   Any ordinance or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this Code;
         B.   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence
of the city’s indebtedness;
         C.   Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
         D.   Any right or franchise granted by the city;
         E.   Any budget or appropriation ordinance;
         F.   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated
or limited term;
         G.   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing
taxes therefor;
         H.   Any ordinance adopted after the effective date of this Code;
         I.   Any ordinance relating to the annual tax levies; or
         J.   Any special ordinance.
      (2)   All such ordinances are hereby saved from repeal and recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
in this Code.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 16.403, 16.405, 16.406; 1992 Code, § 1-6)
   (b)   (1)   Nothing contained in this Code, nor in the ordinance adopting
this Code, shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any manner:
         A.   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee;
or
         B.   Any ordinance of an administrative character not in conflict with
the provisions of this Code.
      (2)   All such ordinances are hereby saved from repeal and recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
in this Code.
(1992 Code, § 2-1)
§ 10.006 PUBLICATION AND EFFECT.
   This Code shall be printed and published in book form and shall take effect
as provided by law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 16.410; 1992 Code, § 1-7)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to publish revised ordinances in book form, see SDCL 9-19-17
§ 10.007 WILLIAM H. LYON FAIR GROUNDS EXEMPTED FROM OPERATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The property within the city limits of the city, commonly called the William
H. Lyon Fair Grounds and which are legally described in a quit claim deed from
the city to Minnehaha County, are hereby exempted from the operation and effect
of the ordinances of the city.
(1992 Code, § 1-8) (Ord. 77-78, passed 7-31-1978)
§ 10.008 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or
invalid, the holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of
the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent of the city council
that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or
section thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of
any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set
forth in the amendatory ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 1-9)
§ 10.009 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (a)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
Code in the following language: “That section ________ of the Code of
Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, is hereby amended to read as follows:
. . . .” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (b)   If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language shall be used: “That the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls,
South Dakota, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ________,
which section reads as follows: . . . .” The new section shall then be set out
in full as desired.
(1992 Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.010 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE; GENERALLY.
   (a)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (b)   In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the
Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes
in the catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this article,” “this division,” and the like, as the case may
be, or to “sections ________ to ________” (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
(1992 Code, § 1-11)
§ 10.011 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE; EXCLUSION OF SPECIAL OR TEMPORARY ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances adopted after the effective date of this Code which are not of a
general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated,
published and recorded in the ordinance book, but shall not be prepared for
insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof.
(1992 Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.999 GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Whenever in this Code or any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or wherever in
such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided
therefor, any person who shall be convicted of any such violation shall be
fined not more than $500 or imprisoned in the county jail not longer than 30
days, or shall receive both such fine and imprisonment. Each day in which a
violation of this Code or other ordinance continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   Any failure to appear for a scheduled court appearance on an ordinance
violation, after notice and promise to appear, summons or arrest, shall be a
public offense, separate and in addition to the underlying offense.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 16.301; 1992 Code, § 1-4) (Ord. 32-76, passed 5-10-1976;
Ord. 117-82, passed 11-29-1982; Ord. 52-91, passed 6-10-1991; Ord. 57-03,
passed 6-23-2003; Ord. 93-12, passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Administrative code enforcement, see
ch. 40
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide for penalty as above prescribed, see SDCL 9-19-3
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
   
30.   CITY COUNCIL
   
31.   DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION
   
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
   
33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
   
34.   ETHICS
   
35.   CONFLICTS OF INTEREST OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND ETHICS BOARD
   
36.   FINANCES
   
37.   TAXATION
   
38.   ELECTIONS
   
39.   PERSONNEL REGULATIONS AND BENEFITS; RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
   
40.   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
   
41.   FEES
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
Organization and Procedure
   
30.001   Council meetings
   
30.002   Special meetings
   
30.003   Informational meetings and working sessions of the city council
   
30.004   Standing committees of the city council
   
30.005   Executive sessions
   
30.006   Minutes
   
30.007   Journal of proceedings
   
30.008   Presiding officer; duties; election of chair, vice chair, and audit
committee chair
   
30.009   Call to order for city council meetings
   
30.010   Roll call
   
30.011   Quorum
   
30.012   Rules of order
   
30.013   Order of business
   
30.014   Agenda
   
30.015   Addressing the council; time limit
   
30.016   Rules of debate
   
30.017   Voting procedure
   
30.018   Decorum
   
30.019   Enforcement of decorum
   
30.020   Persons authorized to be within rail
   
30.021   Members’ objections to council action entered into the minutes
   
30.022   Ordinances, resolutions, motions and other documents requiring council
approval
   
30.023   Reports and resolutions to be filed with city clerk
   
30.024   Adjournment
   
30.025   Creation of agencies, authorities, committees, boards, commissions,
and districts
   
30.026   Rules for boards and commissions
   
30.027   Fee for use of Carnegie Chambers
   
30.028   Assignment of delinquent accounts, uncollectible accounts
   
30.029   Council information gathering
Administrative Appeals
   
30.040   Appeal permitted
   
30.041   Time of hearing and notice
   
30.042   Hearing procedures
   
30.043   Rights of parties at hearing
   
30.044   Decision
   
30.045   Report, costs
   
30.046   Subject to judicial review
Naming Facilities
   
30.060   Definitions
   
30.061   Purpose
   
30.062   City naming committee
   
30.063   Application
   
30.064   Planning and development services department review
   
30.065   Committee review
   
30.066   City council disposition
   
30.067   Criteria; street renaming
   
30.068   Naming or renaming of park property
   
30.069   Naming or renaming of library properties
   
30.070   Naming or renaming of other city property
   
30.071   Commemorative designations
Placement of Statues, Monuments, and Memorials
   
30.075   Placement of statues, monuments and memorials
Cross-reference:
   Administration of sewer provisions, see §
53.001
   Airport authority board, see §§
99.015 through
99.020
   Arena, see
ch. 32
   Arena board, see §§
32.035 through
32.042
   Board of health and health center governing board, see §§
92.025 through
92.034
   Board of trustees of retirement system, see §§
39.280 through
39.294
   Civil service board, see §§
39.080 through
39.092
   Commission on human relations, see §§
98.020 through
98.042
   Continuity of city government, see §§
33.001 through
33.010
   Elections, see
ch. 38
   Electrical board of appeals and examiners, see §
150.211
   Emergency management, see
ch. 33
   Extraterritorial zoning board of adjustment, see §§
159.425 through
159.434
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Firefighters’ pension fund retirement board, see §§
39.355 through
39.367
   Garbage and recycling, see
ch. 57
   Historic preservation commission, see §§
151.015 through
151.020
   Human resources department, see §§
39.020 through
39.022
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
   Park and recreation board, see §§
95.045 through
95.058
   Personnel regulations and benefits, see
ch. 39
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Planning commission, see §§
154.015 through
154.039
   Police, see §§
131.020,
131.021
   Public parking advisory board, see §§
77.025 through
77.031
   Retirement and pensions, see
ch. 39
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Taxation, see
ch. 37
   Utilities, see title V
   Zoning board of adjustment, see §§
160.665 through
160.675
Statutory reference:
   Commissioner form of government, see SDCL ch. 9-9
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE
§ 30.001 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (a)   All city council meetings shall be open to the public, unless closed
pursuant to state law.
   (b)   The city council shall hold meetings on the first, second, and third
Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at the Carnegie Town Hall. The first meeting
of the month shall be designated the regular meeting. In addition, any meeting
scheduled for the purpose of considering the override of a mayoral veto shall
be deemed a regular meeting. When the day fixed for a city council meeting
falls on a date designated by law as a legal or national holiday, the meeting
shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day, not a holiday.
   (c)   Any meeting of the city council may be adjourned to a later date and
time, provided that no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the
next scheduled meeting.
   (d)   The city council may by resolution, when necessary, change the time
and place of any meeting. The resolution shall set forth the circumstances
necessitating the change. The resolution shall be published at least 24 hours
prior to the rescheduled meeting. The city clerk, or the city clerk’s designee,
shall give each council member written notice either in person, by mail, email
or other electronic means of any change from the meeting days established by
this section.
   (e)   All meetings of the city council shall be open to the media, subject
to recording by radio, television and photography at any time, provided that
these arrangements do not interfere with the orderly conduct of the meetings
under those rules as the city council may prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 57-97, passed 8-4-1997;
Ord. 34-98, passed 3-16-1998; Ord. 117-99, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 121-99,
passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012;
Ord. 98-20, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 30.002 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   The mayor, acting mayor or six members of the city council may call
special meetings of the city council whenever in its opinion the public
business may require it.
   (b)   Whenever a special meeting is called, a notice in writing signed by
the mayor, acting mayor or the council members requesting the meeting shall be
prepared by and filed with the city clerk, or the city clerk’s designee, and
served forthwith upon each member of the city council at least 24 hours prior
to the meeting or by 4:00 p.m. the day prior to the meeting, whichever occurs
first, either in person, by e-mail or other electronic means, or by notice left
at the city council member’s place of residence. The notice shall state the
date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which the meeting is called
and, whenever reasonably possible, the background and objective of any item
that requires action by the city council. The notice shall be posted on the
city’s website by the city clerk’s office. However, the provisions of this
section do not apply to any information that is specifically exempt from
disclosure under state public record laws in effect at the time. Additional
printed material may be distributed to the governing body in accordance with
SDCL 1-27-1-16. No business shall be transacted at the meeting except such as
is stated in the notice.
   (c)   No special meeting shall be held until at least 24 hours after the
call is issued.
(1992 Code, § 2-4) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 76-99, passed 7-19-1999;
Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 66-20, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 30.003 INFORMATIONAL MEETINGS AND WORKING SESSIONS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   The city council may meet in informational meetings and working
sessions which shall be open to the general public to review and discuss
matters pertaining to the affairs of the city council provided that all
discussions and conclusions thereon shall be informal. All agendas for
informational meetings and working sessions of the city council shall be posted
with at least 24 hours’ notice.
   (b)   Informational meetings may be held each Tuesday of the month. When the
day fixed for an informational meeting falls on a date designated by law as a
legal or national holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on the
next succeeding day, not a holiday. Cancellations must be posted with at least
24 hours’ notice to the public.
   (c)   Working sessions of the council may be held as needed.
   (d)   The city council chair and vice chair shall determine the agenda, with
city council input, for all informational meetings and working sessions.
(1992 Code, § 2-5) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 117-99, passed 11-15-
1999; Ord. 121-99, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 24-12,
passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 68-12, passed 8-21-2012)
§ 30.004 STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The city council shall establish an audit committee, a regulatory oversight
committee, a fiscal committee, an operations committee, and a city services
committee as standing committees of the city council. Notwithstanding §
32.019, the city council chair and vice chair shall appoint the members of each
committee and shall designate the committee chair for each committee who shall
serve as the presiding officer. The city council may assign or refer any policy
question to a city council committee for its study, consideration, and/or
recommendation. A city council committee cannot convene a meeting unless more
than 50 percent of its members are present. All agendas for the city council
committee meetings shall be posted with at least 24 hours’ notice.
(1992 Code, § 2-5.1) (Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 13-12, passed 2-21-
2012; Ord. 85- 20, passed 10-6-2020; Ord. 69-21, passed 6-15- 2021; Ord. 33-23,
passed 5-9-2023)
§ 30.005 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
   Executive sessions or closed meetings may be held in accordance with the
provisions of the State Open Public Meetings Law.
(1992 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 30.006 MINUTES.
   (a)   The city clerk, or the city clerk’s designee, shall prepare minutes of
all regular and special meetings, informational meetings, and committee
meetings. The minutes shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. The
minutes shall reflect:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the meeting or session;
      (2)   The members recorded as either present or absent;
      (3)   A general description of all matters proposed, discussed or
decided; and
      (4)   Record of any votes taken.
   (b)   Approval of minutes of all city council meetings and informational
meetings shall be considered at the next regular council meeting. The minutes
may be reviewed by the city clerk, or the city clerk’s designee, to correct
spelling, numbering or other technical defects.
   (c)   Minutes of city council meetings held pursuant to §
30.001(b) of this subchapter shall be published in the city’s official
newspaper.
(1992 Code, § 2-7) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011;
Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 30.007 JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (a)   A journal containing the minutes of the council meetings shall be kept
by the city clerk’s office which shall constitute the official record of the
council. Council meeting minutes will be available on the city’s website for
public view, and copies are available from the city clerk’s office upon
request.
   (b)   The minutes of all the city council meetings shall be open to public
inspection.
(1992 Code, § 2-8) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011;
Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 30.008 PRESIDING OFFICER; DUTIES; ELECTION OF CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND AUDIT
COMMITTEE CHAIR.
   (a)   The presiding officer of the city council meetings shall be the mayor.
In the absence of the mayor, the acting mayor shall act as the presiding
officer at the city council meetings. The acting mayor may vote on all issues.
   (b)   (1)   The city council shall elect a council chair and council vice
chair to perform the duties of acting mayor pursuant to city charter §
2.03. The chair and vice chair shall serve a one-year term or until a successor
is elected by the city council. Upon the vacancy of the chair position, the
duly elected vice chair shall assume the role of chair for the remainder of the
term created by the vacancy. In the event of an interim vacancy of vice chair
or both chair and vice chair, a special election shall be held in accordance
with § 30.008(b)(2) to fill the remainder of the term created by the vacancy.
The regular election of the city council chair, vice chair, and audit committee
chair shall occur each year on the third Tuesday in May, or at the city council
meeting that follows the installation ceremony, whichever is later. For the
purposes of this section, an INSTALLATION CEREMONY is defined as the swearing
in of newly elected officials that follows a regular election. The chair or
vice chair shall notify the newly elected city council members in a timely
manner of the regular election date and time.
      (2)   The election of chair, vice chair, and audit committee chair shall
be conducted as follows:
         A.   The mayor shall not participate in the election.
         B.   The presiding officer opens nominations.
         C.   Nominations shall be made from the floor and shall be seconded.
The council members who made and seconded a nomination shall have the
opportunity to speak on behalf of their nominee once the presiding officer
reads their nomination aloud.
         D.   A nominee can withdraw his/her nomination from consideration at
any time.
         E.   The presiding officer shall close nominations after all
nominations are made known.
         F.   After nominations are closed, each nominee will have an
opportunity to give an acceptance speech in the order of their nomination.
         G.   Once the nominees have spoken, each council member will have an
opportunity to discuss the nominations.
         H.   Voting shall be by roll call vote, with each council member
stating the name of their preferred nominee.
         I.   A majority of members present will determine the election
outcome.
         J.   In case of a tie vote and the tie cannot be broken due to the
mayor's absence or after three attempts, the tie will be broken by the flip of
a coin cast by the city clerk upon the floor. One candidate shall be designated
head and one candidate shall be designated tails by the presiding officer.
      (3)   If the vice chair is unable to serve as acting mayor, the council
chair may designate a city council member to serve as acting mayor in his or
her absence.
   (c)   The mayor, or acting mayor, shall preserve strict order and decorum at
all regular and special meetings of the city council and confine members in
debates to the question under discussion. The mayor, or acting mayor, shall
announce the vote on all subjects voted on by the city council.
   (d)   The city clerk, or the clerk’s designee, shall state every question
coming before the city council. The mayor, or acting mayor, shall decide all
questions of order; subject, however, to an appeal to the city council, in
which event a majority vote of the city council shall govern and conclusively
determine a question of order.
   (e)   The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie vote, with his or her
name being called last.
(1992 Code, § 2-9) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 31-96, passed 3-18-1996;
Ord. 76-99, passed 7-19-1999; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 24-12, passed
4-2-2012; Ord. 45-19, passed 4-9-2019; Ord. 43-20, passed 4-21-2020; Ord. 33-
23, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 30.009 CALL TO ORDER FOR CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (a)   The mayor shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the
meeting, and shall immediately call the city council meeting to order.
   (b)   In the absence of the mayor, the city council chair, or in the chair’s
absence, the council vice chair, as acting mayor, shall call the city council
meeting to order.
   (c)   Upon the arrival of the mayor, the acting mayor shall relinquish the
position of presiding officer upon the conclusion of the business immediately
before the city council.
(1992 Code, § 2-10) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 31-96, passed 3-18-
1996; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 30.010 ROLL CALL.
   Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk, or
the city clerk’s designee, shall call the roll of the members. The names of
those present and absent shall be entered in the minutes.
(1992 Code, § 2-11) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.011 QUORUM.
   Five members of the council shall constitute a quorum and be necessary for
the transaction of business. If a quorum is not present, those in attendance
shall be named and shall adjourn to a later time.
(1992 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 30.012 RULES OF ORDER.
   Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised (latest edition) shall govern the
proceedings of the council in all cases, unless they are in conflict with this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 2-13) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 30.013 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The business of the council shall be considered in the following order:
   (a)   Roll call;
   (b)   Invocation;
   (c)   Pledge;
   (d)   Proclamations, recognitions, awards;
   (e)   Approval of consent agenda:
      (1)   Approval of minutes;
      (2)   Communications;
      (3)   Council’s internal departmental directives;
      (4)   Applications;
      (5)   Notice of hearings; and
      (6)   Other.
   (f)   Approval of regular agenda;
   (g)   Petitions;
   (h)   Unfinished business;
   (i)   Introduction and adoption of ordinances:
      (1)   Second readings; and
      (2)   First readings.
   (j)   Hearings and resolutions;
   (k)   Notice of hearings for street vacations;
   (l)   Report of officers, boards, committees, commissions and transfers of
unencumbered appropriation balances among programs within a department or
organizational unit as provided in the city charter §
5.07(d);
   (m)   New business;
   (n)   Items added after agenda deadline;
   (o)   General public input;
   (p)   Adjournment; and
   (q)   Executive session.
(1992 Code, § 2-14) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 51-98, passed 5-18-
1998; Ord. 28-99, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 68-02, passed 9-3-2002; Ord. 1-09,
passed 1-5-2009; Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 99-20, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 30.014 AGENDA.
   (a)   All materials related to an agenda item requiring council action will
be delivered to the city clerk’s office in its complete and final format.
   (b)   At the request of any one council member, an item may be removed from
the consent agenda and placed on the regular agenda whenever that council
member believes additional discussion on the item is necessary.
   (c)   The proposed agenda shall be posted at the city clerk’s office and
placed on the city’s website. An email notice shall also be sent to all persons
who have requested notice pursuant to law by the close of business on the
Friday preceding any meeting to take place on the following Tuesday. Proposed
additions to the agenda, in their complete and final format, including a signed
agenda approval form, shall be delivered to the city clerk’s office no later
than Monday at 12:00 p.m. before the Tuesday meeting the next day. These items
shall be listed as “Items added after agenda deadline” on a revised agenda
which shall be posted, placed on the website and noticed at least 24 hours in
advance of the Tuesday meeting to the council, the mayor, the directors and all
persons who have requested notice pursuant to law. The sponsor(s) of any item
added after the agenda deadline shall provide an email notice to the city
council members and the city clerk’s office by 4:00 p.m. the day prior to
consideration by the city council. The notice shall include a statement
regarding the background and objective of the proposed item and shall be posted
to the city’s website by the city clerk’s office upon its receipt. However, the
provisions of this section do not apply to any information that is specifically
exempt from disclosure under state public record laws in effect at the time.
Additional printed material may be distributed to the governing body in
accordance with SDCL 1-27-1.16. A technological problem or failure that either
prevents the posting of public notices on a website or that temporarily or
permanently prevents the use of all or part of the website does not preclude
the holding of the meeting for which the notice was posted, if the public body
complies with all other public notice requirements.
   (d)   During consideration of new business, the mayor or any two city
council members may bring before the city council any business that person
feels should be deliberated upon by the city council. These matters can be
added to the agenda by a vote of six city council members and will be
considered under new business. Formal action on these matters shall be deferred
until a subsequent city council meeting, unless consideration is necessary for
the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety of the
municipal government. If the city council chooses to take immediate action on
the newly calendared agenda item, an affirmative vote of six members of the
council is required for approval. This subsection shall not apply to any action
to remove the city attorney under city charter §
4.03 or a city council appointed employee. Any action to remove the city
attorney under city charter §
4.03 or a city council appointed employee shall be subject to the provisions of
§
30.022(b).
(1992 Code, § 2-15) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011; Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 8-16, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 66-20,
passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 54- 23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 30.015 ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL; TIME LIMIT.
   (a)   Public input shall be allowed for any item on the regular agenda. Each
person addressing the city council shall step up to the microphone in front of
the rail, shall give his or her name in an audible tone of voice for the
record, and unless further time is granted by the presiding officer, shall be
limited to three minutes on any ordinance receiving a first reading; and on the
date of final adoption by the city council, five minutes shall be allowed. If
the regular agenda item is quasi-judicial as defined by state law or a zoning
ordinance, the private applicant shall be invited first to provide public input
and allowed an additional three minutes for rebuttal following public input.
Rebuttal by the applicant shall only be allowed to respond to earlier testimony
provided during public input. The city council has the right to overrule the
presiding officer’s use of discretion pursuant to Robert’s Rules of Order Newly
Revised (latest edition).
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) above, the general public input portion
of a city council meeting, held pursuant to §
30.001(b) will be limited to topics which do not involve those agenda items
appearing earlier in the regular agenda as public input shall be received when
that agenda item is up for discussion. Each person addressing the city council
during the general public input portion shall be limited to three minutes.
   (c)   No person shall address the city council without first securing the
permission of the mayor, or acting mayor, to do so.
   (d)   Electronic presentations with audio and video embedded within the
electronic presentation shall not be allowed. Electronic presentations without
audio and video embedded within the electronic presentation are only permitted
during regular agenda items on the date of final adoption. The city council may
adopt standards that govern the use of electronic presentations. This provision
shall not be construed to restrict electronic or hardcopy photos from being
presented by the public during a regular meeting.
   (e)   All remarks shall be addressed to the city council as a body and not
to any member thereof.
   (f)   No person, other than the city council and the person having the
floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or
through a member of the city council without the permission of the mayor or
acting mayor.
   (g)   No question shall be asked of a city council member except through the
mayor or acting mayor.
   (h)   No person, except city council members, shall address the council
after a motion is made and seconded unless requested by a city council member.
(1992 Code, § 2-16) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011; Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 55-18, passed 7-3-2018; Ord. 115-18,
passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 99-20, passed 11-10-2020; Ord. 68-24, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 30.016 RULES OF DEBATE.
   (a)   City council debate may occur only after a motion has been made and
seconded.
   (b)   The mayor, or acting mayor, shall not show themselves to be partisan
in their duties as the presiding officer of a city council meeting. The mayor,
or acting mayor, shall relinquish the chair if he or she desires to enter into
the debate of the merits of a pending question. The mayor, or acting mayor,
shall not return until the pending main question has been disposed of by the
city council.
   (c)   Every member desiring to speak shall address the mayor, or acting
mayor, and upon recognition, shall keep comments confined to the question under
debate.
   (d)   A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking
unless it is to be called to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a
member, while speaking, is called to order, the member shall cease speaking
until the question of order be determined, and if in order, the member shall be
permitted to proceed.
   (e)   A motion may be reconsidered at any time during the meeting of the
city council or at the next regular meeting. A motion for reconsideration being
once made and decided in the negative, shall not be renewed. A motion for
reconsideration can only be made by a member who voted on the prevailing side.
(1992 Code, § 2-17) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.017 VOTING PROCEDURE.
   City council members may not abstain from voting, but may absent themselves
from the meeting by physically leaving the meeting at the time an item is
called by the clerk. Members with a financial interest in a matter shall
disclose that interest and shall absent themselves from the meeting by
physically leaving the meeting while the matter is considered.
(1992 Code, § 2-18) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 117-99, passed 11-15-
1999; Ord. 121-99, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 30.018 DECORUM.
   (a)   While the city council is in session, the members must preserve order
and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or
interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council or disturb any member
while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the city council or the mayor,
or acting mayor, except as otherwise herein provided.
   (b)   Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who
shall become boisterous while addressing the council shall be forthwith, by the
mayor, or acting mayor, barred from further audience before the city council,
unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the city
council.
(1992 Code, § 2-19) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.019 ENFORCEMENT OF DECORUM.
   Upon instructions of the mayor, or acting mayor, law enforcement shall place
any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and
cause him or her to be prosecuted under the provisions of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 2-20) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.020 PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO BE WITHIN RAIL.
   No person except city officials and their representatives shall be permitted
within the rail in front of the city council chamber without the express
consent of the mayor, or acting mayor.
(1992 Code, § 2-21) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.021 MEMBERS’ OBJECTIONS TO COUNCIL ACTION ENTERED INTO THE MINUTES.
   At the time of the vote, a council member may request to have the reasons
for that member’s dissent from, or protest against, any action of the city
council entered in the minutes.
(1992 Code, § 2-22) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.022 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS REQUIRING COUNCIL
APPROVAL.
   (a)   Except for any action to remove the city attorney under city charter §
4.03 or a city council appointed employee, all proposed ordinances, resolutions
and other documents requiring city council approval shall, before presentation
to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city
attorney’s office. All proposed ordinances and resolutions involving
substantive matters of administration shall also be reviewed by the head of the
department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of
the ordinance, resolution or other document would devolve. The sponsor(s) of
any proposed ordinance, resolution or other document shall provide a written
background and objective of the proposed item to the city clerk’s office with a
completed agenda approval form. The background and objective shall be posted to
the city’s website by the city clerk’s office. All proposed ordinances may be
assigned or referred to a council committee for consideration and
recommendation.
   (b)   Except for removing the city attorney under city charter §
4.03 or a city council appointed employee, ordinances, resolutions and other
matters or subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced and
sponsored by two members of the city council or the mayor. The mayor may
present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the city
council. Any city council member may move that these ordinances, resolutions,
matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. The
city council members who sponsor any regular agenda item that requires action
by the city council shall be identified by name as sponsors on the regular
agenda item. Any regular agenda item requiring action by the city council that
is sponsored by the mayor shall identify the mayor on the agenda item unless
the item is being presented on behalf of a private applicant. Private applicant
shall mean those individuals or businesses that make application to the
Planning Commission or Public Works Department. Any regular agenda item
presented by the mayor on behalf of a private applicant shall identify the
applicant by name on the regular agenda item. Any action approving the removal
of the city attorney under city charter §
4.03 must be introduced and sponsored by four members of the city council or by
the mayor. The title of the motion shall include the following statement: “A
motion to approve the removal of {'{'}Insert Employee Name{'}'} from employment
as city attorney with the City of Sioux Falls.” Any action approving the
removal of a city council appointed employee must be introduced and sponsored
by four members of the city council. The title of the motion shall include the
following statement: “A motion to approve the removal of {'{'}Insert Employee
Name{'}'} from employment with the City of Sioux Falls.”
   (c)   No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject. The subject shall
be clearly expressed in the title.
   (d)   When a proposed ordinance is referred to a committee of the city
council, the committee shall give a report of the proposed ordinance’s status
to the city council at a subsequent city council meeting or informational
meeting. The proposed ordinance shall stand for final action in accordance with
the report of the committee, notwithstanding that the committee reports an
amended or substituted ordinance, provided that the amendment or substitution
is germane to the title of the ordinance originally referred to the committee.
   (e)   The yes and no votes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances
and resolutions and entered upon the official record of the city council.
   (f)   An affirmative vote of at least five city council members shall be
necessary to pass an ordinance. Unless otherwise provided in charter, a
resolution, motion or any other proposition may be adopted by a majority of
those present. When any vote is called, each city council member shall respond
“yes” or “no.”
   (g)   Upon passage, a number shall be assigned to each ordinance or
resolution by the city clerk or the city clerk’s designee.
   (h)   When passed by the council, unless an ordinance has been vetoed by the
mayor, an ordinance shall be signed by the mayor and be attested by the city
clerk. If the mayor does not veto an ordinance, but fails to sign the
ordinance, the city clerk shall so note the failure to sign on the ordinance,
shall attest and file the ordinance.
   (i)   Any member of the city council may request formal written city
attorney opinions relating to city business.
   (j)   Any member of the city council may, for purposes of inquiry, request
verbal or written opinion or advice on city legal matters directly from the
city attorney.
   (k)   When the annual appropriation ordinance authorizes the maximum
property tax allowed by law, the annual appropriation ordinance title shall
include the following statement: “authorizing an increase in property tax
revenue pursuant to SDCL 10-13-35.”
(1992 Code, § 2-23) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 117-99, passed 11-15-
1999; Ord. 121-99, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 24-12,
passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 81-15, passed 8-18-2015; Ord. 66-20, passed 8-11- 2020;
Ord. 80-22, passed 8-2-2022; Ord. 54-23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 30.023 REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS TO BE FILED WITH CITY CLERK.
   All reports and resolutions of departments, authorities, boards, committees,
commissions, districts and similar organizations shall be filed with the city
clerk and referenced in the minutes.
(1992 Code, § 2-24) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 30.024 ADJOURNMENT.
   A motion to adjourn is decided without debate and without the need for a
roll call vote.
(1992 Code, § 2-25) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011; Ord. 24-12, passed 4-2-2012)
§ 30.025 CREATION OF AGENCIES, AUTHORITIES, COMMITTEES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS,
AND DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The council may create agencies, authorities, committees, boards,
commissions and districts to assist in the conduct of the operation of the city
government with those duties as the council may specify not inconsistent with
the city charter, Code of Ordinances, or state law.
   (b)   Membership and selection of members shall be as provided by the
council if not specified by the city charter, Code of Ordinances, or state law.
   (c)   Any agency, authority, committee, board, commission or district so
created shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special purpose for
which it was created or when abolished by a majority vote of the council,
unless specifically provided by law.
   (d)   No agency, authority, committee, board, commission or district so
appointed shall have powers other than advisory to the council or the mayor
except as otherwise specified by the city charter, Code of Ordinances, or state
law.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided by this Code or state law, any person
appointed to any city agency, authority, board, committee, commission or
district shall not serve more than two consecutive full terms of office on the
agency, authority, board, committee, commission or district. An appointed
person may continue to serve on a city agency, authority, board, committee,
commission or district for up to an additional four months after the expiration
of his/her term of office until a replacement is appointed and approved. If any
person is appointed to serve an unexpired term and serves less than one-half of
that remaining unexpired term, then that person would be eligible to serve an
additional two consecutive full terms of office. Staggering the terms of office
for any board member by appointment to a shorter term is hereby authorized to
ensure boards will have experienced members at any given time. If a member is
appointed to serve a staggered term that is less than one-half of a full-term
for that board, then that member is eligible to serve an additional two
consecutive full terms of office.
   (f)   Citizen appointees who miss more than 50% of the board meetings in any
calendar year may be removed by the mayor for cause, unless specifically
provided by law.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by this Code or state law, the council
may remove any member of an agency, authority, board, committee, commission or
district appointed by the council for cause.
   (h)   Members of agencies, authorities, boards, committees, commissions or
districts shall be registered voters of the city unless otherwise specified.
   (i)   Any vacancy on any board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
member vacating the board in the same manner as is required for a regular
appointment.
(1992 Code, § 2-26) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-1999;
Ord. 179-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 36-15, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 30.026 RULES FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   Bylaws or rules of procedure for any agency, authority, board, committee,
commission, or district must contain the following:
   (a)   Each member of a city agency, authority, board, committee, commission,
or district shall, upon assuming office, receive orientation materials
regarding, at a minimum, the form of city government, the city's conflicts of
interest ordinance, the state open meeting laws and the basic rules of
parliamentary procedure. These materials shall also be available online.
   (b)   A uniform format for the agenda shall be established. A printed agenda
shall be prepared in advance of all meetings of city agencies, authorities,
boards, committees, and commissions. Each agenda shall contain, at a minimum,
the time and place of the meeting and specific descriptions of the topics to be
discussed.
   (c)   A uniform format shall be established for the taking of minutes. The
draft minutes for a meeting shall be posted on the City website within ten
working days following the meeting. A set of approved minutes of all meetings
of city agencies, authorities, boards, committees, and commissions shall be
kept and maintained by the City staff liaison to the agency, authority, board,
committee, or commission. Minutes shall contain, at a minimum, a record of
attendance, actions taken, numerical results of votes taken and specific
descriptions of items discussed.
   (d)   Each city agency, authority, board, committee, and commission shall
conduct a review of its by-laws to reflect any changes in governing law on at
least an annual basis. Such review of the by-laws shall be noticed as a regular
agenda item and be reflected in the minutes.
(1992 Code, § 2-26.1) (Ord. 82-97, passed 11-17-1997; Ord. 102-07, passed 6-18-
2007; Ord. 36-15, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 30.027 FEE FOR USE OF CARNEGIE CHAMBERS.
   If a special meeting of the city council is held because of an individual
request, that individual shall pay a special meeting fee of $150 to the city
clerk’s office prior to the scheduling of the meeting.
(1992 Code, § 2-27) (Ord. 50-95, passed 3-20-1995; Ord. 52-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.028 ASSIGNMENT OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS, UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS.
   The city may assign for collection any or all delinquent accounts
receivable. After reasonable collection efforts for accounts receivable under
$5,000, the city finance officer may determine that an account is
uncollectible, and direct that the uncollectible amount be removed from the
records and disclosed on that year’s financial report. For accounts receivable
of $5,000 or more, the city council shall determine that an account is
uncollectible, and direct that the uncollectible amount be removed from the
records and disclosed on that year’s financial report. Evidence of the debt
removed from the records by the formal action of the finance officer or the
city council shall be retained by the city to support possible subsequent
collection of that debt.
(1992 Code, § 2-28) (Ord. 43-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 30.029 COUNCIL INFORMATION GATHERING.
   (a)   Inquiries as referenced in §
2.05(c) of the city charter shall refer to individual and collective requests
by the city council for information relevant to the performance of the
council’s legislative and policy making duties. Information relevant to council
legislative and policy making duties may not be unreasonably withheld. This
section shall not authorize the public disclosure of material that is
confidential or privileged under federal, state or local law, or material the
public disclosure of which otherwise would constitute an unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy.
 
   (b)   The city attorney shall deliver to the city council, within seven days
of its receipt, a copy of any notice of intent to sue which is received by the
city pursuant to SDCL 3-21 and any lawsuit filed in circuit court against the
city of Sioux Falls.
(1992 Code, § 2-29) (Ord. 56-99, passed 5-17-1999; Ord. 21-18, passed 3-6-2018)
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
§ 30.040 APPEAL PERMITTED.
   (a)   Any party who is harmed by any action or decision of any agency or
major organizational unit of the city concerning an administrative decision of
a city official or officials from which an appeal is not otherwise provided may
appeal the decision. The party who wishes to appeal is referred to as the
“appellant.” An independent hearing examiner, who must be a member in good
standing of the State Bar of South Dakota, shall be assigned to hear the
appeal.
   (b)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a written notice of appeal with
the responsible agency or major organizational unit either in person or
postmarked within 15 days of the decision. The written notice of appeal shall
be printed legibly or typed and contain the following information:
      (1)   The reasons the appellant believes the administrative citation or
decision is objectionable, incorrect or illegal;
      (2)   The amount and type of claim or dispute involved and the time
during which it accrued or occurred;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the appellant;
      (4)   The number of the citation being appealed, if applicable;
      (5)   A statement indicating whether the appellant desires the
administrative appeal hearing to be open or closed to the public. All
administrative appeal hearings are presumed to be open to the public. If either
party requests a hearing that is closed to the public, the party requesting the
closed hearing must present good cause to the hearing examiner that the public
interest in having an open hearing is outweighed by the privacy interest
involved in a particular case or that a closed hearing is legally required
based upon the nature of the evidence to be presented at the administrative
appeal hearing;
      (6)   If the appellant is to be represented by a legal representative,
the name, address and telephone number of the representative; and
      (7)   The signature of the appellant, legal representative and/or
corporate agent.
   (c)   A processing fee of $50 shall be paid by cash, check or certified
funds simultaneously with the filing of the notice of appeal. Any party who
requests a hearing to contest an administrative citation and/or decision and is
financially unable to pay the processing fee may file a request for a hardship
waiver in lieu of the processing fee. The request for hardship waiver must be
filed simultaneously with the filing of the notice of appeal. The party
requesting the hardship waiver must submit a sworn affidavit, together with any
supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the independent
hearing examiner the party’s financial inability to deposit with the city the
full amount of the processing fee. Written proof of financial hardship at a
minimum must include tax returns, financial statements, bank account records,
salary records or similar documentation demonstrating that the party is unable
to pay the processing fee. The hearing examiner shall issue a written decision
specifying the reasons for granting or denying a hardship waiver. The decision
of the independent hearing examiner regarding the hardship waiver shall be
final and shall be mailed by first class mail to the party requesting the
waiver. If the request for a hardship waiver of the processing fee is denied,
the party shall pay the $50 processing fee within five days of the written
decision or prior to the administrative appeal hearing, whichever occurs first.
If the processing fee is not paid in full pursuant to these provisions, the
request for hearing shall be deemed incomplete and waived and the
administrative decision shall be deemed final. The processing fee is not
refundable except as provided in §
30.045. Compliance with the above time limit, notice of appeal contents and
payment of the processing fee or granting of a hardship waiver shall be
jurisdictional prerequisites to any appeal. Failure to comply with any of these
requirements shall be deemed to waive the right to a hearing.
   (d)   If the appellant complies with the jurisdictional requirements for an
appeal, then the city will take no further action to enforce the fine, penalty
or result until the hearing examiner renders a final decision. However, the
provisions for prior notice and hearing may be dispensed with when, in the
opinion of the director of the responsible agency or major organizational unit
of the city, immediate action is necessary to summarily abate a dangerous
condition on public or private property or there is an imminent threat to life
or safety on public or private property. The director shall take only such
action as is reasonably necessary to summarily abate the danger, and then the
city will take no further action to enforce the fine, penalty or result until
the hearing examiner renders a final decision.
   (e)   The director of the responsible agency or major organizational unit,
or his or her designee, shall immediately deliver a copy of the appeal to the
city attorney who will act as legal counsel.
(1992 Code, § 2-60) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.041 TIME OF HEARING AND NOTICE.
   A public hearing, or a closed hearing if the hearing examiner determines it
is necessary, shall be held on all appeals within 30 days after the filing of
the appeal, unless a later date is scheduled by the hearing examiner upon a
showing of good cause why the matter should be scheduled beyond that date. The
city attorney’s office shall cause written notice of the date, time and place
of the hearing to be served upon the appellant by personal service or certified
mail to the address set forth in the notice of appeal at least 15 days before
the hearing date. Simultaneously, the notice of hearing may be sent by first
class mail. If the notice of hearing is sent by certified mail and returned
unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail,
provided the notice of hearing sent by first class mail is not returned.
(1992 Code, § 2-61) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.042 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The following rules shall govern the procedures for an administrative
hearing.
   (a)   Hearings and administrative appeals shall be governed by the rules of
civil procedure and the rules of evidence as set forth in the South Dakota
Codified Laws (SDCL). However, the foundational requirements of SDCL 19-16-10
and SDCL 19-16-12 will not be required as long as the hearing examiner is
reasonably satisfied regarding the source of the document(s).
   (b)   Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
   (c)   The hearing examiner shall administer oaths or affirmations to
witnesses.
   (d)   The city bears the burden of proof at the hearing. The standard of
proof to be used by the hearing examiner is by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (e)   The proponent of any testimony to be offered by a party or witness who
does not proficiently speak the English language shall provide an interpreter.
The interpreter shall be approved by the independent hearing examiner
conducting the proceeding as proficient in the English language and the
language in which the witness will testify. The cost of the interpreter is to
be paid by the party providing the interpreter.
(1992 Code, § 2-62) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.043 RIGHTS OF PARTIES AT HEARING.
   The appellant, the major organizational unit or agency, and any other party
to an appeal shall have these rights among others:
   (a)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue of
the hearing;
   (b)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
   (c)   To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
   (d)   To rebut evidence;
   (e)   To subpoena witnesses to appear and give testimony on that party’s
behalf or to produce records, books, papers and documents relating to any
matters related to the hearing. Any application for a subpoena shall be
submitted to the hearing examiner for consideration at least ten days in
advance of the hearing. The hearing examiner shall not unreasonably refuse to
issue the requested subpoena. Any subpoena must be issued and served no later
than five days before the scheduled time of the hearing. All costs related to
the subpoena, including the witness fee and mileage fee at the rate provided by
statute, SDCL ch. 19-5, shall be paid by the party requesting the subpoena;
   (f)   Any party who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the
right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing,
provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided; and
   (g)   The hearing examiner shall cause to be made a record of the hearing,
either stenographically or by sound recording, and shall make available a
recording of the hearing to any person upon request and payment in advance of
the estimated cost of the recording.
(1992 Code, § 2-63) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.044 DECISION.
   After each appeal hearing, the hearing examiner shall perform the following:
   (a)   Make written findings of fact; and
   (b)   Based upon the written findings, sustain, remand for further hearing
or action or rescind the complained action or decision. The hearing examiner
has the discretion to waive the payment of any reinstatement or late penalty
fee.
(1992 Code, § 2-64) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.045 REPORT, COSTS.
   A written report of the decision, including the findings of fact, shall be
served either in person or by certified mail upon the appellant and the major
organizational unit or agency within 15 working days from the date the appeal
hearing is concluded. The city and the appellant shall bear their own
respective costs of the appeal proceeding, except as specifically provided
herein. If the hearing examiner determines that the appellant has prevailed at
the hearing, then the appellant’s $50 processing fee shall be refunded. The
decision of the hearing examiner shall be final.
(1992 Code, § 2-65) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-
2011)
§ 30.046 SUBJECT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The final decision of the hearing examiner may be subject to judicial review
as provided by law. If judicial review has been commenced by the aggrieved
party within 30 days after the final decision has been entered by the hearing
examiner, or as otherwise provided by law, the city will take no further action
to enforce the fine, penalty or result until the civil action is completed with
the exception of those matters which require immediate abatement as set forth
in §
30.040.
(1992 Code, § 2-66) (Ord. 70-96, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 43-07, passed 3-5-2007;
Ord. 53-11, passed 7-11-2011)
NAMING FACILITIES
§ 30.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY PROPERTY. Includes park properties, library facilities, and other
buildings, structures, facilities, streets, bridges, or other properties owned
by the city. The naming of interior rooms of city-owned facilities, smaller
areas within a park, and other fixtures on city-owned land or within city-owned
facilities. Specifically exempted from this subchapter are gardens, walks,
fields, or other landscaped areas of less than permanent duration, park
benches, donor plaques, engraved pavers, vehicles (i.e., Zamboni), or library
shelves or a library collection.
   FIXTURE. Includes an item affixed to city land or facility or an improvement
located on an identifiable city property such as a wall or a monument on a
park, a plaza, or an interior room or rooms in a building.
   NAMING. To be considered NAMING, it shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The physical space, fixture, property, or structure is distinct and
identifiable;
      (2)   The proposed name or rename would appear before the city property’s
commonly known name;
      (3)   The signage naming the city property would be either permanent or
semi-permanent; and
      (4)   If a naming agreement is required under §
30.061(c), the naming agreement requires the city property to always be
referenced by the name, and the naming agreement, including any extension(s),
has a term that exceeds five years.
   ORGANIZATION. A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, business, association, self-employed individual, holding
company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, activity, or entity.
(Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.061 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide the procedure and
criteria for the naming, renaming, or commemoration of city properties.
   (b)   All requests for proposals or individual applications for the naming
or renaming of city property shall be reviewed by one of the following boards,
depending on the nature of the item to be named or renamed:
      (1)   The parks board shall review and provide a recommendation on the
proposed naming or renaming of park property.
      (2)   The library board shall review and provide a recommendation on the
proposed naming or renaming of any library property.
      (3)   The street naming committee shall review and provide a
recommendation on the proposed naming or renaming of any city street. If a
street is proposed to be renamed, each owner of property abutting the relevant
street shall be sent written advance notice of the public hearing before the
city council on the application for the proposed renaming of that street.
      (4)   In all other instances, the city naming committee shall review and
provide a recommendation on the application.
   (c)   All naming, renaming, or commemorations of city property shall require
a naming agreement approved by the city council if the naming, renaming, or
commemoration is the result of a significant contribution of lands, funds,
foundation gift(s), goods, or services to the city. In addition to compliance
with city ordinance, the naming agreement must include the following:
      (1)   A provision that stipulates the responsible party(s) for the costs
associated with any changes to naming identification and signage caused by the
named organization's merger, consolidation, acquisition, or other action that
results in a name change; and
      (2)   A provision of material breach if the named person or organization
or officers or officials of the named organization has or intends to commit
actions that would adversely impact the city or the named facility.
      (3)   The agreement shall include an expiration or termination date in
the naming agreement unless the city council finds compelling reasons and
strong public sentiment for waiving this provision.
   (d)   For city property not governed by a naming agreement, the city
reserves the right to rename or modify the naming of city property following
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2–9-2021)
§ 30.062 CITY NAMING COMMITTEE.
   (a)   A city naming committee is hereby established to review and provide
recommendations regarding the proposed naming or renaming of city property as
provided in this subchapter. The city naming committee shall consist of the
following nine members:
      (1)   Planning and development services director (who shall serve as
chairperson);
      (2)   Public works director;
      (3)   Police chief;
      (4)   Fire chief;
      (5)   Parks and recreation director;
      (6)   Library director;
      (7)   Three representatives of the public at large.
   (b)   The three representatives of the public at large shall be appointed
with staggered terms by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. Following the initial appointments, the representatives of the public
shall serve for a term of three years. The city naming committee shall meet at
such times and places as deemed necessary to address requests under this
subchapter. A quorum of at least five members shall be required to be present
for the city naming committee to conduct business. The planning and development
services department shall provide administrative assistance to the city naming
committee.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.063 APPLICATION.
   The city may request proposals or any person or organization may submit an
application for the naming or renaming of city properties covered by this
subchapter. Any application shall be filed with the planning and development
services department on a form provided by the planning and development services
department. Such application shall include:
   (a)   A description and significance of the proposed naming or renaming,
addressing the applicable criteria under this subchapter;
   (b)   If the application is for the renaming of a public street, a petition
signed by at least 60% of the number of owners of properties abutting the
portion of the street to be renamed;
   (c)   All terms and conditions of proposed naming or renaming, including all
financial and other relevant terms, must be disclosed.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.064 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT REVIEW.
   Upon filing, the planning and development services director shall review the
application for compliance with this subchapter. An application is not complete
until it includes all the necessary information as provided by this subchapter.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.065 COMMITTEE REVIEW.
   The planning and development services director shall forward the completed
application, proposed naming agreement, if applicable under this chapter, and
all recommendations to the respective board or committee responsible for review
under this subchapter. Based on such review and input received, the respective
board or committee shall adopt a written recommendation regarding the
application. The recommendation shall include a summary of any known opposition
to the proposal or, absent any known opposition, a discussion of any potential
disadvantages of the proposed naming or renaming.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.066 CITY COUNCIL DISPOSITION.
   After review and recommendation by the applicable board or committee, the
application and all recommendations shall be forwarded to the city council. The
city council shall review and hold a public hearing on the application. The
city council shall thereafter by ordinance approve, deny, or approve with
conditions the application. If the application is approved by the city council,
the planning and development services department shall notify all affected city
departments of the naming or renaming. If a street is proposed to be named or
renamed to a name not already authorized nor listed under this code, such
naming or renaming shall not become effective until the adoption of an
ordinance to amend the street lists or other provisions of such subchapter in
conformity therewith.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.067 CRITERIA; STREET RENAMING.
   Upon an application for the proposed renaming of a street, all persons and
bodies reviewing, providing a recommendation on, or disposing of such
application shall take into consideration the following criteria:
   (a)   Consideration shall be primarily given to the following purposes: to
honor and commemorate noteworthy persons associated with the city; to celebrate
local history, places, events, or culture; to strengthen neighborhood identity;
or to recognize native wildlife, flora, fauna, or natural features related to
the community and the city.
   (b)   If an application is made to rename a street after an individual, this
person shall have:
      (1)   Demonstrated excellence of contributions to the city’s development,
community service, personal sacrifice for public service or national defense,
or efforts to foster equality among the citizens of the city; or
      (2)   Historical significance locally, nationally, or globally with
significant local or regional ties or influence.
   (c)   In the case of renaming a street after any person, such renaming may
be considered when the city council finds compelling reasons and strong public
sentiment for doing so.
   (d)   A street (or segment of a street), originally named after an
individual, cannot be renamed unless historical context clearly indicates that
such renaming is appropriate.
   (e)   An unbroken, continuous street shall maintain the same name throughout
the entire section.
   (f)   A proposed street name should not duplicate (written or phonetically)
an existing street name within the city of Sioux Falls or create confusion or
problems for the city’s emergency services.
   (g)   Street names shall not be longer than can be produced by the standard
sign manufacturing capability of the public works department.
   (h)   If a proposed street name is not included in the lists of street names
authorized under this code, the proposed renaming to such street name shall not
take effect until the council by ordinance amends such subchapter to so
authorize such street name.
   (i)   Denial of an application may be appropriate if the city council finds
that the proposed renaming fails to meet the criteria under this section, may
bring disrepute upon the community for any reason, or would not be looked upon
favorably by city residents.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.068 NAMING OR RENAMING OF PARK PROPERTY.
   Upon an application for a naming or renaming of a park property, any person
or body reviewing, providing a recommendation on, or disposing of such an
application shall take into consideration the following criteria:
   (a)   In naming or renaming city park property, consideration shall be
primarily given to the following purposes: to honor and commemorate noteworthy
persons associated with the city; to celebrate local history, places, events,
or culture; to strengthen neighborhood identity; or to recognize native
wildlife, flora, fauna or natural features related to the community and the
city.
   (b)   If an application is made to name or rename public park property after
an individual, this person shall have:
      (1)   Demonstrated excellence of contributions to the city’s development,
community service, personal sacrifice for public service or national defense,
or efforts to foster equality among the citizens of the city; or
      (2)   Historical significance locally, nationally, or globally with
significant local or regional ties or influence.
   (c)   In the case of naming or renaming a park or natural environmental
feature after any person or organization, such naming or renaming may be
considered when such person or organization has provided a significant
contribution of lands, funds, goods, or services to the city, and/or parks and
recreation department and/or to the city's approved third-party management
company, where applicable and for the direct or indirect benefit of the city;
or is being recognized for a significant foundation gift(s); or if the city
council finds compelling reasons and strong public sentiment for doing so.
   (d)   Denial of an application may be appropriate if the city council finds
that the proposed renaming fails to meet the criteria under this section, may
bring disrepute upon the community for any reason, or would not be looked upon
favorably by city residents.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.069 NAMING OR RENAMING OF LIBRARY PROPERTIES.
   Upon an application for the naming or renaming of a city library building or
property, any person or body reviewing, providing a recommendation on, or
disposing of such an application shall take into consideration the following
criteria:
   (a)   Generally, public library buildings will be named or renamed after a
location, subdivision, neighborhood, well-recognized landmark, or adjacent
street.
   (b)   If an application is made to name or rename library property after an
individual, this person shall have:
      (1)   Rendered valuable service to and has had a positive influence on
the development of the city’s public library system, or was a literary or
artistic figure of national prominence who has significant local or regional
ties; or
      (2)   Demonstrated excellence of contributions to the city’s development,
community service, personal sacrifice for public service or national defense,
or efforts to foster equality among the citizens of the city; or
      (3)   Historical significance locally, nationally, or globally with
significant local or regional ties or influence.
   (c)   In the case of naming or renaming a library property after any person
or organization, such naming or renaming may be considered when such person or
organization has provided a significant contribution of land, funds, goods, or
services to the city's public library system; or is being recognized for a
significant foundation gift(s); or if the city council finds compelling reasons
and strong public sentiment for doing so.
   (d)   Denial of an application may be appropriate if the city council finds
that the proposed renaming fails to meet the criteria under this section, may
bring disrepute upon the community for any reason, or would not be looked upon
favorably by city residents.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.070 NAMING OR RENAMING OF OTHER CITY PROPERTY.
   Upon an application for the naming or renaming of city property (other than
a street, park property, or library property), any person or body reviewing,
providing a recommendation on, or disposing of such application shall take into
consideration the following criteria:
   (a)   In naming or renaming city property, consideration shall be primarily
given to the following purposes: to honor and commemorate noteworthy persons
associated with the city; to celebrate local history, places, events, or
culture; to strengthen neighborhood identity; or to recognize native wildlife,
flora, fauna, or natural features related to the community and the city.
   (b)   If an application is made to name or rename city property after an
individual, this person shall have:
      (1)   Demonstrated excellence of contributions to the city’s development,
community service, personal sacrifice for public service or national defense,
or efforts to foster equality among the citizens of the city; or
      (2)   Historical significance locally, nationally, or globally with
significant local or regional ties or influence.
   (c)   In the case of naming or renaming a city property after any person or
organization may be considered when such person or organization has provided a
significant contribution of lands, funds, goods, or services to the city or to
the city's approved third-party management company, where applicable and for
the direct or indirect benefit of the city; or is being recognized for a
significant foundation gift(s); or if the city council finds compelling reasons
and strong public sentiment for doing so.
   (d)   Denial of an application may be appropriate if the city council finds
that the proposed renaming fails to meet the criteria under this section, may
bring disrepute upon the community for any reason, or would not be looked upon
favorably by city residents.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 30.071 COMMEMORATIVE DESIGNATIONS.
   A street, building, or other city property may be given a commemorative
designation. Such a commemorative designation shall not change the official
name of the street, building, or other city property, but shall allow for
placement of commemorative signs, plaques, or other items to be placed on the
building or property or below the existing street signs. The procedure for a
commemorative designation shall be as follows:
   (a)   An applicant may file an application for a commemorative name with the
planning and development services department, using a form to be provided by
the planning and development services department. The application shall include
a description of the proposed naming, the significance of the proposed name,
and shall show how the criteria under this section are met by the proposed
application.
   (b)   Upon completion of the application, the planning and development
services director shall review and make a written recommendation on the
application based on the following criteria:
      (1)   In the commemorative naming of public property, consideration shall
be primarily given to the following criteria: to honor and commemorate
noteworthy persons associated with the city; to celebrate local history,
places, events, organizations, or culture; or to strengthen neighborhood
identity.
      (2)   If an application is made to commemorate a street or city property
after an individual, this person shall have:
         A.   Demonstrated excellence of contributions to the city's
development, community service, personal sacrifice for public service or
national defense, or efforts to foster equality among the citizens of the city;
or
         B.   Historical significance locally, nationally, or globally with
significant local or regional ties.
   (c)   Commemorative street names shall not be longer than can be produced by
the standard sign manufacturing capability of the public works department.
   (d)   A plaque or marker may be used on a facility to honor persons or
individuals, even though the facility is not named after them.
   (e)   A commemorative name will be permanent unless stipulated otherwise by
an agreement, and as long as the person honored maintains the criteria stated
in these standards:
      (1)   The commemorative sign/plaque including upkeep shall be the
responsibility of the city unless otherwise stipulated in the agreement or
resolution.
      (2)   If the person does not maintain compliance with these criteria, the
commemorative sign shall be considered null and void and shall be removed by
the city.
   (f)   The application and recommendations shall be forwarded to the city
council for public hearing and disposition. The city clerk shall send notice of
the date of the public hearing to the applicant. Following public hearing, the
city council shall by resolution approve, deny, or approve with conditions the
proposed commemorative designation.
   (g)   If a commemorative designation is approved by the city council, the
commemorative signs, plaques, or other items shall not be made and installed
until payment for the same is received from the applicant, unless otherwise
authorized by the city council.
   (h)   Denial of an application may be appropriate if the city council finds
that the proposed renaming fails to meet the criteria under this section, may
bring disrepute upon the community for any reason, or would not be looked upon
favorably by city residents.
(Ord. 22-13, passed 4-9-2013; Ord. 18-21, passed 2-9-2021)
PLACEMENT OF STATUES, MONUMENTS AND MEMORIALS
§ 30.075 PLACEMENT OF STATUES, MONUMENTS AND MEMORIALS.
   Excluding works of art or exhibits in or on the grounds of the Washington
Pavilion, the Sioux Falls Zoo and Delbridge Museum of Natural History, the
Horse Barn and the Old Courthouse Museum, no statue, monument or memorial shall
be placed in any city park, city property or public right-of-way unless the
placement has first been approved by the city council, after recommendation
from the appropriate city board or commission, including the arts commission.
(1992 Code, § 2-90) (Ord. 92-99, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 71-00, passed 8-14-2000;
Ord. 76-03, passed 8-18-2003)
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION
Section
   
31.001   City clerk
   
31.002   Powers of the mayor
   
31.003   Administrative organization of city departments subject to the mayor
§ 31.001 CITY CLERK.
   All personnel, functions and financial responsibility for operations of the
office of the city clerk are assigned to the city council.
(1992 Code, § 2-34) (Ord. 55-95, passed 4-17-1995; Ord. 50-05, passed 5-9-2005)
§ 31.002 POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   The mayor shall have the power to prescribe executive orders for an interim
successor and for the creation of departments of the administration, as
provided in city charter §§
2.03 and
4.01. The mayor shall also have the power to prescribe rules and regulations
that the mayor deems necessary or expedient for the conduct of employees in
departments and administrative agencies subject to his or her authority. The
mayor shall have the power to revoke, suspend or amend any executive order,
provided the executive orders do not conflict with city charter or ordinance.
All executive orders shall be filed with the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 2-35) (Ord. 26-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 117-99, passed 11-15-
1999; Ord. 121-99, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 19-11, passed 4-11-2011; Ord. 24-12,
passed 4-2-2012)
§ 31.003 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION OF CITY DEPARTMENTS SUBJECT TO THE MAYOR.
   The organizational chart for the departments and administrative agencies
subject to the mayor shall be established by executive order. The departments
established in the executive order shall be the administrative departments of
the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-37) (Ord. 98-97, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 125-99, passed 12-13-
1999; Ord. 96-02, passed 11-12-2002; Ord. 19-11, passed 4-11-2011)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Charter Revision Commission
   
32.001   Charter revision commission established
   
32.002   Duties; public meetings
   
32.003   Officers and rules
   
32.004   City attorney ex officio
Internal Audit
   
32.010   Preamble
   
32.015   Audit committee created
   
32.016   Membership and qualifications of audit committee members
   
32.017   Appointment
   
32.018   Terms; filling of vacancies of audit committee members
   
32.019   Audit committee chair
   
32.020   Meetings of the audit committee
   
32.021   Quorum of the audit committee
   
32.022   General duties of the audit committee
   
32.023   Office of internal audit; staff; resources; standards; authority
   
32.024   Limitation of authority
   
32.025   Audit charter
Events Center Complex Advisory Board
   
32.035   Created
   
32.036   Qualifications of board members and appointment
   
32.037   Compensation
   
32.038   Terms; filling of vacancies
   
32.039   Officers
   
32.040   Meetings
   
32.041   Quorum
   
32.042   Duties and responsibilities
Cross-reference:
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   City council, see
ch. 30
Statutory reference:
   Auditorium building funds, see SDCL 6-4-1 et seq.
   Municipal auditoriums, see SDCL 9-52-1 et seq.
CHARTER REVISION COMMISSION
§ 32.001 CHARTER REVISION COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created an advisory commission to be known as the Sioux
Falls charter revision commission. The commission shall consist of five members
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
(1992 Code, § 2-40) (Ord. 54-95, passed 4-3-1995; Ord. 117-99, passed 11-15-
1999; Ord. 121-99, passed 12-6-1999)
§ 32.002 DUTIES; PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   The commission may deliver a report to the city election authorities framing
and proposing amendments to the city home rule charter that is approved by at
least four commission members. The commission shall hold at least one public
meeting each calendar year for the purpose of receiving recommendations from
the public regarding revisions to the charter and to take action upon any
matters before the commission relating to proposed charter revisions.
(1992 Code, § 2-41) (Ord. 54-95, passed 4-3-1995; Ord. 11-18, passed 2-13-2018)
§ 32.003 OFFICERS AND RULES.
   The commission shall elect those officers as it deems necessary. It may
adopt formal written rules for the conduct of its business and proceedings.
(1992 Code, § 2-42) (Ord. 54-95, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 32.004 CITY ATTORNEY EX OFFICIO.
   The city attorney shall be a nonvoting, ex officio member of the commission,
and shall serve as its legal advisor.
(1992 Code, § 2-43) (Ord. 54-95, passed 4-3-1995; Ord. 111-19, passed 11-12-
2019)
INTERNAL AUDIT
§ 32.010 PREAMBLE.
   The city council finds that good governance, transparency, and
accountability are critical in the public sector for the effective and credible
functioning of a healthy democracy, and in fulfilling the government's
responsibility to citizens and taxpayers. Transparent and reliable reporting
and effective auditing in government serve to promote accountability, enhance
the effectiveness of government services to citizens, and increases the
public's confidence in their government. The members of the city council share
a duty to ensure that the actions of public officials, employees, and
contractors of the city are carried out with integrity and in the most
responsible manner possible and that city policies, budgets, goals, and
objectives are fully implemented. The city council further finds that it is
imperative that the city's network of risk management, control, and governance
processes, as designed and represented by management, are adequate and
functioning.
(Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 32.015 AUDIT COMMITTEE CREATED.
   There is hereby created an audit committee for the city. This committee
shall be entitled the audit committee.
(1992 Code, § 2-133) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-
2019)
§ 32.016 MEMBERSHIP AND QUALIFICATIONS OF AUDIT COMMITTEE MEMBERS.
   The committee shall be composed of seven members. The members shall include
four city council members. The remaining three members will be from outside
city government, registered voters of the city, and be independent of city
government. All of the outside members shall have finance and/or audit
experience.
(1992 Code, § 2-134) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 74-10, passed 10-12-
2010; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 37-23, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 32.017 APPOINTMENT.
   The city council members shall be appointed by the chair and vice chair of
the city council. The outside members shall be appointed by the city council.
(1992 Code, § 2-135) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 60-17, passed 7-18-
2017; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 33-23, passed 5-9-2023)
§ 32.018 TERMS; FILLING OF VACANCIES OF AUDIT COMMITTEE MEMBERS.
   The city council members shall serve a term of one year with no limit on
reappointment. The outside members shall serve a three-year, staggered term and
may be reappointed for one additional term.
(1992 Code, § 2-136) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 60-17, passed 7-18-
2017; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 32.019 AUDIT COMMITTEE CHAIR.
   The city council shall elect one of its members as the committee’s chair in
accordance with §
30.008(b)(2).
(1992 Code, § 2-137) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 74-10, passed 10-12-
2010; Ord. 61-14, passed 9-2-2014; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 33-23,
passed 5-9-2023)
§ 32.020 MEETINGS OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   The committee shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly. Minutes will
be taken by staff and the minutes shall be made public.
(1992 Code, § 2-138) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-
2019)
§ 32.021 QUORUM OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum and
may, by resolution or motion at any meeting duly held, authorize any action
within the power of the committee.
(1992 Code, § 2-139) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 74-10, passed 10-12-
2010; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 32.022 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   (a)   The committee shall determine whether:
      (1)   Risks are appropriately identified and managed.
      (2)   Interaction with the various governance groups occurs as needed.
      (3)   Significant financial, managerial, and operating information is
accurate, reliable, and timely.
      (4)   Employee's actions are in compliance with policies, standards,
procedures, and applicable laws and regulations.
      (5)   Resources are acquired economically, used efficiently, and
adequately protected.
      (6)   Programs, plans, and objectives are achieved.
      (7)   Quality and continuous improvement are fostered in the
organization's control process.
      (8)   Significant legislative or regulatory issues impacting the
organization are recognized and addressed properly.
      (9)   Opportunities for improving management control, accountability, and
the organization's image may be identified during audits. These opportunities
will be communicated to the appropriate level of management.
   (b)   The committee shall advise the city council regarding changes to
financial, risk management, control, and governance processes.
   (c)   The committee shall develop and recommend to the city council for
approval an audit plan for the ensuing years. The committee shall annually
review the audit plan to evaluate the progress made in completing the audit
plan. The committee may further recommend to the city council for approval
amendments to the audit plan at any time as is necessary.
   (d)   The committee shall provide the internal audit office and any
contracted firm that provides audit services with guidance, priorities, and
potential areas for audits.
   (e)   The committee shall review any audit report and shall submit final
reports to the city council pursuant to §
30.013 of this ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 2-140) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 4-13, passed 2-19-
2013; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 37-23, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 85-24,
passed 9-10-2024)
§ 32.023 OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT; STAFF; RESOURCES; STANDARDS; AUTHORITY.
   The city council establishes the office of internal audit. The office of
internal audit, its personnel, and any contracted firm that provides audit
services shall be budgeted under the city council.
   (a)   All personnel and financial responsibility for operations of the
office of internal audit are assigned to the city council. The audit function
of the office of internal audit is assigned to the audit committee.
   (b)   The internal audit office and any contracted firm that provides audit
services shall implement the audit plan, provide timely reports to the audit
committee, establish a system to follow up on reported audit findings,
establish and implement procedures to prevent and detect fraud, and perform
other such duties as assigned by the audit committee or city council.
   (c)   The office of internal audit will meet or exceed the International
Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing of the Institute
of Internal Auditors (latest edition). All internal audit personnel shall
comply with the Code of Ethics of the Institute of Internal Auditors (latest
edition), and the Conflicts of Interest of Officers and Employees set forth in
Chapter 35 of this Code.
   (d)   The city council may authorize the office of internal audit and any
contracted firm that provides audit services to:
      (1)   Have unrestricted access to all functions, records, property, and
personnel of the City of Sioux Falls to the fullest extent necessary in the
performance of the audit plan.
      (2)   Allocate resource, set frequencies, select subjects, determine
scopes of work, and apply audit techniques required to accomplish the audit
objectives.
      (3)   Obtain the necessary assistance of personnel within city divisions
of the City of Sioux Falls where they perform audits, as well as other
specialized services from within or outside the City of Sioux Falls.
(1992 Code, § 2-141) (Ord. 120-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-
2019; Ord. 37-23, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 85-24, passed 9-10-2024)
§ 32.024 LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The internal audit office and any contracted firm that provides audit
services are not authorized to:
   (a)   Perform any operational duties of the City of Sioux Falls or its
affiliates.
   (b)   Initiate or approve accounting transactions external to the internal
audit office.
   (c)   Direct the activities of any City of Sioux Falls employee not assigned
to the city council, except to the extent such employee has been appropriately
assigned to auditing teams or to otherwise assist the internal audit office.
(Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 37-23, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 32.025 AUDIT CHARTER.
   Sections
32.010 through
32.024 of this chapter shall serve as the internal audit charter for the city's
internal audit function consistent with the Mission of Internal Audit and the
mandatory elements of the International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF)
promulgated by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) as amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 16-19, passed 2-4-2019)
EVENTS CENTER COMPLEX ADVISORY BOARD
§ 32.035 CREATED.
   The arena/convention center board is hereby reconstituted and renamed the
events center complex advisory board. Whenever in this subchapter the term
BOARD is used, it shall mean the events center complex advisory board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.601; 1992 Code, § 8-26) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
102-87, passed 12-7-1987; Ord. 79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-
16-1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 32.036 QUALIFICATIONS OF BOARD MEMBERS AND APPOINTMENT.
   The board will consist of 11 voting members and four nonvoting ex-officio
members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council
as follows:
   (a)   Voting members:
      (1)   Two members with experience in the hospitality industry;
      (2)   One member with experience in commercial development or commercial
brokerage;
      (3)   One member with experience in banking and financial services;
      (4)   One member with experience in engineering, architecture, or design
services;
      (5)   One member with experience in marketing and communications; and
      (6)   Five members serving at-large.
   (b)   Nonvoting ex-officio members:
      (1)   City staff liaison of the city department of finance;
      (2)   City staff liaison of the city department of planning and
development services;
      (3)   Chief executive officer of Experience Sioux Falls;
      (4)   The current general manager of the events center complex; and
      (5)   The immediate past chair of the board for a period of one year, if
such member has fulfilled two consecutive full terms on the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.602; 1992 Code, § 8-27) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-
1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 32.037 COMPENSATION.
   All members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.602; 1992 Code, § 8-28) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 133-95, passed 10-2-1995; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-
16-1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 32.038 TERMS; FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   All voting members will be appointed to staggered three-year terms and may
not serve more than two consecutive full terms. Initially, four members will be
appointed to a three-year term, three members appointed to a two-year partial
term, and three members appointed to an initial one-year partial term. If a
voting member fails to attend two meetings of the board in a calendar year, the
voting member’s position may be deemed vacant by majority vote of the remaining
board voting members. The mayor will fill any vacancy for the unexpired term of
the member vacating the board in the same manner as is required for a regular
appointment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.603; 1992 Code, § 8-29) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-
2022)
§ 32.039 OFFICERS.
   At the first regular meeting of the year, the board shall elect from its
voting members a chair, a vice-chair, and a secretary, each of whom shall serve
until the first regular meeting of the Board the following year. The vice-chair
shall act in the absence of the chair. A successor shall be elected
immediately, as determined by the board, if a vacancy creates an unfilled
officer position.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.604; 1992 Code, § 8-30) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-
2022)
§ 32.040 MEETINGS.
   The board shall hold regular meetings as frequently as determined by the
board, but no less than quarterly.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.606; 1992 Code, § 8-31) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
101-87, passed 12-7-1987; Ord. 79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-
16-1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 32.041 QUORUM.
   Six voting members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(1992 Code, § 8-32) (Ord. 79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-16-
1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-2022)
§ 32.042 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The board shall act as an advisory board to the mayor and city council
on matters relating to the events center complex.
   (b)   Its duties may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Advocate and provide public feedback for the use and management of
the events center complex;
      (2)   Advise on the future use, planning strategy, and development of the
events center complex; and
      (3)   Advise on any long-term master plan for the events center complex
and surrounding areas.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.605; 1992 Code, § 8-33) (Ord. 2096, passed 5-8-1961; Ord.
102-87, passed 12-7-1987; Ord. 79-92, passed 8-24-1992; Ord. 19-99, passed 2-
16-1999; Ord. 19-22, passed 2-8-2022)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
Continuity of City Government
   
33.001   Definitions
   
33.002   Designation of emergency interim successors; elective officers
   
33.003   Designation of emergency interim successors; appointive officers
   
33.004   Designation of emergency interim successors; qualifications
   
33.005   Review of designations
   
33.006   Status of emergency interim successor
   
33.007   Assumption by emergency interim successor
   
33.008   Recording and publication
   
33.009   Formalities of taking office
   
33.010   Quorum and vote requirements
Emergencies
   
33.025   Disaster declaration
   
33.026   Emergency council meetings
   
33.027   Emergency ordinances
   
33.028   Emergency award of contracts
Cross-reference:
   City council, see
ch. 30
   Departmental organization, see
ch. 31
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Hospitals, see
ch. 114
   Offenses involving police, see §§
131.020,
131.021
Statutory reference:
   County organization, see SDCL 24-48A-39
   Emergency and disaster service, see SDCL 34-48A-1 et seq.
   Emergency interim succession to office, see SDCL 1-30-1 et seq.
CONTINUITY OF CITY GOVERNMENT
§ 33.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTACK. Any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States
causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property
or persons in the United States in any manner, by sabotage or by the use of
bombs, missiles, shellfire or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological
or biological means or other weapons or processes.
   DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY. A person who is authorized to perform all of the
functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of an
office in the event the office is vacant or at those times as it lacks
administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent
officer.
   EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR. A person designated pursuant to this
subchapter, in the event the officer is unavailable, to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of an office until a successor is appointed or elected and
qualified as may be provided by the constitution, statutes, charter and
ordinances or until the lawful incumbent is able to resume the exercises of the
powers and discharge the duties of the office.
   UNAVAILABLE. Either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy
authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the
office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy
exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a
vacancy) and his or her duly authorized deputy are absent or unable to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of the office.
(1992 Code, § 12-16) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 33.002 DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS; ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   Within 30 days after first entering upon the duties of his or her office,
the mayor and each member of the city council shall designate a number of
emergency interim successors to his or her office and specify their rank in
order of succession so that there will be not less than three nor more than
seven emergency interim successors.
(1992 Code, § 12-17) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.003 DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS; APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   The city council shall within 30 days after taking office, in addition to
any duly authorized deputy, designate for appointive officers including the
police chief, fire chief, city finance director, city attorney, public works
director and public health director a number of emergency interim successors to
these officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly
authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three nor more than seven
duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof
for each officer.
(1992 Code, § 12-18) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.004 DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim successor
unless he or she may, under the constitution and statutes of this state and the
provisions of this Code and the ordinances of this city, hold the office of the
person to whose powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed, but no
provision of this Code or any ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of
this city from holding another office shall be applicable to an emergency
interim successor.
(1992 Code, § 12-19) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.005 REVIEW OF DESIGNATIONS.
   The incumbent in the case of the elective officers and the city council in
the case of those appointive officers specified in this subchapter shall review
and, as necessary, promptly revise the designations of emergency interim
successors to ensure that at all times there are at least three qualified
emergency interim successors or duly authorized deputies or any combination
thereof for each officer specified.
(1992 Code, § 12-20) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.006 STATUS OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR.
   A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that designation
at the pleasure of the designator, provided that he or she must be replaced if
removed. He or she retains this designation as emergency interim successor
until replaced by another appointed by the authorized designator.
(1992 Code, § 12-21) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.007 ASSUMPTION BY EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR.
   If in the event of an attack any elective or appointive officer of the city
and any duly authorized deputy is unavailable, his or her emergency interim
successor highest in rank in order of succession who is not unavailable shall,
except for the power and duty to appoint emergency interim successors, exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of that officer. Any emergency interim
successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only until a
time as the lawful incumbent officer or any duly authorized deputy or an
emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of succession exercises, or
resumes the exercise of, the powers and discharge of the duties of the office,
or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is appointed to fill the
vacancy or is elected and qualified as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 12-22) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.008 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION.
   The name, address and rank in order of succession of each newly authorized
deputy shall be filed with the city finance director and each designation,
replacement or change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor
shall become effective when the designator files with the city finance director
the successor’s name, address and rank in order of succession. The city finance
director shall keep on file all data regarding newly authorized deputies and
emergency interim successors and it shall be open to public inspection.
(1992 Code, § 12-23) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.009 FORMALITIES OF TAKING OFFICE.
   At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take an
oath and do those other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may
succeed.
(1992 Code, § 12-24) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
§ 33.010 QUORUM AND VOTE REQUIREMENTS.
   In the event of an attack, if emergency interim successors are not present:
   (a)   Quorum requirements for the city council shall be suspended; and
   (b)   Where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members for
approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would otherwise be
required, the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be sufficient.
(1992 Code, § 12-25) (Ord. 2131, passed 3-5-1962)
EMERGENCIES
§ 33.025 DISASTER DECLARATION.
   The mayor shall declare an emergency by executive order upon the occurrence
of any disaster or emergency involving any natural, nuclear, human- made, war-
related or other catastrophe producing phenomena in the city which in the
opinion of the mayor, causes damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to
warrant extraordinary lawmaking authority. Notice shall be provided to the
press by e-mail or facsimile, or any other means.
(1992 Code, § 2-80) (Ord. 75-99, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 33.026 EMERGENCY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Upon the declaration of an emergency by the mayor pursuant to §
33.025, meetings of the city council may be convened without the notice
required for special meetings pursuant to §
30.002. Notice shall be provided to the press by e-mail or facsimile, or any
other means.
(1992 Code, § 2-81) (Ord. 75-99, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 33.027 EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of state law, upon the declaration of an
emergency by the mayor, ordinances or resolutions may be adopted and become
effective upon one reading and adoption.
(1992 Code, § 2-82) (Ord. 75-99, passed 7-6-1999)
§ 33.028 EMERGENCY AWARD OF CONTRACTS.
   Upon the declaration of an emergency by the mayor pursuant to §
33.025, the city, pursuant to SDCL 5-18A-9, may award contracts without
advertising if rentals are not practicable and there exists a threat to public
health, welfare or safety or for other urgent and compelling reasons.
(1992 Code, § 2-83) (Ord. 75-99, passed 7-6-1999)
CHAPTER 34: ETHICS
Section
City Council Code of Ethics
   
34.001   Adoption of Code of Ethics
   
34.002   Preamble
   
34.003   Canon One
   
34.004   Canon Two
   
34.005   Canon Three
   
34.006   Canon Four
   
34.007   Canon Five
   
34.008   Canon Six
   
34.009   Canon Seven
Cross-reference:
   Conflicts of interest of officers, see
ch. 35
CITY COUNCIL CODE OF ETHICS
§ 34.001 ADOPTION OF CODE OF ETHICS.
   The Code of Ethics of the city council is hereby adopted.
(1992 Code, § 2-100) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.002 PREAMBLE.
   The stability and proper operation of democratic representative government
depends upon the continuing consent of the governed, upon the public confidence
in the integrity of the government and upon responsible exercise of the trust
conferred by the people. Government decisions and policy must be made and
implemented through proper channels and processes of the governmental
structure. The purpose of this code is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for city council members. City council members must act in
a manner that maintains their integrity and independence, yet is responsive to
the interests and needs of those they represent. City council members must act
in a fair and impartial manner. City council members must be aware of their
obligation to conform their behavior to standards of ethical conduct that
warrant the trust of their constituents.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.003 CANON ONE.
   (a)   A city council member shall honor the letter and spirit of the law.
   (b)   City council members shall support the constitution of the United
States, the constitution of the state, the charter of the city and the laws
enacted by the congress of the United States, the state and the city pursuant
thereto.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.004 CANON TWO.
   (a)   A city council member should uphold the integrity and independence of
his or her office.
   (b)   City council members should demonstrate the highest standards of
personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty and fortitude in all their public
activities in order to inspire public confidence and trust in city government.
City council members should participate in establishing, maintaining and
enforcing, and should themselves observe, high standards of conduct so that the
integrity and independence of their office may be preserved. The provisions of
this Code should be construed and applied to further these objectives.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.005 CANON THREE.
   (a)   A city council member should avoid impropriety and the appearance of
impropriety in all his or her activities.
   (b)   It is essential that city government attract those citizens best
qualified and willing to serve. City council members have legitimate interests
(economic, professional and vocational) of a private nature. City council
members should not be denied, and should not deny to other city council members
or citizens, the opportunity to acquire, retain and pursue private interests,
economic or otherwise, except when conflicts with their responsibility to the
public cannot be avoided.
   (c)   City council members should conduct themselves at all times in a
manner that promotes public confidence in the integrity of their office and of
city government.
   (d)   City council members should not allow family, social or other
relationships to unduly influence their conduct or judgment and should not lend
the prestige of the office of city council member to advance the private
interests of others; nor should they convey or permit others to convey the
impression that they are in a special position to influence them.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.006 CANON FOUR.
   (a)   A city council member should perform the duties of the office
diligently.
   (b)   City council members should, while performing the duties of the office
as prescribed by law, give precedence to these duties over other activities. In
the performance of these duties, the following standards should apply.
      (1)   City council members should actively pursue policy goals they
believe to be in the best interests of their constituents within the parameters
of orderly decision-making, rules of the city council and open government.
      (2)   City council members should respect the legitimacy of the goals and
interests of other city council members and should respect the rights of others
to pursue goals and policies different from their own.
      (3)   City council members should be faithful to the general and local
laws pertaining to the office and strive for professional competence in them.
They should be unswayed by partisan interests, public clamor or fear of
criticism.
      (4)   City council members should demand and contribute to the
maintenance of order and decorum in proceedings before the city council.
      (5)   City council members should be honest, patient, dignified and
courteous to those with whom they deal in their official capacity, and should
require similar conduct of their staff and others subject to their direction
and control.
      (6)   City council members should accord to every person who is legally
interested in a proceeding before the city council full right to be heard
according to law.
      (7)   City council members should dispose promptly of the business of the
city for which they are responsible.
      (8)   City council members should diligently discharge their legislative
responsibilities.
      (9)   City council members should exercise their powers of advice and
consent diligently. The council should not recommend the appointment of
unnecessary employees and should exercise the power of advice and consent on
the basis of merit, avoid favoritism and refrain from illegal discrimination
and nepotism. They should not approve compensation of employees beyond the fair
value of services rendered.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.007 CANON FIVE.
   (a)   A city council member should conduct the affairs of the city council
in an open and public manner.
   (b)   City council members should be aware of the letter and intent of the
state’s open meetings law, should conduct the affairs of the city council
consistent with the letter and spirit of that law and consistent with the need
to inspire and maintain public confidence in the integrity and fairness of city
government and the office of city council member. Consistent with this goal of
preserving public trust, city council members should be aware of the need for
discretion in deliberations involving resources of the city, the reputation of
people and the integrity of the governmental processes.
   (c)   All actions, decisions and votes by city council members should be
made on their merits, objectively, and without party, regional or ideological
partisanship.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.008 CANON SIX.
   (a)   A city council member should limit his or her extra-governmental
activities to minimize the risk of conflict with his or her official duties.
   (b)   City council members should inform themselves concerning campaign
finance, conflicts of interest and other appropriate city, state and federal
laws and should scrupulously comply with the provisions of the laws.
   (c)   City council members should refrain from financial and business
dealings that tend to reflect adversely on the city or on city government or to
interfere with the proper performance of official duties.
   (d)   City council members should manage their personal financial interests
to minimize the number of cases in which they must refrain from discussion and
voting on matters coming before the city council.
   (e)   Information acquired by city council members in their official
capacity should not be used or disclosed in financial dealings or for any other
purpose not related to official duties.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000)
§ 34.009 CANON SEVEN.
   (a)   A city council member should refrain from political activity
inappropriate to his or her office.
   (b)   City council members have a civic responsibility to support good
government by every available legal and ethical means, to continue to inform
and educate the citizenry about the affairs and processes of city government,
and to make themselves available to citizens of the city so that they may
ascertain and respond to the needs of the community. In doing so, city council
members may join or affiliate with civic organizations that advocate and
support the principles consistent with the constitution and laws of the United
States and South Dakota. In furtherance of this section, city council members
may attend conferences or events affiliated with a political party, and may
hold appointed or elected positions within their respective political parties,
including, but not limited to, precinct officer or delegate to party
conventions. However, in no case shall city funds be expended for any event or
activity organized by a political party.
   (c)   Candidates for the office of city council member, including
incumbents:
      (1)   Should inform themselves concerning the laws of the city and state
with regard to campaigns and relevant disclosure requirements and should
scrupulously comply with the provisions of the laws
      (2)   Should maintain the dignity appropriate to the office
      (3)   Should not misrepresent their identity, qualifications, present
position, or other fact
      (4)   Should not make pledges or promises of conduct in office other than
the faithful and impartial performance of the duties of the office.
(1992 Code, App. E) (Ord. 34-00, passed 4-11-2000; Ord. 98-14, passed 12-16-
2014; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
CHAPTER 35: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND ETHICS BOARD
Section
Definitions
   
35.000   Definitions
Board of Ethics, Qualifications, Appointments, Terms, Powers and Duties
   
35.001   Board of ethics created
   
35.002   Qualifications and board composition
   
35.003   Appointment
   
35.004   Terms
   
35.005   Compensation
   
35.006   Chairperson
   
35.007   Meetings
   
35.008   Quorum
   
35.009   Complaints
   
35.010   Powers and duties of the board of ethics
   
35.011   Records
   
35.012   Staff
Conflicts of Interests of Officers and Employees
   
35.025   Declaration of policy
   
35.026   Construction
   
35.027   [Reserved]
   
35.028   Conflicts of interest; acting in an official capacity on matters in
which an official or employee has a private financial interest clearly separate
from that of the general public
   
35.029   Acceptance of gifts and other things of value
   
35.030   Disclosure of confidential information
   
35.031   Disclosure of confidential or privileged information prohibited
   
35.032   Appearances by city officials on behalf of private interests
   
35.033   Prohibited conduct after leaving the city
   
35.034   Advisory opinions
   
35.035   Complaint procedure
   
35.036   Collective bargaining agreements
Conflicts of Interest and Standards of Conduct of City Council Members
   
35.050   Declaration of policy
   
35.051   Construction
   
35.052   [Reserved]
   
35.053   Conflicts of interest; city council members
   
35.054   Standards of conduct; city council members
   
35.055   Conflicts of interest; former city council members
   
35.056   Disclosure of interest
   
35.057   Advisory opinions; elected city council members and candidates
   
35.058   Complaint procedure
   
35.059   Judicial review
 
   
35.999   Remedies
Cross-reference:
   City council code of ethics, see §§
34.001 through
34.009
   Code of Ethics, see
ch. 34
   Elections; Investigation and prosecution of violations, see §
38.006
DEFINITIONS
§ 35.000 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY OPINION. A written opinion offering the board's advice to the
requestor in conjunction with its interpretation of the city charter and city
ordinances on a matter submitted for that purpose. ADVISORY OPINIONS may be
requested only by an officer or employee, city council member or a candidate
for city office seeking advice about his or her own current conduct or an
anticipated future behavior or activity(ies).
   BENEFIT. Anything reasonably regarded as economic gain or economic advance,
including BENEFIT to any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary is
interested, but does not include a contribution or expenditure made and
reported in accordance with law.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity
recognized by law through which business is conducted.
   CITY AGENCY. Any authority, advisory board, body, commission, committee,
department, unit, division, or office of the city.
   CITY COUNCIL MEMBER. For the purposes of this chapter, means all members of
the city council, including the mayor.
   COMPLAINT. A formal accusation against an officer or employee, city council
member or a candidate for city office alleging unethical or improper actions,
behavior or conduct as defined by city charter or city and state law.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Privileged statements or communications, whether
expressed or implied, oral or written, between the city council member, city
employees and their attorneys; work product of the city attorney, or other
attorneys representing the city, its council member, officers and employees;
and city records, documents and other information not subject to public
disclosure or dissemination by law.
   DAY OF ASSIGNMENT. The date a complaint is received by the board of ethics,
which shall be the date a notarized complaint is filed with the city attorney's
office, unless the accused is a candidate, as defined by SDCL 12-27-1(4) for
any elected public office, in which case the day of assignment shall be the day
following the official canvas of the election in which the accused is a
candidate unless the accused candidate requests the board expedite the
complaint pursuant to 35.009(e).
   EVENT ORGANIZER. The organization that is responsible for actively
organizing, planning, and conducting an event.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST. An expectation of receiving a pecuniary benefit. A
FINANCIAL INTEREST of a person includes any FINANCIAL INTEREST of a member of
that person's immediate family. A person has a FINANCIAL INTEREST in an
organization in which that person has an ownership interest, or is a director,
officer or employee. A person has a FINANCIAL INTEREST in a decision if a
financial interest of that person will vary with the outcome of the decision. A
FINANCIAL INTEREST does not include the following:
      (1)   A personal or FINANCIAL INTEREST which is not of the magnitude that
would exert an influence on an ordinary reasonable person;
      (2)   A personal or FINANCIAL INTEREST of a type which is generally
possessed by the public or a large class of persons to which person belongs; or
      (3)   An action or influence which would have an insignificant or
conjectural effect on the matter in question.
   FUNDRAISING. The raising of funds for the city or a nonprofit organization,
other than a political organization or prohibited source as defined in this
chapter, through:
      (1)   Solicitation of funds or sale of items; or
      (2)   Participation in the conduct of an event by an officer or employee
where any portion of the cost of attendance or participation may be taken as a
charitable tax deduction by a person incurring that cost.
      (3)   Participation in the conduct of an event means active and visible
participation in the promotion, production, or presentation of the event and
includes serving as honorary chairperson, sitting at a head table during the
event, and standing in a reception line. The term does not include mere
attendance at an event provided that, to the officer's or employee's knowledge,
his/her attendance is not used by the nonprofit organization to promote the
event. While the term generally includes any public speaking during the event,
it does not include the delivery of an official speech sanctioned by his/her
department whose subject matter pertains to their official duties, nor does it
include any seating or other participation appropriate to the delivery of such
a speech. Waiver of a fee for attendance at an event by a participant in the
conduct of that event does not constitute a gift for purposes of this chapter.
      (4)   Personally solicit means to request or otherwise encourage
donations or other support either through person-to-person contact or through
the use of one's name or identity in correspondence or by permitting its use by
others. It does not include the solicitation of funds through the media or
through either oral remarks, or the contemporaneous dispatch of like items of
mass-produced correspondence, if such remarks or correspondence are addressed
to a group consisting of many persons, unless it is known to the official or
employee that the solicitation is targeted at subordinates or at persons who
are prohibited sources as defined by this chapter. It does not include behind-
the-scenes assistance in the solicitation of funds, such as drafting
correspondence, stuffing envelopes, or accounting for contributions.
   GIFT. Any payment, gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, reimbursement, or other tangible or intangible item having
monetary value including, but not limited to, cash and cash equivalents, food
and drink, travel, and lodging, which are related to, attributable to, or
enhanced because of their position as an officer or employee or city council
member.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Any person related to an officer or employee or city
council member within the first degree of consanguinity and includes a spouse,
parent, child, or an individual claimed by that individual or their spouse as a
dependent for federal income tax purposes.
   NOMINAL INTRINSIC VALUE. A rebuttable presumption that a gift is of minimum
value and would not exert an undue influence on an ordinary reasonable person.
   OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. Any person appointed to, or employed or retained by,
any public office or public body of the city, whether paid or unpaid and
whether temporary, part-time or full-time.
   OFFICIAL ACTION. A decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval, or other
action or failure to act which involves the use of discretionary authority.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who (1) is seeking official action
from an officer or employee or the city council or (2) does business with the
city or seeks to do business with the city or (3) conducts activities regulated
by the city.
   WIDELY ATTENDED GATHERING. A meeting, training, seminar, conference, or
other event which is reasonably expected to be attended by a number of people
(1) who are members of a public, civic, charitable or professional
organization, (2) who are from a from a particular industry or profession, (3)
who represent persons interested in a particular issue with a diverse set of
viewpoints or (4) who are selected for a scholarship or other reimbursement
that is competitive and available for a large number of people to apply to be
selected. The event must provide an opportunity to exchange ideas and views
among invited persons. A WIDELY ATTENDED GATHERING consists of more than mere
entertainment. The event may be held virtually or in person.
(Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
BOARD OF ETHICS, QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENTS, TERMS, POWERS AND DUTIES
§ 35.001 BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.
   There is hereby created a board which shall be known as the board of ethics
which shall consist of five members.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-1) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.002 QUALIFICATIONS AND BOARD COMPOSITION.
   No member of the board may be an officer or employee of the city or any
other governmental unit, or hold any political party office, or be a city
council member including the mayor, or a candidate for city office, or be in a
contractual relationship with the city, or receive compensation for services
from the city. No member of the board may endorse or engage in any political or
campaign activity on behalf of any candidate for city office.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-2) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.003 APPOINTMENT.
   The members of the board of ethics shall be appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the city council.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-3) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.004 TERMS.
   The members of the board of ethics shall be appointed for staggered terms of
four years. No member is eligible for reappointment after having served two
four-year terms.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-4) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011)
§ 35.005 COMPENSATION.
   No member of the board of ethics shall receive a salary. Members may be
reimbursed for expenses in accordance with city policy.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-5) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.006 CHAIRPERSON.
   The board of ethics shall annually select a chairperson from its members.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-6) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.007 MEETINGS.
   (a)   The board of ethics may meet in executive session pursuant to state
law. The board of ethics must give advance notice to the public of all meetings
in accordance with state law.
   (b)   The board of ethics shall meet at least quarterly.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-7) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012)
§ 35.008 QUORUM.
   Three members of the board of ethics shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business coming before it.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-8) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 35.009 COMPLAINTS.
   (a)   Any person who is a resident of the city or is doing or attempting to
do business with the city may file a complaint with the board. The complaint
shall be in writing, signed and dated, and include an address and telephone
number. All complaints shall be sworn to by a notary public and filed with the
office of the city attorney, except for any referral from the fraud
coordination committee pursuant to the city’s fraud control policy. Complaints
shall describe in detail the act or acts complained of and the specific section
(s) of the respective subchapter in this chapter that have been allegedly
violated.
   (b)   All complaints, and any subsequent filings and proceedings before the
board, shall remain confidential unless the accused elects to make the
complaint public or the board has issued its report pursuant to §§
35.050 through
35.059. If the board determines that the complainant (the person who filed the
complaint) has violated any confidentiality provisions under this chapter, or
in any way prejudiced the accused through any disclosures or other violations
of confidentiality, then the board may immediately dismiss the complaint.
Dismissal under this section does not affect the right of the board or any
person other than the complainant to initiate a complaint based on the same
factual allegations, though, in such event, the board shall consider the facts
and circumstances surrounding the violation resulting in said dismissal when
considering any related subsequent complaints.
   (c)   Complaints alleging violations of any of the provisions of §§
35.025 through
35.036 naming a city employee are personnel matters subject to the jurisdiction
of Human Resources. All other complaints alleging violations of any of the
provisions §§
35.025 through
35.036 are to be investigated by the city attorney's office. The board of
ethics shall not have jurisdiction to review, investigate, or adjudicate a
complaint alleging violations of §§
35.025 through
35.036.
   (d)   After an initial review of the complaint pursuant to §§
35.050 through
35.056, the board may dismiss any complaint that it finds to be frivolous,
illegible, too indefinite, does not identify the accused, is unsigned or is not
verified by an oath of affirmation. A "frivolous" complaint is one which lacks
a rational basis in fact or law, and/or is intended merely to harass or
embarrass the accused. No investigation is required if the board determines
that a complaint is frivolous on its face, illegible, too indefinite, does not
identify the accused, is unsigned or is not verified by an oath of affirmation.
Except for the fraud coordination committee, any person who files a frivolous
complaint with the board shall be civilly liable to the person charged for all
costs incurred in defending the charge, including, but not limited to, costs
and attorney's fees. In determining if a complaint is frivolous, the board may
consider the following:
      (1)   The timing of the complaint with respect to when the facts
supporting the alleged violation became known to the complainant, and with
respect to the date of any pending election in which the accused is a candidate
or is otherwise involved with that election in any manner, if any;
      (2)   The nature and type of publicity surrounding the filing of the
complaint, and the degree of participation by the complainant in publicizing
the fact that a complaint was filed with the board;
      (3)   The existence and nature of any relationship between the accused
and the complainant before the complaint was filed;
      (4)   If the accused is a candidate for any elected public office at the
time of the filing of the complaint, the existence and nature of any
relationship between the complainant and any candidate or group opposing the
accused;
      (5)   Any evidence that the complainant knew or reasonably should have
known that the allegations in the complaint were groundless; and
      (6)   Any evidence of the complainant’s motives in filing the complaint.
   (e)   The board shall hold in abeyance any complaint filed against a
candidate, as defined by SDCL 12-27-1(4) for any elected public office within
90 days of the election for such office, unless the accused candidate requests
the board to expedite its handling of the complaint or unless the complaint
involves the alleged conduct of a municipal election for such office pursuant
to City Charter Section 6.01(c).
(1992 Code, § 12.5-9) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.010 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.
   In addition to the other powers and duties specifically mentioned in this
subchapter, the board of ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   To initiate and to receive complaints of violations of any of the
provisions of §§
35.050 through
35.059;
   (b)   To conduct reviews and/or investigations based on requests or
complaints concerning any matter covered by §§
35.050 through
35.059 and the city charter. Council shall receive a report of all findings and
recommendations of all complaints or investigations of the board regarding §§
35.050 through
35.059. Upon receiving the report from the board, council shall follow
procedures set forth in §§
35.050 through
35.059 and shall determine if disciplinary action is necessary;
   (c)   To consult with municipal agencies, officials and employees on matters
involving ethical conduct;
   (d)   To recommend such legislative action as it may deem appropriate to
effectuate the policy of §§
35.025 through
35.034 and §§
35.050 through
35.059;
   (e)   To adopt procedural rules consistent with the requirements of due
process of law, consistent with the rules of evidence, consistent with the
intent of this chapter and the city charter, and subject to review by the city
council;
   (f)   To prescribe forms for the disclosure and registration of information
as provided in §§
35.025 through
35.034 and §§
35.050 through
35.059;
   (g)   The board of ethics may also render advisory opinions at the board's
discretion with respect to §§
35.025 through
35.034;
   (h)   The board of ethics may render advisory opinions at the request of an
elected official of the city or a candidate for city office with respect to §§
35.050 through
35.059;
   (i)   To offer a full report of all findings and recommendations of the
board, for complaints and investigations of elected officials, with respect to
§§
35.050 through
35.059. The remedies for violations of §§
35.050 through
35.059 shall follow the provisions therein; and
   (j)   To forward to the appropriate law enforcement agency any information
concerning alleged violations which may become the subject of a criminal
prosecution.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-10) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.011 RECORDS.
   (a)   The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every question, and shall also keep records of its
investigations and other official actions. All minutes of the board’s
proceedings will be filed with the city clerk’s office.
   (b)   Designees within the city attorney’s staff shall serve as
administrative and secretarial staff to the board and shall take and preserve
minutes of all meetings as required by law. An annual report will be produced
on the past costs of those activities and from which estimated cost should be
included in the next annual budget as a separate item.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-11) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 35.012 STAFF.
   The individual serving as the city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to
the board of ethics unless a complaint arises under §§
35.050 through
35.059. For a complaint under §§
35.050 through
35.059, the board shall consult only with outside legal counsel of its own
choosing as needed who is not otherwise employed by the city. The board may
appoint an individual to act as its investigator. The individual serving as the
investigator for the board shall be an employee of the city police department
who is trained in investigatory techniques and shall be bound by the rules of
confidentiality contained in this chapter. If a member of the city police
department is a complaining party, the accused person, or is a material witness
to the investigation, then the board shall appoint and consult with an outside
investigator as needed.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-12) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012)
CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 35.025 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The proper operation of a republic requires that public officers and
employees be honest, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental
decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental
structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the
public have confidence in the integrity of its government. This subchapter
applies to city officers and employees, whether appointed, paid or unpaid,
including members of all city agencies. The purpose of these regulations is to
establish guidelines setting forth those actions which are incompatible with
the best interest of the citizens of the city and directing disclosure by those
officers and employees of private financial or other interests in matters
affecting city government. This subchapter does not apply to the mayor and
other city council members.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-13) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.026 CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed to protect the public interest
in full disclosure of conflicts of interest and promoting ethical standards of
conduct for municipal officers, employees, members of city agencies and all
advisory boards.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-14) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.027 [RESERVED].
§ 35.028 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ACTING IN AN OFFICIAL CAPACITY ON MATTERS IN
WHICH AN OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE HAS A PRIVATE FINANCIAL INTEREST CLEARLY SEPARATE
FROM THAT OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC.
   (a)   No officer or employee of the city shall knowingly have a financial
interest clearly separate from that of the general public in any contract,
transaction, zoning decision or other matter which is subject to an official
act or services from the city. This provision shall not apply if the interested
officer or employee discloses by written communication to his or her immediate
supervisor, director and the appropriate elected official(s) and they reply
with unanimous consent to the financial interest or if the person serves on a
lay board and discloses to the city council the full nature and extent of that
interest and disqualifies and/or removes himself or herself from consideration
or future participation in the matter in any respect.
   (b)   The foregoing conflict of interest prohibition shall not apply if an
interested officer or employee does not or will not act in the regular course
of his or her duties and responsibilities, directly or indirectly, for the city
as to inspection, any related performance issues or any operational oversight
or work with the matter in question. Also, this prohibition may not apply if
the interested officer or employee is an employee of a business entity involved
in the matter in question and the officer or employee has no ownership interest
in the matter and will not receive a fee or compensation related thereto.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-16) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-
2023) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.029 ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS AND OTHER THINGS OF VALUE.
   (a)   No officer or employee shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift,
or, other than as set forth herein, accept any gift in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift unduly influenced, or could reasonably be
expected to unduly influence the officer or employee, in the performance of
official duties, or was a reward for any official action of the officer or
employee.
   (b)   Exceptions:
      (1)   Legitimate political contributions are not gifts under the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   It is not a conflict of interest for any officer or employee to
receive a gift that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value.
      (3)   It is not a conflict of interest for any officer or employee to
receive a gift from the city or other officer or employees including, but not
limited to, awards for service anniversaries and gifts based on personal
friendships.
      (4)   Anything paid for or reimbursed by the city is not a gift.
      (5)   Any benefit received by an officer or employee pursuant to a grant
or competitive application process awarded to the city or to the officer or
employee related to the official duties of the officer or employee is not a
gift.
      (6)   Any benefit received by an officer or employee that is directly
associated with his/her membership in an outside organization shall not be
prohibited by this section if:
         A.   The benefit was not offered or enhanced because of the official
position of the officer or employee; and
         B.   The benefit is customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
      (7)   It is not a conflict of interest for any officer or employee to
receive a gift of travel, lodging, registration fees, entrance fees, food and
drink, and other incidental expenses directly related and attributable to a
widely attended gathering, if the event meets all the following conditions:
         A.   The event is related to the official duties of an officer or
employee or the city's legislative or policy interests. An event presumptively
meets this requirement unless a reasonable person would not find this to be the
case.
         B.   The event organizer is not a prohibited source.
      (8)   An officer or employee may participate in fundraising in an
official capacity if, in accordance with ordinance, Executive Order, or other
applicable law or official policy, he/she is authorized to engage in the
fundraising activity as part of his/her official duties. When authorized to
participate in an official capacity, an officer or employee may use his/her
official title, position, and authority. An officer or employee may engage in
fundraising in his/her personal capacity provided that he/she does not:
         A.   Personally solicit funds or other support from a subordinate or
from any person known to the officer or employee to be a prohibited source
within the meaning of this chapter whose interests may be substantially
affected by the performance or nonperformance of his/her official duties and
whose contribution could reasonably be expected to unduly influence the officer
or employee in the performance of their official duties, or whose contribution
could be reasonably deemed as a reward for any official action of the employee
or official.
         B.   Use or permit the use of his/her official title, position or any
authority associated with his/her public office to further the fundraising
effort.
         C.   Engage in any action that would otherwise violate this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-17) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-
2023; Ord. 48-24, passed 5-14-2024) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.030 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   During the period of employment or service and for two years thereafter, no
officer or employee, with respect to any contract, transaction, zoning decision
or other matter which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of
the city shall, without appropriate authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of the city. In
addition, no officer or employee shall use this information to advance the
financial or other private interest of the officer or employee or others.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-18) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.031 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL OR PRIVILEGED INFORMATION PROHIBITED.
   No member of any city agency may publicly disclose information received,
discussed or decided in executive session held pursuant to law or in conference
with legal counsel which is protected by the attorney/client privilege or has
been confidentially disclosed at an executive session, unless a majority of the
members of the city agency has authorized that disclosure or unless a
disclosure is authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-19) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.032 APPEARANCES BY CITY OFFICIALS ON BEHALF OF PRIVATE INTERESTS.
   No officer or employee, except when acting in an official capacity, shall
appear on behalf of any private person before any city agency. This section
shall not apply to any officer who has fully informed the city agency of the
officer’s private interest in a matter and the officer does not participate in
any decision related thereto.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-20) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.033 PROHIBITED CONDUCT AFTER LEAVING THE CITY.
   No present or former officer or employee may represent another person for
compensation before the city or any public body thereof while in office or
employed for a period of two years from the date of termination of their office
or employment concerning any matter with which the officer or employee was
directly concerned and in which the officer or employee personally participated
during the employment or service by a substantial and material exercise of
administrative discretion either during their holding of office or employment
or for a period of two years thereafter. This section shall not prohibit any
former employee from acting as a paid private consultant for any person so long
as the former officer or employee does not appear on behalf of that person
before the city or any public body thereof, either personally or by
communication of any kind, for a period of two years from the date of
termination of their office or employment and that former officer or employee
does not disclose confidential information at any time.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-21) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.034 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   An advisory opinion may be requested from the board of ethics by any city
officer or employee whether appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of all
city agencies who seek the board of ethics’ opinion to interpret the law as it
applies to himself or herself. A request for an advisory opinion may include
the request to review the city officer or employee’s own conduct that has
already occurred that has not yet been the subject of a complaint to the board
or a report to the fraud coordination committee. The “self- reporting” of past
incidents shall not act as a bar against possible sanctions for conduct, but
may be considered in mitigation of any possible penalties otherwise imposed.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-22) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.035 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   A complaint that a city officer or city employee, whether appointed, paid or
unpaid, or a member of a city agency has violated the conflicts of interest or
standards of conduct outlined in this subchapter shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. All complaints naming a city employee
shall be forwarded to the human resources office. All other complaints shall be
investigated by the city attorney's office. All complaints shall remain
confidential.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-23) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.036 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be enforced contrary to the provisions of any
collective bargaining agreements between the city and its employees.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-25) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND STANDARDS OF CONDUCT OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
§ 35.050 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (a)   All city council members shall act with integrity, impartiality and
dedication to the best interest of the city and the public trust which they
hold.
   (b)   The citizens have a right to expect that city council members will
conduct themselves in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in
and respect for the government they represent.
   (c)   The public confidence and respect can best be promoted if city council
members uniformly treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and
equality under the law and avoid both actual and potential conflicts between
their private self-interest and the public trust.
   (d)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate conflicts of interest
and standards of conduct for city council members by setting forth conduct
which is incompatible with the best interest of the city, and by directing
disclosure by city council members of private financial or other interests in
matters affecting the city.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-27) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.051 CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed to protect the public interest
in full disclosure of conflicts of interest and promoting ethical standards of
conduct for city council members including the mayor.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-28) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 35.052 [RESERVED].
§ 35.053 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   City council members shall not:
   (a)   Participate or vote in matters in which they have a financial interest
in any contract with the city;
   (b)   Participate or vote in matters in which they may be financially
interested in the sale of land to the city, or in which they may have rights or
interests in the sale of any materials, supplies or services to the city;
   (c)   Participate or vote in any other matters in which they may have a
financial interest, or in which an immediate family member has a financial
interest;
   (d)   Except when acting in an official capacity, appear on behalf of any
private person before any city agency. A city council member may appear at any
place on behalf of constituents in the course of their duties as
representatives of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations. City council members shall not receive compensation for those
appearances, unless specifically authorized by action of the city council.
However, this section shall not apply to any city council member who has fully
informed the city agency of his or her private interest in a matter and he or
she does not participate in any decision related thereto;
   (e)   Directly or indirectly solicit any gift, or, other than as set forth
herein, accept any gift in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift
unduly influenced, or could reasonably be expected to unduly influence the city
council member in the performance of their official duties, or was a reward for
any official action of the city council member. Exceptions:
      (1)   Legitimate political contributions are not gifts under the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   It is not a conflict of interest for any city council member to
receive a gift that is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic value.
      (3)   It is not a conflict of interest for any city council member to
receive a gift from the city or other city council members including, but not
limited to, awards for service anniversaries and gifts based on personal
friendships.
      (4)   Anything paid for or reimbursed by the city is not a gift.
      (5)   Any benefit received by a city council member pursuant to a grant
or competitive application process awarded to the city or to the city council
member related to the official duties of the city council member is not a gift.
      (6)   Any benefit received by a council member that is directly
associated with his/her employment or organizational membership outside the
city shall not be prohibited by this section if:
         A.   The benefit was not offered or enhanced because of the official
position of the city council member; and
         B.   The benefit is customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
      (7)   It is not a conflict of interest for any city council member to
receive a gift of travel, lodging, registration fees, entrance fees, food and
drink, and other incidental expenses directly related and attributable to a
widely attended gathering, if the event meets all of the following conditions:
         A.   The event is related to the official duties of a city council
member or the city's legislative or policy interests. An event presumptively
meets this requirement unless a reasonable person would not find this to be the
case.
         B.   The event organizer is not a prohibited source.
   (f)   Participate or vote in matters having a financial interest in any
property within 300 feet of property involved in a zoning matter before the
city council; and
   (g)   Participate or vote in matters that come before the city council
directly or indirectly involving the interest of a present business client or
customer of any city council member or the interest of a person or entity who
has been a business client or customer of any city council member within the
prior 12 months. A business client or customer is any person or entity for
which the city council member is employed or if in the past 12 months payment
has been received by the city council member from the person or entity in the
amount of $5,000 or greater and that fact is or should be known by the city
council member.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-30) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-
2023; Ord. 48-24, passed 5-14-2024) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.054 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT; CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   City council members shall not take action to:
   (a)   Disclose confidential information;
   (b)   Directly or indirectly use any confidential information which was
gained because of their official position or employment for their own personal
gain or benefit or for the benefit of others. Disclose or reveal any
information or the contents of any discussion which took place in executive
session under the provisions of the state open meetings law;
   (c)   Disclose or reveal any information, or the contents of any discussion,
considered during an executive session or closed meeting conducted pursuant to
the state open meetings law, held by the city council or city agency, except as
may be authorized by a majority vote of that body;
   (d)   Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any
citizen, individual, business entity or group beyond that which is normally
available to every other citizen, individual, business entity or group;
   (e)   Use their elected position to secure special advantages, privileges or
exemptions for themselves or others;
   (f)   Engage in any conduct which may be directly prejudicial to the
government of the city or which reflects discredit or dishonor on the
government of the city, which conduct causes the city substantial monetary
damage or the commission of a criminal act;
   (g)   Use city supplies, equipment or facilities for any purpose other than
the conduct of official city business, unless otherwise provided for by law,
ordinance or city policy;
   (h)   Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act to deliberately prevent
the execution of the city ordinances, rules or regulations, or the achievement
of official city programs;
   (i)   Engage in activity(ies) that delay or disrupt the proceedings of a
city council meeting or refuse to adhere to the orders of the presiding
officer;
   (j)   Violate the city's election ordinances;
   (k)   Violate the city's fraud control policy; and
   (l)   Violate any provision of the city charter.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-31) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.055 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; FORMER CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Past city council members shall not appear before the city council or any
city agency and represent any interest on any matter which was pending on file
and unresolved with the city during their service, for a period of one year
after the date of termination of the relationship with the city.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-32) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-
2023)
§ 35.056 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.
   City council members who have a financial interest in any matter pending
before the city shall disclose that interest to other members of the city
council, and shall refrain from further discussion of the matter; shall not be
physically present when the subject is discussed in an executive session; and
shall not vote on or participate further therein in any manner.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-33) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009)
§ 35.057 ADVISORY OPINIONS; ELECTED CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS AND CANDIDATES.
   Advisory opinions may be requested by any city council member who seeks the
board of ethics' opinion to guide his or her own conduct. Only a city council
member may request an advisory opinion from the board of ethics about his or
her own conduct or activities, provided that the request is made prior to the
filing of a complaint as outlined in this chapter. Candidates for a city office
can seek advisory opinions from the board of ethics about his or her own
conduct or activities. A request for an advisory opinion may include a request
to review the council member's own conduct that has already occurred, and has
not yet been the subject of a complaint to the board or a report to the fraud
coordination committee. The "self-reporting" on past incidents shall not act as
a bar against possible sanctions for that conduct, but may be considered in
mitigation of any possible penalties otherwise imposed.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-34) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-
2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.058 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (a)   A complaint that a city council member has violated the conflicts of
interest or standards of conduct outlined in this subchapter shall be made in
accordance with this chapter, except that a report concerning a city council
member may be referred to the board by the fraud coordination committee.
Anonymous complaints shall not be considered. All complaints shall be referred
to the board of ethics who shall review the complaint in light of the conflicts
of interest and standards of conduct as set forth in this subchapter, or the
fraud control policy if it is a referral from the fraud coordination committee.
A copy of the complaint shall be sent to the city council member against whom a
complaint has been filed by certified mail within two business days of the
written filing.
   (b)   All complaints, subsequent filings and proceedings of the board shall
remain confidential unless otherwise provided herein. The accused may choose to
waive confidentiality and make the complaint public. Upon the election by the
accused, any subsequent filings and proceedings with the board become public.
If the accused chooses to waive confidentiality, then the board has the right
to make a public statement limited to that information as reasonably necessary
to mitigate any adverse publicity resulting from a public statement by the
accused.
   (c)   The board of ethics shall have all the powers of investigation as are
afforded the city council by the city charter. The board performing the review
of the complaint shall report to the city council in writing not more than 60
days after the day of assignment, unless an extension is granted by a majority
of the eligible council members. For purposes of this section, an ELIGIBLE
COUNCIL MEMBER means any council member who is not named in the complaint. If
the board determines that the facts as alleged do not establish probable cause
that there has been a violation of this subchapter as described herein or
otherwise dismisses a complaint under this subchapter, a report of the board's
findings shall be given to the city council, and the matter shall be considered
concluded. If the board determines that the facts as alleged establish probable
cause that there has been a violation of this subchapter, the report containing
the board's findings and recommended sanctions shall be given to the city
council. A finding of probable cause requires the affirmative vote of three or
more members of the board of ethics.
   (d)   The board's report to the city council shall be a public record, and
all filings and proceedings prior to the report shall likewise become a public
record after the report is issued unless a filing is not subject to disclosure
by law. Until a time as the board issues its report to the city council or the
accused elects to make the complaint public, no complainant, board member, nor
any person who has access to any confidential information related to the
functions or activities of the board shall divulge that information to any
person who is not authorized to have it.
   (e)   Upon receiving a report from the board of ethics that there is
probable cause to believe that a violation of the conflicts of interest or
standards of conduct or a violation of the fraud control policy by a city
council member may exist, the eligible members of the city council may consider
further action and/or recommendations and remedies as provided by this chapter.
The accused city council member may participate in the discussion and may be
represented by counsel of his/her own choosing and expense during the city
council meeting on the issue, but the accused council member shall not vote on
any of the possible remedies in § 35.999.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-35) (Ord. 24-09, passed 3-16-2009; Ord. 03-11, passed 1-18-
2011; Ord. 57-12, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.059 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any final order by the city council is subject to judicial review as
provided by SDCL ch. 21-31 within 20 days of the filing of the city council’s
final order.
(1992 Code, § 12.5-37) (Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 35.999 REMEDIES.
   Violations of §§
35.050 through
35.059 may be remedied by the eligible city council members by any one or any
combination of the following:
   (a)   Public reprimand; and/or
   (b)   Referral to the appropriate prosecuting agency for further proceedings
for the possible assessment of fines and/or removal from office as provided by
law.
(Ord. 116-23, passed 12-5-2023)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCES
Section
Financial Regulations
   
36.001   Accounting publications adopted
   
36.002   Revenues and special funds
   
36.002.1   Committed and restricted settlement funds
   
36.003   Department of finance
   
36.004   Authorization of promissary notes
   
36.005   Disbursements by third party administrators
Purchasing
   
36.020   Authorization of contracts and agreements
   
36.021   Contracts involving public facilities or properties
   
36.022   Multiple year contracts and agreements
   
36.023   Discrimination clause
   
36.024   Budget administration manuals required
   
36.025   Claims to be published
   
36.026   Subsidy agreements
   
36.027   [Reserved]
   
36.028   [Reserved]
   
36.029   [Reserved]
   
36.030   Emergency award of contract without advertising
   
36.031   Negotiation of contract when no bids or when no firm competitive bids
are received
   
36.032   [Reserved]
   
36.033   Items exempt from competitive bidding
   
36.034   Capital program
   
36.035   Design-build contracts
   
36.036   Construction manager-at-risk authorized
   
36.037   Construction manager-at-risk defined
   
36.038   Compatibility with other laws
   
36.039   City council authorization
FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
§ 36.001 ACCOUNTING PUBLICATIONS ADOPTED.
   The most current edition of the Municipal Accounting Manual (MAM) for state
municipalities, published by the state department of legislative audit;
Government Accounting, Auditing and Financial Reporting (GAAFR), published by
the Government Finance Officers Association and the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB), are hereby adopted by the city to govern its financial
procedures.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 2.301—2.305; 1992 Code, § 2-51)
§ 36.002 REVENUES AND SPECIAL FUNDS.
   All money belonging to the city derived from taxation, licenses, fines,
forfeitures, the operation of waterworks or other public utility owned or
operated by the city, or from any other source, shall be paid into the city
treasury, and the city council shall designate by ordinance to what fund or
funds the money shall be applied as provided by law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.307; 1992 Code, § 2-52)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Taxation, see
ch. 37
§ 36.002.1 COMMITTED AND RESTRICTED SETTLEMENT FUNDS.
   (a)   As authorized by the charter and state law, all settlement proceeds
received from litigation initiated by the City of Sioux Falls and lodged in
multidistrict litigation, Master Docket No.: 2:18-mn-2873, Civil Case No.: 2:
19-cv-1806-RMG or any matters related thereto and any resulting investment
revenue shall be deposited into the Water Fund and committed and restricted by
the City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota for the procurement, treatment and
protection of the city’s existing and future water, water sources and water
rights, for benefit of the residents of the City of Sioux Falls and future
generations, to be used solely for the following purposes:
      (1)   Treatment and procurement of existing and future water and water
sources, including but not limited to procurement of additional water rights,
and all costs of land acquisition, construction or expansion of infrastructure
that is necessary to procure, treat, transport and store existing and future
water and water sources, including but not limited to design, surveying,
engineering, and environmental fees and costs; regional water association
membership dues and fees; and any other professional fees and costs that are
directly related to the procurement, treatment, transmission, storage and
distribution of existing and future water, water sources and water rights;
      (2)   Debt service, issuance costs, fees and any other costs incurred in
support of the city’s water supply system, to the extent permitted by
applicable city, federal and state law;
      (3)   Expenses incurred in preparing and updating the comprehensive
plans; and
      (4)   All other related administrative, consulting, attorney, and other
professional fees and costs.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from
issuing tax-exempt bonds or other obligations for water-related projects,
provided
that such bond proceeds are used in accordance with applicable federal tax law
and do not finance expenditures expected to be paid from the settlement funds
restricted by this section.
   (c)   Funds established.
      (1)   The required committed and restricted accounts for the purpose of
managing the settlement proceeds received and any resulting investment revenue
are hereby established.
      (2)   No city water customer shall have any right, title, or interest in
such an account.
(Ord. 39-25, passed 7-15-2025)
§ 36.003 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
   (a)   There is hereby created for the city a department of finance.
   (b)   The department of finance shall be managed and directed by the city
finance officer, who shall be appointed as provided by the charter, and who
shall file a bond in the amount of $250,000.
   (c)   The city finance officer shall perform all the duties of the city
auditor and city treasurer, as provided by law in the South Dakota Codified
Laws and in the ordinances of the city.
   (d)   All references made in the South Dakota Codified Laws and the City
Code to the city auditor and city treasurer shall be construed to mean the city
finance officer.
(1992 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. 101-76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 97-97, passed 12-15-
1997)
§ 36.004 AUTHORIZATION OF PROMISSARY NOTES.
   Whenever monies shall have been actually provided for any fund by a levy of
taxes or otherwise, and the monies shall not have been actually collected, but
concerning the receipt of which monies there can be no question, the city
council is hereby authorized to anticipate the receipt of the monies into that
fund and may issue promissory notes from that fund to any other fund of the
city for which there shall not be immediate use.
(1992 Code, § 2-55) (Ord. 92-98, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 36.005 DISBURSEMENTS BY THIRD PARTY ADMINISTRATORS.
   The mayor may, by executive order, authorize the processing of claims and
expenditures by third party administrators under contract with the city,
including the issuances of warrants drawn on separate accounts established by
the city. Authorized third party administrators shall be subject to audit as
determined by the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-56) (Ord. 123-98, passed 11-23-1998)
PURCHASING
§ 36.020 AUTHORIZATION OF CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to provisions in city charter §§ 2.11(c) and 2.12,
contracts, agreements and amendments to contracts and agreements that are in
excess of $100,000 per vendor, for each calendar year, shall be approved by the
city council.
   (b)   Each contract or agreement of the city shall be executed in the name
of the municipality by the mayor, or his or her interim successor, and shall be
attested by the city clerk. The city clerk shall affix the corporate seal. Any
contract or agreement for park purposes may be reviewed by the parks and
recreation board prior to council consideration. All contracts involving the
expenditure of funds less than $100,000 that are entered into by the mayor and
are not subject to council approval shall be noticed to the city council on the
consent agenda under communications. All contracts or agreements which are
subject to approval by the city council shall be delivered to the city clerk
office pursuant to §
30.014 and placed on the consent agenda under approval of contracts and
agreements. Change orders in excess of $100,000 involving the expenditure of
funds, shall be noticed to the city council on the consent agenda under
communications. Deductive change orders do not need to be noticed to the city
council.
   (c)   Contracts and agreements pertaining to subjects that are permissible
for executive session shall not be subject to this section.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-1) (Ord. 28-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 75-11, passed 10-3-
2011; Ord. 97-23, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 36.021 CONTRACTS INVOLVING PUBLIC FACILITIES OR PROPERTIES.
   No contract pertaining to the management of the city’s public facilities or
properties will be valid unless the contract has been authorized by a vote of
the city council at a duly assembled meeting. Management contracts for public
facilities and properties shall be listed on the regular agenda for separate
consideration by resolution. Such contracts shall be presented at either an
informational meeting, working session, or standing committee of the city
council at least five days prior to the city council vote. Prior to the city
issuing a request for proposal, the city council will be given notice by the
administration in writing.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-1.1) (Ord. 75-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 14-18, passed 2-20-
2018; Ord. 97-23, passed 10-10-2023)
§ 36.022 MULTIPLE YEAR CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS.
   In addition to provisions in city charter §
2.12, all multiple year contracts and agreements involving the payment of money
from appropriations shall be approved by the city council. No contract
involving the payment of money from appropriations shall extend past a five-
year period but may have an option for renewal or renegotiation for up to a
subsequent five-year period, subject to the approval of the council in office
at the time of the option or renegotiations is put into effect. No contract,
option or renegotiation shall be valid unless approved by the city council.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-1.2) (Ord. 75-11, passed 10-3-2011)
§ 36.023 DISCRIMINATION CLAUSE.
   All contracts and agreements of the city shall contain a provision that
contracts shall not, in the performance of the contract, discriminate or permit
discrimination in violation of federal or state laws or local ordinances
because of race, color, sex, age, political or religious opinions, affiliations
or national origin.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-1.3) (Ord. 75-11, passed 10-3-2011)
§ 36.024 BUDGET ADMINISTRATION MANUALS REQUIRED.
   The mayor shall develop, promulgate and update a manual or manuals
containing procedures for administering the budget, including but not limited
to the following: budgeting, purchasing and accounting. All manuals relating to
the procedures for administering the budget shall be subject to council
approval by resolution per city charter §
5.09.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-2) (Ord. 28-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 75-11, passed 10-3-
2011)
§ 36.025 CLAIMS TO BE PUBLISHED.
   No claim against the city shall be audited or allowed unless it be fully
itemized and a memorandum of the same submitted to the mayor. The memorandum
shall be published by the city clerk on a monthly basis by vendor, expense
class (repair, equipment, professional service or other similar class) and
amount.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-3) (Ord. 28-95, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 36.026 SUBSIDY AGREEMENTS.
   On or before the 1st day of June of each year, the mayor shall deliver to
the city council a list of all organizations and amounts proposed to be
budgeted for subsidy agreements in the mayor’s recommended budget for the
ensuing fiscal year, along with a brief description of each program and
purpose, financial results, and an accounting of key data relating and
pertaining to the program’s impact and stated objectives from the prior
agreement year. All subsidy agreements of the city shall contain a provision
requiring each contracting party, intending to request funding for the ensuing
fiscal year, to provide to the mayor and the department liaison financial
results and an accounting of key data relating and pertaining to the program’s
impact and stated objectives from the prior agreement year. Each contracting
party shall provide such information to the mayor and the department liaison on
or before the 15th day of May each year.
(Ord. 44-24, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 36.027 [RESERVED].
§ 36.028 [RESERVED].
§ 36.029 [RESERVED].
§ 36.030 EMERGENCY AWARD OF CONTRACT WITHOUT ADVERTISING.
   The mayor, or his or her interim successor, may make an emergency
procurement without advertising the procurement if rentals are not practicable
and there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety or for other
urgent and compelling reasons. Failure to abide by the bid provisions in a
timely manner is not an emergency. An emergency procurement shall be made with
the competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of
particular contractors shall be included in the contract file and shall be
provided to the city council within seven days of the award of the contract.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-8) (Ord. 28-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 51-10, passed 6-7-
2010; Ord. 75-11, passed 10-3-2011)
§ 36.031 NEGOTIATION OF CONTRACT WHEN NO BIDS OR WHEN NO FIRM COMPETITIVE BIDS
ARE RECEIVED.
   If after advertising for bids for purchase of materials, supplies or
equipment and either no bids or no firm competitive bids are received, the
mayor, or his or her interim successor, may reject all the bids in the case of
no firm competitive bid being received and may negotiate a contract for the
purchase of the materials, supplies or equipment at the most advantageous
price, provided that the materials, supplies or equipment meet the
specifications of the original advertisement for bids. The mayor, or his or her
interim successor, shall contact and attempt to obtain competitive quotations
from at least three suppliers. The mayor, or his or her interim successor,
shall maintain a record of the names of the suppliers, the quotations received
and the procurement procedures used in purchasing. The contract may include a
procedure for adjusting prices to meet changing market conditions not within
the control of the vendor. The adjustments may not result in increases in the
profit of the vendor and shall be supported by a written justification filed
with the purchasing agent of the city.
(1992 Code,§§ 34.5-9, 34.5-10) (Ord. 28-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 75-11,
passed 10-3-2011)
§ 36.032 [RESERVED].
§ 36.033 ITEMS EXEMPT FROM COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   The city may purchase, lease, or engage in the following without advertising
for competitive bids:
   (a)   Storm-caused debris removal services.
   (b)   Sewer cleanup services.
   (c)   Any contract for the purchase of supplies from the United States or
its agencies or any contract issued by the General Services Administration.
   (d)   Any purchase of supplies or services, other than professional
services, by purchasing agencies from any active contract that has been awarded
by any government entity by competitive sealed bids or competitive sealed
proposals or from any contract that was competitively solicited and awarded
within the previous 12 months.
   (e)   Any equipment repair contract.
   (f)   Any procurement of electric power, water, or natural gas; chemical and
biological products; laboratory apparatus and appliances; published books,
maps, periodicals and technical pamphlets; works of art for museum and public
display; medical supplies; communications technologies, computer hardware and
software, peripheral equipment, and related connectivity; tableware, or
perishable foods.
   (g)   Any purchase of surplus property from another purchasing agency.
   (h)   Any animals purchased.
   (i)   Any purchase of supplies for any utility owned or operated by a
municipality if the purchase does not exceed the limits established in SDCL 5-
18A-14.
   (j)   Any contract for asbestos removal in emergency response actions and
any contract for services provided by individuals or firms for consultants,
audits, legal services, ambulance services, architectural services and
engineering, insurance, real estate services, or auction services.
   (k)   Any purchase of equipment involving the expenditure of less than
$50,000.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-12) (Ord. 25-96, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 49-97, passed 7-7-
1997; Ord. 8-99, passed 1-4-1999; Ord. 95-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 55-00,
passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 102-01, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 8-03, passed 1-21-2003;
Ord. 41-04, passed 4-19-2004; Ord. 51-10, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 13-17, passed
1-17-2017)
§ 36.034 CAPITAL PROGRAM.
   (a)   The capital program required by Article V of the charter shall be a
five-year plan for annual capital acquisitions to meet capital needs for the
city. It shall identify and project funding to finance each project.
   (b)   Capital improvements consist of capital acquisitions including, but
not limited to, land, buildings, equipment and infrastructure improvements.
Capital improvements shall be defined within the city’s accounting manual and
become capital assets on the city’s balance sheets.
   (c)   All pooled development driven street projects shall be prioritized by
the capital improvement program committee and approved by the city council.
   (d)   The city council may amend the current capital program by resolution.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-13) (Ord. 83-96, passed 8-5-1996; Ord. 25-01, passed 3-12-
2001; Ord. 13-04, passed 2-9-2004; Ord. 82-05, passed 8-5-2005)
§ 36.035 DESIGN-BUILD CONTRACTS.
   The performance criteria for any public improvement for which a design-build
contract has been authorized by the city council may include the acquisition
through deed or lease of the real property upon which the improvement is
located.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-14) (Ord. 102-99, passed 10-4-1999)
§ 36.036 CONSTRUCTION MANAGER-AT-RISK AUTHORIZED.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city may construct public
improvements using the construction manager-at-risk method of project delivery.
The mayor shall, by executive order, establish rules for the administration of
the construction manager-at-risk method of project delivery.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-15) (Ord. 110-00, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 36.037 CONSTRUCTION MANAGER-AT-RISK DEFINED.
   CONSTRUCTION MANAGER-AT-RISK means a city project delivery system in which:
   (a)   The city provides design services or there is a separate contract for
design services, and there is a separate contract for construction services;
   (b)   The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same
time as the contract for design services or at a later time;
   (c)   Design and construction of a project may be in sequential phases or
concurrent phases;
   (d)   Labor, materials and other construction services, including financial
services, maintenance services, operation’s services, preconstruction services
and other related services may be included in contracts with construction
managers-at-risk; and
   (e)   Construction services which are not competitively bid may be
negotiated.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-16) (Ord. 110-00, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 36.038 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER LAWS.
   The city shall follow the procedures of the laws governing public
improvement construction contracts to the extent these laws are compatible with
the use of construction manager-at-risk contracts.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-17) (Ord. 110-00, passed 12-18-2000)
§ 36.039 CITY COUNCIL AUTHORIZATION.
   The city council shall, for each public improvement performed using the
construction manager-at-risk method, determine by resolution that it is in the
best interest of the public to enter into a contract to complete the public
improvement.
(1992 Code, § 34.5-18) (Ord. 110-00, passed 12-18-2000)
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION
Section
Retail Sales and Service Tax
   
37.001   Imposition of retail sales and service tax and exemptions therefrom
   
37.002   Imposition of additional retail sales and service tax
   
37.003   Special tax rates
   
37.004   Imposition of additional tax
   
37.005   Collection
   
37.006   Special rate for vending receipts
   
37.007   Interpretation
Use Tax
   
37.020   Imposition
   
37.021   Imposition of additional tax
   
37.022   Collection
   
37.023   Interpretation
Urban and Rural Service Districts
   
37.035   Service districts established
   
37.036   Rural service district; criteria for lands included
   
37.037   Rural service district; lands described
   
37.038   Lands included in rural service district
   
37.039   Lands included in urban service district
   
37.040   Agricultural land annexed; limitation on mill levy and assessed value
   
37.041   Platting or construction in rural district
   
37.042   Filing ordinance amendment or order with County Auditor
Reduced Taxation for New Industrial Structures, Additions Thereto Within the
City
   
37.055   Authority
   
37.056   Applicability; effective date
   
37.057   Calculation of tax
   
37.058   Application for reduced taxation on new construction
Reduced Taxation for New Industrial, Commercial Structures, Additions Thereto
Within Downtown Center Designated Urban Renewal Area
   
37.070   Authority
   
37.071   Applicability; effective date
   
37.072   Calculation of tax
   
37.073   Application for reduced taxation on new construction
Reduced Taxation for New Housing Structures, Additions Thereto
   
37.080   Authority
   
37.081   Applicability and application for reduced taxation
   
37.082   Calculation of tax
   
37.083   Qualifying projects
   
37.084   Definitions
Reduced Taxation for New Midtown Mixed-Use Structures, Additions Thereto
   
37.085   Authority
   
37.086   Applicability and application for reduced taxation
   
37.087   Calculation of tax
   
37.088   Definitions
   
37.089   [Reserved]
   
37.090   Discretionary formula report
Dowtown Sioux Falls Business Improvement District
   
37.105   Creation
   
37.106   Boundaries
   
37.107   Resolutions of intent
   
37.108   Public hearing
   
37.109   Purposes
   
37.110   Special assessment
   
37.111   Exemptions
   
37.112   Reduced assessments
   
37.113   Lodging establishment occupation tax imposed
   
37.114   Duty to account for complimentary rooms
   
37.115   Computation and collection of occupational tax
   
37.116   Statement required along with occupational tax payment
   
37.117   Payment of fees
   
37.118   Costs incurred by city in administering occupational tax
   
37.119   Payment of occupational tax proceeds
   
37.120   Severability
Property Tax Rebate Criteria
   
37.135   General
   
37.136   Compliance with state law
   
37.137   Taxes to be paid
   
37.138   Payment by December 31
Abatement or Refund of Assessment
   
37.150   Abatement or refund of invalid, inequitable or unjust assessment
   Retail Sales and Service Tax and Use Tax Refund
   
37.165   Definitions
   
37.166   Refund of retail sales and service tax and use tax on capital assets
   
37.167   Eligible projects
   
37.168   [Reserved]
   
37.169   Application for refund
   
37.170   Amount of refund
   
37.171   Submission of returns and payment
   
37.172   Payment of amount withheld
   
37.173   Improper return
   
37.174   Appeals
   
37.175   Appropriations
Experience Sioux Falls Business Improvement District
   
37.190   Establishment of district
   
37.191   Boundaries of district
   
37.192   Purpose of district
   
37.193   Occupational tax imposed
   
37.194   Duty to account for complimentary rooms
   
37.195   Computation and collection of occupational tax
   
37.196   Statement required along with occupational tax payment
   
37.197   Payment of fees
   
37.198   Costs incurred by city in administering occupational tax and
collection of delinquent assessments
   
37.199   Payment of occupational tax proceeds to Experience Sioux Falls
   
37.200   Board of directors and officers
   
37.201   Severability
Tax Incremental Districts
   
37.216   Authority and purpose
   
37.217   Application
   
37.218   Fees and cost recovery
   
37.219   Evaluation, documents, and presentation
   
37.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   City council, see
ch. 30
   City organizations, see
ch. 32
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Revenues and special funds, see §
36.002
   Storm drainage fee, see §
51.100
   Utility rates and charges, see
ch. 51
Statutory reference:
   Use tax, see SDCL ch. 10-46
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX
§ 37.001 IMPOSITION OF RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX AND EXEMPTIONS THEREFROM.
   There is hereby imposed as a city retail occupational sales and service tax
upon the privilege of engaging in business a tax of 1% on the gross receipts of
all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the city and county,
who are subject to the state retail occupational sales and service tax, SDCL
ch. 10-45.
(1992 Code, § 39-16) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979; Ord. 96-82, passed 8-23-
1982; Ord. 114-82, passed 11-1-1982; Ord. 78-87, passed 9-14-1987)
§ 37.002 IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX.
   (a)   There is hereby imposed as a city retail occupational sales and
service tax upon the privilege of engaging in business, in addition to the tax
imposed by §
37.001, a tax measured by 1%of the gross receipts of all persons engaged in
business within the jurisdiction of the city and county, who are subject to the
state retail occupational sales and service tax, SDCL ch. 10-45, and acts
amendatory thereto.
   (b)   Any revenues received under division (a) above shall be deposited to
the city treasury in a fund designated for the capital improvements as outlined
within §
36.034 and defined as capital by the city’s accounting manual, debt retirement
and furniture, fixtures and equipment (“FF&E”) on new construction and transfer
to a nongovernmental fund to provide funding for the same.
(1992 Code, § 39-16.1) (Ord. 103-83, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 132-84, passed 10-
22-1984; Ord. 90-85, passed 10-28-1985; Ord. 78-87, passed 9-14-1987; Ord. 46-
88, passed 6-20-1988; Ord. 46-89, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 99-91, passed 12-23-
1991; Ord. 101-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 70-03, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 14-04,
passed 2-9-2004; Ord. 82-05, passed 8-5-2005; Ord. 152-06, passed 11-20-2006;
Ord. 116-08, passed 9-15-2008)
Editor’s note:
   It should be noted that notwithstanding any provision of Ord. 14-04 to the
contrary, the second penny sales use tax of .92% established pursuant to Ord.
70-03 and codified in §§
37.002 and
37.021 has been in effect from and after January 1, 2004, to the current date,
and shall remain at that rate until changed by duly adopted action by the city
council.
§ 37.003 SPECIAL TAX RATES.
   Notwithstanding the rate of tax established in §§
37.001 and
37.002, from and after March 1, 1992, the rate of tax upon sales of leases or
rentals of hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations within the
city for periods of less than 28 consecutive days; sales of alcoholic beverages
as defined in SDCL 35-1-1; sales of establishments where the public is invited
to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared food for immediate consumption;
ticket sales or admissions to places of amusement, athletic or cultural events
is 3%. Any revenues received from the tax imposed in this section in excess of
2%, but not more than 3%, shall be used only for the purpose of land
acquisition, architectural fees, construction costs, zoo maintenance and
operational expenses, and payment for an entertainment center and a convention
center, including maintenance, staffing and operations of these facilities and
the promotion and advertising of the city, its facilities, attractions and
activities.
(1992 Code, § 39-17) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979; Ord. 99-91, passed 12-23-
1991; Ord. 150-95, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 79-10, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 37.004 IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL TAX.
   (a)   From and after January 1, 1996, there is hereby imposed in addition to
the taxes imposed by §§
37.001,
37.002 and
37.003, an additional 1% tax upon the gross receipts of all leases or rentals
of hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging within the city for periods of less
than 28 consecutive days.
   (b)   All revenues received under this section shall be used for funding
Experience Sioux Falls, a South Dakota nonprofit corporation as the Destination
Marketing Organization (DMO) and Convention & Visitors Bureau (CVB) for the
City of Sioux Falls.
(1992 Code, § 39-17.1) (Ord. 150-95, passed 12-4-1995; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
202
§ 37.005 COLLECTION.
   The tax imposed in this subchapter shall be collected by the state
department of revenue in accordance with the same rules and regulations
applicable to all other state sales tax and under any additional rules and
regulations as the state secretary of revenue shall lawfully prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 39-18) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979; Ord. 150-95, passed 12-4-
1995)
§ 37.006 SPECIAL RATE FOR VENDING RECEIPTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the rate of city
sales tax on the gross receipts from vending machines, including but not
limited to pinball machines, video games, phonographs and all other mechanical
devices for amusement, shall be limited to 1% of the gross receipts.
(1992 Code, § 39-19.1) (Ord. 12-84, passed 1-23-1984)
§ 37.007 INTERPRETATION.
   It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied
under this subchapter that the subchapter shall be interpreted and construed in
the same manner as all sections of the State Retail Occupational Sales and
Service Act, SDCL ch. 10-45, and acts amendatory thereof, and that this shall
be considered a similar tax except for the rate of that tax.
(1992 Code, § 39-20) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979)
USE TAX
§ 37.020 IMPOSITION.
   There is hereby imposed a city excise tax upon the privilege of the use,
storage and consumption, within the jurisdiction of the city and county of
tangible personal property purchased from and after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived at 1% upon all transactions for
use, storage and consumption which are subject to the State Use Tax Act, SDCL
ch. 10-46, and acts amendatory thereof.
(1992 Code, § 39-47) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979; Ord. 78-87, passed 9-14-
1987)
§ 37.021 IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL TAX.
   (a)   There is hereby imposed as a city excise tax upon the privilege of the
use, storage and consumption, within the jurisdiction of the city and county,
of tangible personal property purchased from and after the effective date of
the ordinance from which this section is derived, in addition to the tax
provided in §
37.020, a tax at 1% upon all transactions or use, storage and consumption which
are subject to the State Use Tax Act, SDCL ch. 10-46, and acts amendatory
thereof.
   (b)   Any revenue received under division (a) above shall be deposited to
the city treasury in a fund designated for the capital improvements as outlined
within §
36.034, and defined as capital by the city’s accounting manual, debt
retirement, furniture, fixtures and equipment (“FF&E”) on new construction and
transfer to a nongovernmental fund to provide funding for the same.
(1992 Code, § 39-47.1) (Ord. 103-83, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 78-87, passed 9-
14-1987; Ord. 46-88, passed 6-20-1988; Ord. 67-88, passed 7-25-1988; Ord. 46-
89, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. 70-03, passed 8-4-2003; Ord. 14-04, passed 2-9-2004;
Ord. 152-06, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 116-08, passed 9-15-2008)
Editor’s note:
   It should be noted that notwithstanding any provision of Ord. 14-04 to the
contrary, the second penny sales use tax of .92% established pursuant to Ord.
70-03 and codified in §§
37.002 and
37.021 has been in effect from and after January 1, 2004, to the current date,
and shall remain at that rate until changed by duly adopted action by the city
council.
§ 37.022 COLLECTION.
   The tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL ch. 10-52 and
acts amendatory thereof, and shall be collected by the state department of
revenue in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the
state sales tax and use tax and under any additional rules and regulations as
the state commissioner of revenue shall lawfully prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 39-48) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979)
§ 37.023 INTERPRETATION.
   It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied
under this subchapter that the subchapter shall be interpreted and construed in
the same manner as all sections of the state use tax, SDCL ch. 10-46, and acts
amendatory thereof, and that this shall be considered as a similar tax except
for the rate of that tax.
(1992 Code, § 39-49) (Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979)
URBAN AND RURAL SERVICE DISTRICTS
§ 37.035 SERVICE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority granted in SDCL ch. 9-21A, the city is hereby
divided in area into an urban service district and a rural service district
constituting separate taxing districts for the purpose of levying all city ad
valorem property taxes, except those levied for the payment of bonds.
(1992 Code, § 39-80) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984)
§ 37.036 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT; CRITERIA FOR LANDS INCLUDED.
   The rural service district shall include only those platted or unplatted
lands as in the judgment of the city council are rural in character, are used
or usable for agriculture, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or
urban residential purposes. The rural service district may include lands which
are not contiguous to one another.
(1992 Code, § 39-81) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984)
§ 37.037 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT; LANDS DESCRIBED.
   The rural service district shall consist of those (platted) or (unplatted)
or (both) lands described in §
37.038, all of which lands are rural in character, are used or usable for
agriculture, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban
residential purposes.
(1992 Code, § 39-82) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984; Ord. 65-09, passed 7-6-
2009)
§ 37.038 LANDS INCLUDED IN RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
   1)   SE1/4 NW1/4 S of I-90 and S1/2 NE1/4 S I-90 and W of I-29 and NE1/
4 SE1/4 W of I-29 Unplatted 25-102-50, Minnehaha County, SD;
   2)   Tract 2 (ex Redstone Village Addition) Cloverleaf Addition and Tract 1
Cloverleaf Addition 30-102-49 to the City of Sioux Falls, Minnehaha County, SD;
   3)   SE1/4 NW1/4 (ex H1 and H2) and NE1/4 SW1/4 (ex Skyline Heights and H2)
and (ex Redstone Village Addition) Unplatted 30-102-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   4)   Tract 1 Great Meadow Addition to the City of Sioux Falls, 30-102-49,
Minnehaha County, SD;
   5)   SE1/4 (ex H1, H3, H4, H5, H6, H7, H8, H9 and ex Pinnacle Point
Addition) 36-102-50, Minnehaha County, SD;
   6)   Tract 1 (ex Lots H1, H2 and H3) North Ridge Addition to the City of
Sioux Falls 1-101-50, Minnehaha County, SD;
   7)   N1/2 NW1/4 including FE1, FE2, FE3 (ex Lots H1, H2, H3 and H4 and ex
Sanford Sports Complex South Addn) 6-101-49 Sioux Falls City Unplatted,
Minnehaha County, SD;
   8)   N1/2 NE1/4 including FE1 (ex 2.24 acres SE Corner and Lot E-1 Co. Aud.
Sub. and ex H1 and ex Sanford Sports Complex South Addn) 6-101-49 Sioux Falls
City Unplatted, Minnehaha County, SD;
   9)   S1/2 NE1/4 (ex 26.25 A SE corner and ex Sanford Sports Complex South
Addn) 6-101-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   10)   N1/2 SW1/4 including FE1, FE2 and FE3 (ex Lot H1, H2, H2, H3 and ex
S360' E755' W863' and ex Sencore Addition and ex Sanford Sports Complex South
Addn) 6-101-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   11)   NW1/4 SE1/4 (ex 15.45 acres SE1/4 and ex Sanford Sports Complex South
Addn) 6-101-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   12)   NW1/4 NW1/4 (ex H1, H2, H2, H3, H3 and Ex. Legacy Farm North Addition)
Unplatted 13-101-50, Minnehaha County, SD;
   13)   NE1/4 NW1/4 (ex Lot H-1 and H3 and Legacy Farm North 2nd Addn) and Lot
A in Lot H1 E1/2 NW1/4 13-101-50, and Lot A in Lot H1 SW1/4 12-101-50,
Minnehaha County, SD;
   14)   SE1/4 SW1/4 (ex Lot H2) and NE1/4 SW1/4 (ex Railway and RD and ex Lot
H1 and H2 and Ex. Legacy North Farm Addn and ex Legacy North Farm 2nd Addn) and
Pt NE1/4 (ex Lot H2 and ex Lot 8 Blk 2) W of I-29, 13-101-50, Minnehaha County,
SD;
   15)   N3/4 SE1/4 East of I-229 (ex Wexford Addn), 3-101-49, Minnehaha
County, SD;
   16)   N1/2 Vac E. 34th St. N. and Vac Section Line ROW Lying Adj. and NW1/4
(ex H-1, H-2, H-3, and Wexford Addn) 2-101-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   17)   NE1/4 (ex H1-H3 and ex E810.15' S727.91') but including E280' S316.96'
SE1/4 NE1/4 Unplatted 2-101-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   18)   Part SE1/4 NE1/4 and SE1/4 lying S and E of BNSF Railroad (ex H, R and
PE lots and ex C&NW Railroad and ex Loap Addition and ex Lined Snake Addition
and ex Tracts 2-4) 35-102-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   19)   Tract 2 Pana Tracts (ex Pana Addition and ex Lot H2) SW1/4 and Gov't.
Lots 3 and 4, 8-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   20)   E1/2 (ex Lots H1, H2 and Leih's Addition) Rolling Hill's Subd, (ex Lot
H-1 and part sold E1/2) 8-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   21)   NE1/4 (ex RR ROW and ex Lots H-1, H-2 and H-3 Therin, and ex Sanford
Research Park Addn) 18-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   22)   N1/2 SE1/4 (ex Lot H1, H2 and H4 and Sanford Research Park Addn) 18-
100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   23)   W650' (ex N1005' and Lot H-1) N1/2 NW1/4, 17-100-50, Lincoln County,
SD;
   24)   Tract 1 Sherr-Al Estates Addition to the City of Sioux Falls, 17-100-
50, Lincoln County, SD;
   25)   N1/2 S1/2 NW1/4 (Ex Lot H1) 17-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   26)   S1/2 S1/2 NW1/4 and N1/2 SW1/4 and N13' of W559' of E384' S1/2 SW1/4
(ex Lot H1) 17-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   27)   Tract 5 Beal's Addition to the City of Sioux Falls, 17-100-50, Lincoln
County, SD;
   28)   NW1/4 (ex H1, H2 and Tract A Prairie View Addition and Avera McKennan
South) 16-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   29)   N1/2 SE1/4 (ex E525' N275' and ex W495' E1020' N395' NE1/4 SE1/4 and
ex W185' E525' S120' N395' NE1/4 SE1/4) and (ex South Cliff Grasslands
Addition) and N570' SE1/4 SE1/4 14-100-50 ex W495' E1020' N395' NE1/4 SE1/4 and
ex W185' E525' S120' N395' NE1/4 SE1/4) 14-100-50, Lincoln County, SD;
   30)   S1344.99' NE1/4 (ex E50' Marion Rd ROW and ex H-lots and University
Hills Addition), and a portion of Vac Northview Lane ROW by Res 25-23 Lying Adj
to 35-102-50, Minnehaha County, SD;
   31)   Tract 1 Golden Triangle Addition to the City of Sioux Falls, 8-100-50,
Lincoln County, SD;
   32)   NE1/4 SW1/4 (ex I-29 Lake Park Addition) 24-101-50, Minnehaha County,
SD;
   33)   E1/2 SW1/4 (ex Nelson's Addition) and W1/2 SE1/4 (ex Nelson's Addition
and H Lots) and W30 Acres (ex H-1) SE1/4 SE1/4 32-101-48, Minnehaha County, SD;
   34)   SW1/4 NW1/4 and W1/2 SW1/4 (ex Krull’s Tracts and ex H-1, H-2, H-3)
32-101-48, Minnehaha County, SD;
   35)   SE1/4 (ex Majestic Village Addn and ex Krull's Addition and ex Lynx
Addn and ex Lots A Inlot H1, H-1 thru H10) 31-101-48, Minnehaha County, SD;
   36)   Lots 1-10 Block 1 and Lots 1-7 Block 2 Fernyhoughs Addition and E Pt.
Tract 2 NW1/4 (ex. H1) and Tract 1 NW1/4 (ex. 1.08 RD and ex. E Lots) and NW1/
4 NE1/4 (ex. H1 and H2) and NW1/4 SW1/4 NE1/4 and N1/2 NE1/4 SW1/4 NE1/4 and E
portion Lot E1 N1/2 NW1/4 and Lot E1 Tracts 1 and 2 CAS NW1/4, 10-101-49,
Minnehaha County, SD;
   37)   SW1/4 SW1/4 (ex. Oliver Tract and Hein's Addition and ex. S1/2 Gov't.
Lot 2 W of Hein's Addition and N of ROW of Tract 1) unplatted 18-101-48 and
Tract 1 and N150' W300' Tract 3 Oliver's Tracts SW1/4 SW1/4 unplatted 18-101-48
and ICR abandoned ROW SW1/4 unplatted 18-101-48 and Tracts 1, 2 and 5 Hein's
Addition all within 18-101-48, Minnehaha County, SD;
   38)   Government Lots 1 and 2 (ex Lots H1 and H2 and Lot P1) in the SE1/
2 NE1/4, 9-100-49, Lincoln County, SD;
   39)   Tract 1, Nelson's Addition, 32-101-48, Minnehaha County, SD;
   40)   Tracts 1 and 3, Shields 1st Addition in Government Lot 4 and Tract 1,
and Reiter Addn Tract 1, 7-100-49 and Shield's 2nd Addition in Government Lots
3 and 4, ex. H-1 and ex Rowe on 57th Addn, in the NW1/4, 7-100-49, Lincoln
County, SD;
   41)   S1/2 Vac E 34th St N and Vac Section Line Row Lying Adj and S1/2 (Ex
Wexford Addn and Ex Platted Pts and H-1 and H-2) 2-101-49, and Tract 14 Rogness
Addn S1/2 S1/2 S1/2 03-101-49, Minnehaha County, SD;
   42)   Government Lot 3 NW1/4 and the N1/2 NE1/4 SW1/4 of 8-100-49 (except
.05 acres road and Lot H-1 and Harvest Creek Addn), Lincoln County, SD;
   43)   W1/2 NE1/4 (ex Leubecher 2nd Addn, Southloop Addn and Lot H-1) 18-100-
49, Minnehaha County, SD.
(1992 Code, § 39-82A) (Ord. 65-09, passed 7-6-2009; Ord. 111-09, passed 12-21-
2009; Ord. 75-10, passed 11-1-2010; Ord. 27-11, passed 5-2-2011; Ord. 95-11,
passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 80-16, passed 7-5-2016; Ord. 111-17, passed 11-21-2017;
Ord. 9-20, passed 2-3-2020; Ord. 99-21, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 16-23, passed 3-
21-2023; Ord. 34-24, passed 4-16-2024; Ord. 20-25, passed 5-6-2025)
§ 37.039 LANDS INCLUDED IN URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT.
   The urban service district shall include all lands within the boundaries of
the city which are not included in the rural service district.
(1992 Code, § 39-83) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984)
§ 37.040 AGRICULTURAL LAND ANNEXED; LIMITATION ON MILL LEVY AND ASSESSED VALUE.
   The tax levy and assessed value on the agricultural land annexed shall not
exceed the average tax levy and average assessed value on unannexed
agricultural land in adjoining townships in the county so long as the annexed
land remains rural property and is included in the rural service district.
(1992 Code, § 39-84) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984)
§ 37.041 PLATTING OR CONSTRUCTION IN RURAL DISTRICT.
   The board or officer of the city approving the plat or building permit or
having knowledge of the change in circumstances shall report the change to the
city council which shall make and enter an order transferring the parcel from
the rural service district to the urban service district, whenever any parcel
of land included within the rural service district:
   (a)   Is platted in whole or in part;
   (b)   Is the subject of an application for a permit for the construction of
a commercial, industrial or urban residential development or improvement to be
situated on the parcel or any part thereof; or
   (c)   Otherwise fails to meet the criteria as set forth in §
37.037.
(1992 Code, § 39-85) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984)
§ 37.042 FILING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT OR ORDER WITH COUNTY AUDITOR.
   The city finance director is hereby directed to file with the appropriate
county auditor a certified copy of every amendment to §§
37.035 through
37.042 which is adopted by the city council.
(1992 Code, § 39-86) (Ord. 89-84, passed 5-21-1984)
REDUCED TAXATION FOR NEW INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES, ADDITIONS THERETO WITHIN THE
CITY
§ 37.055 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city
pursuant to SDCL 10-6-35.4.
(1992 Code, § 39-121) (Ord. 59-87, passed 7-27-1987)
§ 37.056 APPLICABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (a)   The term INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES OR ADDITIONS THERETO as used in this
subchapter shall include, but not be limited to, the following uses:
      (1)   Apparel and textile manufacturing;
      (2)   Wood, furniture and manufacturing;
      (3)   Lumber wholesaling;
      (4)   Printing and publishing plants;
      (5)   Warehousing and distribution (no retail uses);
      (6)   Electronics assembly and manufacturing;
      (7)   Scientific research and development, including incubation of start-
up technology businesses;
      (8)   Other light pollution-free manufacturing facilities;
      (9)   Food, agricultural processing, stockyards, rendering and milk
processing plants;
      (10)   Paper, pulp and wood processing and manufacturing;
      (11)   Chemical, petroleum and rubber manufacturing and distribution;
      (12)   Stone, glass, clay, brick and cement manufacturing;
      (13)   Primary metal and smelting;
      (14)   Metal fabricating and manufacturing;
      (15)   Distillation and purification plants;
      (16)   Manufacture and storage of electrical transformers;
      (17)   Data processing, hosting and related services including payroll
services and financial transactions processing; and
      (18)   Insurance underwriting, premium processing and policyholder
service facilities operated by domestic or foreign insurers or by other
entities (other than licensed agents) who provide these services to insurers.
   (b)   This subchapter shall apply to those new industrial structures or
additions thereto that are commenced after August 21, 1987.
(1992 Code, § 39-122) (Ord. 59-87, passed 7-27-1987; Ord. 85-05, passed 8-15-
2005)
§ 37.057 CALCULATION OF TAX.
   (a)   All new qualifying structures, or additions or renovation or
reconstruction of existing qualifying structures, which have a full and true
value of $300,000 or more, added to real property shall be taxed pursuant to
the following formula during the five tax years subsequent to the completion of
their construction:
      (1)   The full and true value of the structures, additions, renovation or
reconstruction shall be determined in the usual manner by the director of
equalization;
      (2)   For the first tax year following construction, no portion of the
taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (3)   For the second tax year following construction, 20% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (4)   For the third tax year following construction, 40% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (5)   For the fourth tax year following construction, 60% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes; and
      (6)   For the fifth tax year following construction, 80% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes.
   (b)   The taxable value of the structures or additions during any of the
five tax years subsequent to the completion of their construction may not be
less than their taxable value in the year preceding the first year of the tax
years following construction.
   (c)   For the sixth and all subsequent tax years following construction, the
structures or additions shall be taxed in the same manner as all other similar
industrial property within the city.
   (d)   Any structures, additions, renovation or reconstruction, the
construction of which is only partially completed on any assessment date, shall
be assessed for taxation purposes in the usual manner.
   (e)   The new construction tax incentive shall be discontinued if the
business use changes to a nonqualifying use during the five-year period so that
it would be ineligible under the new use.
(1992 Code, § 39-123) (Ord. 59-87, passed 7-27-1987; Ord. 85-05, passed 8-15-
2005; Ord. 135-06, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.058 APPLICATION FOR REDUCED TAXATION ON NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to claim reduced taxation on new construction
shall make application to the planning and development services department on
or before October 1 in the year in which the project is completed and shall
first appear on the tax rolls as a completed or modified structure. The
application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city. Upon planning
and development services' approval of the application, the staff shall notify
the applicant within 30 days stating whether the facility is eligible to
receive reduced taxation.
   (b)   In January, the year following completion of the project, planning and
development services will certify those improvements which qualify for reduced
taxation to the director of equalization in the county in which the real
property is taxed. New construction tax incentives are not assignable or
transferable, except as collateral or security pursuant to SDCL ch. 57A-9,
Secured Transactions.
(1992 Code, § 39-127) (Ord. 135-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 32-08, passed 3-3-
2008; Ord. 64-20, passed 8-4-2020)
REDUCED TAXATION FOR NEW INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES, ADDITIONS THERETO
WITHIN DOWNTOWN CENTER DESIGNATED URBAN RENEWAL AREA
§ 37.070 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the
municipalities pursuant to SDCL 10-6-35.4.
(1992 Code, § 39-128) (Ord. 69-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 35-88, passed 5-16-
1988; Ord. 136-06, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.071 APPLICABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall apply only to those new industrial or commercial
structures or additions thereto, or renovation or reconstruction of existing
structures located within the city downtown center designated urban renewal
area. It shall apply to new structures or additions thereto on which
construction has been commenced after August 1, 1987. It shall also apply to
renovations or reconstruction on which construction has commenced after June
30, 1988.
(1992 Code, § 39-129) (Ord. 69-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 26-88, passed 4-18-
1988; Ord. 35-88, passed 5-16-1988; Ord. 136-06, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.072 CALCULATION OF TAX.
   (a)   All new industrial or commercial structures, or additions to existing
structures, or renovation or reconstruction of existing structures, which new
structures or additions or renovation or reconstruction have a full and true
value of $50,000 or more, added to the real property and located within the
city downtown center designated urban renewal area, as defined by SDCL 11-8-4,
shall be taxed pursuant to the following formula during the five tax years
subsequent to the completion of their construction:
      (1)   The full and true value of the structures, additions, renovation or
reconstruction shall be determined in the usual manner by the director of
equalization;
      (2)   For the first tax year following construction, no portion of the
taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (3)   For the second tax year following construction, 20% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (4)   For the third tax year following construction, 40% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (5)   For the fourth tax year following construction, 60% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes; and
      (6)   For the fifth tax year following construction, 80% of the taxable
value shall be used for taxation purposes.
   (b)   The taxable value of the structures, additions, renovation or
reconstruction during any of the five tax years subsequent to the completion of
their construction may not be less than their taxable value in the year
preceding the first year of the tax years following construction.
   (c)   For the sixth and all subsequent tax years following construction, the
structures, additions, renovation or reconstruction shall be taxed in the same
manner as all other similar industrial or commercial property within the city.
   (d)   Any structures, additions, renovation or reconstruction, the
construction of which is only partially completed on any assessment date, shall
be assessed for taxation purposes in the usual manner.
   (e)   The new construction tax incentive shall be discontinued if the
business use changes to a nonqualifying use during the five-year period so that
it would be ineligible under the new use.
(1992 Code, § 39-130) (Ord. 69-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 26-88, passed 4-18-
1988; Ord. 35-88, passed 5-16-1988; Ord. 136-06, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 37.073 APPLICATION FOR REDUCED TAXATION ON NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to claim reduced taxation on new construction
shall make application to the planning and development services department on
or before October 1 in the year in which the project is completed and shall
first appear on the tax rolls as a completed or modified structure. The
application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city. Upon planning
and development services' approval of the application, the staff shall notify
the applicant within 30 days stating whether the facility is eligible to
receive reduced taxation.
   (b)   In January, the year following completion of the project, planning and
development services will certify those improvements which qualify for reduced
taxation to the director of equalization in the county in which the real
property is taxed. New construction tax incentives are not assignable or
transferable, except as collateral or security pursuant to SDCL ch. 57A-9,
Secured Transactions.
(1992 Code, § 39-131) (Ord. 136-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 32-08, passed 3-3-
2008; Ord. 64-20, passed 8-4-2020)
REDUCED TAXATION FOR NEW HOUSING STRUCTURES, ADDITIONS THERETO
§ 37.080 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the
municipalities pursuant to SDCL 10-6-137.5 and 10-6-138.
(Ord. 41-24, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 37.081 APPLICABILITY AND APPLICATION FOR REDUCED TAXATION.
   (a)   This subchapter shall apply only to those new commercial residential
structures or additions that meet the criteria for qualifying projects
identified in §
37.083.
   (b)   Any person desiring to claim reduced taxation shall make an
application to the planning and development services department on or before
the date a building permit is issued for the construction of a structure or
facility. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city
and include a copy of the site and building plans.
   (c)   Upon approval of the application, the planning and development
services department shall notify the applicant stating whether the facility is
eligible to receive reduced taxation.
   (d)   In January, the year following completion of the project, planning and
development services department will certify those improvements which qualify
for reduced taxation to the director of equalization in the county in which the
real property is taxed. New construction tax incentives are not assignable or
transferable, except as collateral or security pursuant to SDCL ch. 57A-9,
Secured Transactions.
   (e)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning director under this
subchapter may file an appeal according to the procedure set forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046.
(Ord. 41-24, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 37.082 CALCULATION OF TAX.
   (a)   All new Qualifying Projects, which have a full and true value of
$500,000 or more, added to real property, shall be taxed pursuant to the
following formula during the six tax years subsequent to the completion of
their construction:
      (1)   The full and true value of the structure shall be determined in the
usual manner by the director of equalization;
      (2)   For the first and second tax years following construction, 25% of
the taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (3)   For the third and fourth tax year following construction, 50% of
the taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (4)   For the fifth and sixth tax year following construction, 75% of the
taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes; and
   (b)   The taxable value of the structures or additions during any of the
seven tax years subsequent to the completion of their construction may not be
less than their taxable value in the year preceding the first year of the tax
years following construction.
   (c)   For the seventh and all subsequent tax years following construction,
the structures and additions, shall be taxed in the same manner as all other
similar commercial residential property within the city.
   (d)   Any structures or additions, the construction of which is only
partially completed on any assessment date, shall be assessed for taxation
purposes in the usual manner.
   (e)   The new construction tax incentive shall be discontinued if the
project use changes to a nonqualifying use during the seven-year period so that
it would be ineligible under the new use.
(Ord. 41-24, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 37.083 QUALIFYING PROJECTS.
   Any project making a claim for reduced taxation to the Planning and
Development Services Department must meet one of the following criteria:
   (a)   An approved Low Income Housing Tax Credit Project approved by the
South Dakota Housing Development Authority (SDHDA).
   (b)   An approved housing project with HOME Investment Partnerships Program
(HOME) funding included in the project.
   (c)   Ten percent of the units in the project assigned Project-based
vouchers (PBVs) in coordination with Sioux Falls Public Housing Agency.
   (d)   Twenty-five percent of total units included in the project must capped
at or below "fair market rent" as published annually the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
   (e)   Other "Available Development Programs" as outlined by SDHDA.
   (f)   Projects that receive City of Sioux Falls Housing Program funding and
must have a minimum of 20% of units considered affordable (65% Rent Limit).
(Ord. 41-24, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 37.084 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL. Any residential structure containing four or more
dwelling units.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association,
cooperative, nonprofit development corporation, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   QUALIFYING PROJECTS. Any commercial residential structures that meet the
applicability referenced in §
37.083.
(Ord. 41-24, passed 5-14-2024)
REDUCED TAXATION FOR NEW MIDTOWN MIXED-USE STRUCTURES, ADDITIONS THERETO
§ 37.085 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the
municipalities pursuant to SDCL 10-6-137.5 and 10-6-138.
(1992 Code, § 39-134) (Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 64-20, passed 8-4-
2020; Ord. 40-24, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 37.086 APPLICABILITY AND APPLICATION FOR REDUCED TAXATION.
   (a)   This subchapter shall apply only to those new commercial residential
structures or additions that meet the requirements of the Midtown Mixed Use–Low
Density (MMU1), Midtown Mixed Use–Medium Density (MMU2), or Midtown Mixed
Use–High Density (MMU3) zoning districts.
   (b)   Any person desiring to claim reduced taxation shall make an
application to the Planning and Development Services Department on or before
the date a building permit is issued for the construction of a structure or
facility. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city
and include a copy of the site and building plans.
   (c)   Upon approval of the application, the planning and development
services department shall notify the applicant stating whether the facility is
eligible to receive reduced taxation.
   (d)   In January, the year following completion of the project, planning and
development services department will certify those improvements which qualify
for reduced taxation to the director of equalization in the county in which the
real property is taxed. New construction tax incentives are not assignable or
transferable, except as collateral or security pursuant to SDCL ch. 57A-9,
Secured Transactions.
   (e)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning director under this
subchapter may file an appeal according to the procedure set forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046.
(Ord. 40-24, passed 5-14-24)
§ 37.087 CALCULATION OF TAX.
   (a)   All new qualifying Midtown Mixed-Use structures or additions, which
have a full and true value of $500,000 or more, added to real property, shall
be taxed pursuant to the following formula during the six tax years subsequent
to the completion of their construction:
      (1)   The full and true value of the structure shall be determined in the
usual manner by the director of equalization;
      (2)   For the first and second tax years following construction, 25% of
the taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (3)   For the third and fourth tax year following construction, 50% of
the taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes;
      (4)   For the fifth and sixth tax year following construction, 75% of the
taxable value shall be used for taxation purposes; and
   (b)   The taxable value of the structures or additions, during any of the
seven tax years subsequent to the completion of their construction may not be
less than their taxable value in the year preceding the first year of the tax
years following construction.
   (c)   For the seventh and all subsequent tax years following construction,
the structures or additions, shall be taxed in the same manner as all other
similar commercial residential property within the city.
   (d)   Any structures or additions, the construction of which is only
partially completed on any assessment date, shall be assessed for taxation
purposes in the usual manner.
   (e)   The new construction tax incentive shall be discontinued if the
project use changes to a nonqualifying use during the seven-year period so that
it would be ineligible under the new use.
(Ord. 40-24, passed 5-14-24)
§ 37.088 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL. Any residential structure containing four or more
dwelling units.
   MIDTOWN MIXED-USE STRUCTURES. Any commercial residential structures that
meet the applicability referenced in §
37.086.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association,
cooperative, nonprofit development corporation, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
(Ord. 40-24, passed 5-14-24)
§ 37.089 [RESERVED].
§ 37.090 DISCRETIONARY FORMULA REPORT.
   In July of each year, planning and development services department shall
submit a report to the city council of all eligible completed new construction
projects which qualified for the discretionary formula beginning in December of
2008. The report will include the description of each qualified property, the
base full and true taxable value, the new adjusted full value of new
construction and improvements and the amount of discretionary loss of taxable
value as defined in city ordinance of 100%, 80%, 60%, 40% or 20% for each year
of the eligible tax abatement.
(1992 Code, § 39-139) (Ord. 32-08, passed 3-3-2008; Ord. 64-20, passed 8-4-
2020)
DOWNTOWN SIOUX FALLS BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 37.105 CREATION.
   The Downtown Sioux Falls Business Improvement District is hereby created
pursuant to the provisions of SDCL ch. 9-55.
(1992 Code, § 39-141) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 142-22, passed 12-20-2022)
§ 37.106 BOUNDARIES.
   The business improvement district created in this subchapter shall have the
following boundaries:
   Beginning on the north right-of-way line of Third Street at its intersection
with the west right-of-way line of Minnesota Avenue; then east along the north
right-of-way line of Third Street to its intersection with the west right-of-
way line of the alley located between Dakota Avenue and Main Avenue; then north
along the west right-of-way line of the alley located between Dakota Avenue and
Main Avenue to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of First
Street; then east along the north right-of-way line of First Street to its
intersection with the west right-of-way line of Main Avenue; then north along
the west right-of-way line of Main Avenue to its intersection with the south
property line of Tower Park; then east approximately 591 feet to the west
right-of-way line of Phillips Avenue; then north along the west right-of-way
line of Phillips Avenue to its intersection with the north right-of-way line of
McClellan Street; then east along the north right-of-way line of McClellan
Street to its merging point with the north right-of-way line of Falls Park
Drive; then east along the north right-of-way line of Falls Park Drive to its
intersection with the west right-of-way line of Weber Avenue; then south along
the west right-of-way line of Weber Avenue to its intersection with the south
right-of-way line of Sixth Street; then east along the south right-of-way line
of Sixth Street to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Nesmith
Avenue; then south along the west right-of-way line of Nesmith Avenue to its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of Seventh Street; then east
along the south right-of-way line of Seventh Street to its intersection with
the west right-of-way line of Franklin Avenue; then south along the west right-
of-way line of Franklin Avenue to its intersection with the south right-of-way
line of the former Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad; then south
approximately 755 feet to an intersection with the west right-of-way line of
the Burlington Northern Railroad; then southeast along the west right-of-way
line of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the south
right-of-way line of 14th Street; then west along the south right-of-way line
of 14th Street to its intersection with the east right-of-way line of Minnesota
Avenue; then north along the east right-of-way line of Minnesota Avenue to its
intersection with the north right-of-way line of Third Street being the point
of beginning, or as otherwise changed pursuant to SDCL 9-55-11.
(1992 Code, § 39-142) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 07-06, passed 1-3-
2006; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 80-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 37.107 RESOLUTIONS OF INTENT.
   (a)   A resolution of intent, Resolution No. 275-89, for the creation of the
business improvement district was adopted on October 23, 1989.
   (b)   A resolution of intent, Resolution No. 13-12, allowing for the use of
a lodging establishment occupation tax within the district was adopted on March
12, 2012.
   (c)   A resolution of intent, Resolution No. 69-23, allowing for the use of
a lodging establishment occupation tax within the district was adopted on
August 2, 2023.
(1992 Code, § 39-143) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 84-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 37.108 PUBLIC HEARING.
   A public hearing on the formation of the business improvement district was
held in city council chambers at 224 West Ninth Street, Sioux falls, South
Dakota on October 23, 1989.
(1992 Code, § 39-144) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
§ 37.109 PURPOSES.
   The purposes, public improvements and facilities to be included in the
business improvement district are as follows:
   (a)   The creation and implementation of a plan for improving the general
architectural design of public areas in the business improvement district
boundaries;
   (b)   The development of any activities or promotions of any events in the
business improvement district boundaries;
   (c)   Employing or contracting for personnel, including administrators, for
any improvement or promotional program allowed by law and providing for any
service necessary to carry out the purposes of the law;
   (d)   Any other project or undertaking for the betterment of the facilities
in the business improvement district boundaries, whether the project is capital
or noncapital in nature; and
   (e)   As otherwise allowed pursuant to SDCL 9-55 or law.
(1992 Code, § 39-145) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 80-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 37.110 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   Real property in the business improvement district boundaries except as
otherwise set forth in §§ 37.111 and 37.112, shall be subject to annual special
assessments as follows:
   (a)   For Improvement Value: $1.50 per $1,000 of assessed valuation of
improvements between $0 and $1,000,000, and $0.50 per $1,000 of assessed
valuation of improvements greater than $1,000,000; and
   (b)   For Land Value: $1.00 per $1,000 of assessed valuation of land between
$0 and $200,000, and $0.50 per $1,000 of assessed valuation of land greater
than $200,000.
(1992 Code, § 39-146) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 78-92, passed 8-17-
1992; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 80-11, passed 10-11-2011; Ord. 142-22,
passed 12-20-2022)
§ 37.111 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following real property in the business improvement district boundaries
shall be exempt from assessment under this subchapter:
   (a)   Real property exempt from taxation under SDCL ch. 10-4;
   (b)   Industrial property;
   (c)   Property with a zoning classification of RA-1, RA-2, and RA-3; and
   (d)   Property whose sole use is residential with two or fewer dwellings.
(1992 Code, § 39-147) (Ord. 114-89, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 07-06, passed 1-3-
2006; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 80-11, passed 10-11-2011; Ord. 13-13,
passed 4-2-2013)
§ 37.112 REDUCED ASSESSMENTS.
   Any assessment for the following real property in the business improvement
district boundaries shall be reduced as set forth herein: for multi-family
property whose sole use is residential, the amounts due under §
37.110 shall be reduced by 50%.
(1992 Code, § 39-148) (Ord. 80-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 37.113 LODGING ESTABLISHMENT OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   An occupation tax up to a maximum amount allowable per SDCL 9-55, per
night, will be imposed upon transient guests based upon rooms rented by the
hotels, motel or lodging establishments within the boundaries of the district
as enumerated in this subchapter. This occupation tax must be fair, equitable
and uniform. No occupational tax may be imposed on any transient guest who has
been offered a room by a lodging establishment on a complimentary basis whereby
no fee or rent is charged for such room. This tax rate is imposed on transient
guests as follows in conformance with Resolution(s) No. 13-12, No. 69-23, and §
37.109:
 
Address of Lodging  Per Room, Per Night Approximate Rooms in Uses of Funds
Establishment       Occupation Tax      Hotel
                                                             Those uses
201 E. Eighth St.   $2                  136                  identified by Res.
(Hilton Garden Inn)                                          13-12 and this
                                                             subchapter
                                                             Those uses
120 E. Fourth Place $2                  216                  identified by Res.
(Canopy by Hilton)                                           69-23 and this
                                                             subchapter
 
   (b)   Any additions or removals of lodging establishments for which the tax
is imposed, or changes in rates, shall be made in accordance with SDCL 9-55-16
and codified in this section.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 84-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 37.114 DUTY TO ACCOUNT FOR COMPLIMENTARY ROOMS.
   Each hotel, motel or lodging establishment must account for complimentary
rooms that are also subject to audit by the city finance director with records
to show the basis for offering the room on a complimentary basis.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 37.115 COMPUTATION AND COLLECTION OF OCCUPATIONAL TAX.
   The city finance director is authorized and directed to determine and
compute the tax in accordance with this subchapter. The occupational tax
assessed pursuant to the terms of this subchapter must be remitted by the
twentieth day of each month to the city finance director, with the remittance
to be for the previous calendar month’s tax collections. The city finance
director or any person or firm contracted by the city finance office will be
entitled to audit the books, ledgers or franchise reports of any hotel, motel
or lodging establishment subject to the terms of this subchapter, including the
right to inspect daily reports of hotels and motels so as to ensure that the
occupancy tax assessed by this subchapter is being properly remitted to the
city. The city finance director will be entitled to seek injunctive relief
against any hotel, motel or lodging establishment that does not remit the
proper amount of tax monies when due, which relief may be in the form of an
action requiring the offending hotel or motel owner to allow entry upon their
property and access to their records, computers or books so as to verify that
the hotel, motel or lodging establishment is remitting all monies it collects
pursuant to this subchapter and the laws of the state. Each hotel, motel or
lodging establishment subject to this subchapter must keep accurate records of
amounts collected from transient guests for review by the city finance director
or its designee, pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 37.116 STATEMENT REQUIRED ALONG WITH OCCUPATIONAL TAX PAYMENT.
   Any lodging establishment governed by this subchapter must sign a sworn
statement to be submitted along with the remittance of any tax imposed by this
subchapter on or before the twentieth day of each month stating as follows:
I declare, under penalty of perjury, that the above accounting of rooms rented
is accurate and the tax payment made herein is accurate to the best of my
knowledge according to my business records.
      Signed_________________ Dated_________
      Title___________________
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 37.117 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   In the event of any civil or criminal action being filed seeking collection
of any delinquent assessments, the offending hotel, motel or lodging
establishment will be responsible to pay all attorney’s fees and costs incurred
by the city in seeking payment under the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 37.118 COSTS INCURRED BY CITY IN ADMINISTERING OCCUPATIONAL TAX.
   All costs incurred by the city or the city finance office pursuant to this
subchapter will be paid from occupancy taxes collected under this subchapter.
The costs may not exceed 2.5% of the amount of tax collected annually.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 37.119 PAYMENT OF OCCUPATIONAL TAX PROCEEDS.
   Once the occupational tax has been collected, the city finance office will
subtract its administrative costs and make payment of funds to any entity for
which the city has contracted or entered into agreement for the implementation
of the activities authorized by this subchapter and Resolution(s) No. 13-12 and
No. 69-23.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 84-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 37.120 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section, clause or provision of this subchapter be declared by
the courts to be invalid, the same will not affect the validity of the
subchapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be
invalid.
(Ord. 30-12, passed 4-16-2012)
PROPERTY TAX REBATE CRITERIA
§ 37.135 GENERAL.
   When a property tax rebate is included in the city’s budget, no rebate shall
be paid unless the owner of eligible owner-occupied single-family dwelling
property has complied with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 39-150) (Ord. 48-97, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
§ 37.136 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   Property tax rebates budgeted by the city shall be paid for non-ag owner-
occupied single-family dwellings.
(1992 Code, § 39-151) (Ord. 48-97, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
§ 37.137 TAXES TO BE PAID.
   In addition to the above requirement, no city property tax rebate shall be
paid for any property for which taxes and assessments due have not been paid in
full to Minnehaha County and Lincoln County treasurers on or before October 31
of the year in which they are payable.
(1992 Code, § 39-152) (Ord. 48-97, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
§ 37.138 PAYMENT BY DECEMBER 31.
   Any authorized rebate shall be paid not later than December 31.
(1992 Code, § 39-153) (Ord. 48-97, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
ABATEMENT OR REFUND OF ASSESSMENT
§ 37.150 ABATEMENT OR REFUND OF INVALID, INEQUITABLE OR UNJUST ASSESSMENT.
   If after application, signed by the taxpayer under oath stating the reason
the assessment is invalid, inequitable or unjust, the council is satisfied
beyond a doubt that the assessment of real property described in the
application for abatement or refund is invalid, inequitable or unjust, the
council, if the application is filed no later than the first day of November of
the fourth year after which the assessment would have been delinquent, may by
resolution abate or refund all or any part thereof in excess of a valid, just,
fair and equitable assessment.
(1992 Code, § 39-160) (Ord. 48-97, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX AND USE TAX REFUND
§ 37.165 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL ASSETS. Tangible and intangible personal property which is subject
to depreciation or amortization under §§ 167 and 168 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended to the date of adoption of this ordinance.
   CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT. The date of application for a footing and
foundation or building permit for the new business facility or expanded
business facility, whichever comes first.
   DEPARTMENT. The finance department of the city.
   EXPANDED BUSINESS FACILITY. An expansion of an existing building or
structure, or a stand-alone building on the same parcel of an existing
facility, with a building permit value of not less than $5,000,000, that is
part of a project that satisfies the requirements of §
37.167, and is a single project and not an ongoing, systematic process of
upgrading, replacing, retooling, or modernizing the existing building or
structure.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The finance director of the city.
   NEW BUSINESS FACILITY. A new building or structure, with a building permit
value of not less than $10,000,000, that is part of a project that satisfies
the requirements of §
37.167.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
limited liability company, limited liability partnership, corporation, trust or
any group or combination thereof acting as a unit.
   PROJECT. The construction, equipping and furnishing of a new business
facility or expanded business facility at a single site.
   QUALIFYING EQUIPMENT. Equipment that is purchased and installed in the new
or expanded business facility and will be used in the manufacturing process for
which the facility is being constructed. This includes items that are
capitalized with the  equipment as allowed by generally accepted accounting
principles.
   SALES TAX. The sales and service and use taxes imposed by the city pursuant
to §§
37.001 and
37.002.
(1992 Code, § 39-172) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.166 REFUND OF RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX AND USE TAX ON CAPITAL ASSETS.
   As provided in this subchapter, any person may apply for a refund for sales
tax paid on the costs incurred in the furnishing and equipping of a new or
expanded business facility that satisfies all requirements of this subchapter.
Except as provided in the last sentence of this section, the refund allowed
under this section pertains only to project costs incurred on qualifying
equipment and paid within 36 months following the approval of the application
required by §
37.169. The refund shall not apply to capital assets purchased to replace
capital assets for which a refund has been previously received. Upon a showing
of good cause, the time limits prescribed by this section may be extended by
the finance director for a period not to exceed 24 months.
(1992 Code, § 39-173) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 38-06, passed 4-3-
2006; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.167 ELIGIBLE PROJECTS.
   No refund may be made unless:
   (a)   The project includes an investment in non-realty capital assets of not
less than $10,000,000; and
   (b)   The new or expanded business facility is used directly to expand or
increase the manufacturing, as the term is used by the 2022 North American
Industry Classification System Manual Sector 31-33, of personal property which
is intended to be sold or leased for final use consumption.
(1992 Code, § 39-174) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.168 [RESERVED]
§ 37.169 APPLICATION FOR REFUND.
   Any person desiring to claim a refund pursuant to this subchapter shall make
application to the finance director. The application shall be filed at least 30
days prior to construction commencement. No person may receive any sales tax
refund payment, as provided by §
37.170, if the application is not timely filed with the finance director. The
application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the finance director. A
separate application shall be submitted for each project. Upon the finance
director's approval of the application, the finance director shall notify the
applicant that he or she is eligible to submit refund returns and to receive
refunds as provided in this subchapter. Refund returns are not assignable or
transferable except as collateral or security pursuant to SDCL ch. 57A-9.
(1992 Code, § 39-176) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.170 AMOUNT OF REFUND.
   The refund shall be 100% of the sales taxes paid to the city for qualifying
equipment. The refund is subject to an inspection confirming the installation
of the qualifying equipment and any other requirements necessary for the
finance director to ensure compliance with this subchapter, the person
receiving a refund shall be entitled to retain 100% of the amount refunded if
the new or expanded business facility remains in operation in the city for at
least five years from the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the
facility ceases operation in the city before the end of the five-year period,
the city shall be entitled to repayment of the refund being prorated based upon
the time remaining in the five-year period. Any amount the city is entitled to
recover under this section shall constitute a debt to the city and a lien in
favor of the city upon all property and rights to property whether real or
personal belonging to the claimant and may be recovered in an action of the
debt.
(1992 Code, § 39-177) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.171 SUBMISSION OF RETURNS AND PAYMENT.
   Any person who is eligible for a refund pursuant to this subchapter shall
submit a return to the department no more frequently than on or before the last
day of each month and no less frequently than on or before the last day of each
month following each calendar quarter, also known as the submission period, for
sales tax on qualifying equipment that was paid only during the submission
period. The finance director shall determine and pay 85% of the amount of the
tax refund within 30 days of receipt of a completed return. Fifteen percent of
the refund shall be withheld by the department. No interest shall be paid on
the refund amount withheld.
(1992 Code, § 39-178) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.172 PAYMENT OF AMOUNT WITHHELD.
   The amounts withheld by the department in accordance with §
37.171 shall be retained until the project has been issued a certificate of
occupancy and the person has met all the conditions of this subchapter, at
which time all sums retained shall be paid to the person.
(1992 Code, § 39-179) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.173 IMPROPER RETURN.
   If any return has been fraudulently presented or supported as to any item in
the return, or if the person fails to meet all the conditions of this
subchapter, then the return may be rejected in its entirety and all sums
previously refunded to the person shall constitute a debt to the city and a
lien in favor of the city upon all property and rights to property whether real
or personal belonging to the person and may be recovered in an action of debt.
(1992 Code, § 39-180) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007; Ord. 65-25, passed 10-15-2025)
§ 37.174 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the finance director under this
subchapter may file an appeal according to the procedure set forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046.
(1992 Code, § 39-181) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 43-07, passed 3-5-
2007; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-2007)
§ 37.175 APPROPRIATIONS.
   All monies refunded pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed to be
continually appropriated without further action by the city council.
(1992 Code, § 39-182) (Ord. 42-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 60-07, passed 5-7-
2007)
EXPERIENCE SIOUX FALLS BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 37.190 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of SDCL ch. 9-55, the CVB business
improvement district of the city is hereby created. A resolution of intent
(Resolution 86-10) to create this district was approved by the city council on
October 12, 2010. The public hearing on creation of the district was held in
the city council chambers, located at 235 W. 10th St., P.O. Box 7402, Sioux
Falls, South Dakota, at 7:00 p.m. on November 15, 2010.
(1992 Code, § 39-183)
   (B)   The CVB business improvement district is retitled the Experience Sioux
Falls business improvement district.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 37.191 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT.
   The Experience Sioux Falls business improvement district will have the
following boundaries, excluding any hotel/motel properties with less than 40
rooms:
   (a)   All commercial transient lodging facilities located within the city
limits; and
   (b)   For purposes of establishing whether a hotel/motel property has 40 or
more rooms, lodging rooms in contiguous properties will be aggregated if they
function as part of a single hotel/motel, even if owned by separate entities.
(1992 Code, § 39-184) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.192 PURPOSE OF DISTRICT.
   The Experience Sioux Falls business improvement district is created for the
purpose of funding the marketing and promotion of the visitor industry in the
city and its hotels and motels located within the district.
(1992 Code, § 39-185) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.193 OCCUPATIONAL TAX IMPOSED.
   An occupational tax in the amount of $2 per night will be imposed upon
transient guests based upon rooms rented by any of the hotels, motels or
lodging establishments within the boundaries of the district. This occupational
tax must be fair, equitable and uniform as to class. No occupational tax may be
imposed on any transient guest who has been offered a room by a lodging
establishment on a complimentary basis whereby no fee or rent is charged for
the room. This tax rate will be subject to establishment and adjustment by the
city council by resolution in accordance with SDCL 9-55-16.
(1992 Code, § 39-186) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.194 DUTY TO ACCOUNT FOR COMPLIMENTARY ROOMS.
   Each hotel, motel or lodging establishment must account for complimentary
rooms which are also subject to audit by the city finance director with records
to show the basis for offering the room on a complimentary basis.
(1992 Code, § 39-187) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.195 COMPUTATION AND COLLECTION OF OCCUPATIONAL TAX.
   The finance director is authorized and directed to determine and compute the
tax in accordance with this subchapter. The occupational tax assessed pursuant
to the terms of this subchapter must be remitted by the 20th day of each month
to the finance director, with the remittance to be for the previous calendar
month’s tax collections. The finance director is authorized to determine, from
time to time, the acceptable form and means of submission and payment. As made
available by the finance director, electronic submission and payment will be
accepted. The city finance director or any person or firm contracted by the
city finance office will be entitled to audit the books, ledgers or franchise
reports of any hotel, motel or lodging establishment subject to the terms of
this subchapter, including the right to inspect daily reports of the hotels and
motels so as to ensure that the occupancy tax assessed by this subchapter is
being properly remitted to the city. The city finance director will be entitled
to seek injunctive relief against any hotel, motel or lodging establishment
which does not remit the proper amount of tax monies when due, which relief may
be in the form of an action requiring the offending hotel or motel owner to
allow entry upon their property and access to their records, computers or books
so as to verify that the hotel, motel or lodging establishment is remitting all
monies it collects pursuant to this ordinance and the laws of the state. Each
hotel, motel or lodging establishment subject to this subchapter must keep
accurate records of amounts collected from transient guests for review by the
city finance director or its designee, pursuant to this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 39-188) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.196 STATEMENT REQUIRED ALONG WITH OCCUPATIONAL TAX PAYMENT.
   (A)   Any business governed by this subchapter must sign a sworn statement
to be submitted along with the remittance of any tax imposed by this subchapter
on or before the 20th day of each month on a form(s) approved by the city
finance director, stating as follows:
      I declare, under penalty of perjury, that the above accounting of rooms
rented is accurate and the tax payment made herein is accurate to the best of
my knowledge according to my business records.
      Signed_________________ Dated_________
      Title___________________
   (B)   The sworn statement may be signed by electronic signature or other
electronic certification, provided electronic submission and payment has been
made available by the finance director.
(1992 Code, § 39-189) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.197 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   In the event of any civil or criminal action being filed seeking collection
of any delinquent assessments, the offending hotel, motel or lodging
establishment will be responsible to pay to the city all attorney’s fees and
costs incurred by the city in seeking payment under the terms of this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 39-191) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.198 COSTS INCURRED BY CITY IN ADMINISTERING OCCUPATIONAL TAX AND
COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.
   All costs incurred by the city or the city finance office pursuant to this
subchapter will be paid from occupancy taxes collected under this subchapter.
The costs may not exceed 1% of the amount of tax collected. All administrative
collection fees imposed pursuant to § 37.999 shall be paid to and retained by
the city.
(1992 Code, § 39-192) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.199 PAYMENT OF OCCUPATIONAL TAX PROCEEDS TO EXPERIENCE SIOUX FALLS.
   Once the occupational tax has been collected, the city finance office will
subtract its administrative costs and fees and forward the remaining balance to
Experience Sioux Falls, a South Dakota nonprofit corporation. Experience Sioux
Falls will use the proceeds to market and promote the visitor industry in the
city and the lodging facilities within the district, all in accordance with the
budget approved by the board of directors of the Experience Sioux Falls
business improvement district pursuant to SDCL ch. 9-55.
(1992 Code, § 39-193) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.200 BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS.
   (a)   Official board. The official board of the formerly known CVB business
improvement district, the "Convention and Visitors Bureau Board of Directors,"
shall be renamed to "Experience Sioux Falls Business Improvement District (BID)
Board of Directors." The Experience Sioux Falls BID board of directors will be
the official board of the Experience Sioux Falls business improvement district,
a board of directors appointed as provided in this section.
   (b)   Composition, terms, and appointment.
      (1)   The board of directors will consist of nine voting members
appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, and comprised of:
         A.   Three members who own or manage a hotel in the city with over 100
or more rooms;
         B.    Two members who own or manage a hotel in the city with 75 to 99
rooms;
         C.    One member who owns or manages a hotel in the city with 40 to 74
rooms;
         D.    Two members from the Experience Sioux Falls board of directors
executive committee; and
         E.   One member from the city business community at-large.
   (c)   Officers. At the first regular meeting of the board of directors of
each calendar year, the board shall select from its voting members at a minimum
a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary.
   (d)   No hotel ownership or management group may, either directly or
indirectly, hold more than two seats on the board of directors.
   (e)   Terms. All members will be appointed to three-year terms, and may not
serve more than two consecutive full terms.
   (f)   Voting registration. Any voting member may serve without being a
registered voter of the city provided they have a vested or representative
interest in the district. This exception does not apply to the at-large member
referenced in subsection (b)(1)E above. The at-large member shall be a
registered voter of the city. Non-voting members may serve without being a
registered voter of the city.
   (g)   Non-voting members. The following persons will be non-voting ex
officio members of the board of directors:
      (1)    A member of the city council, appointed by the mayor;
      (2)    The Experience Sioux Falls CEO; and
      (3)   The immediate past chairperson of the board of directors, if such
member has fulfilled two consecutive full terms.
   (h)   Resignations. Resignations of directors must be in writing and will
take effect upon receipt of the board of directors.
   (i)   A member shall be automatically terminated from the board of directors
if:
      (1)   A member no longer meets the stated requirements of this section;
or
      (2)   A member fails to attend two meetings in a calendar year of the
board of directors and a vacancy is declared by majority vote of the voting
members of the board of directors.
   (j)   The mayor, with the approval of the city council, will fill any
vacancy for the remainder of the term vacated.
   (k)   Duties of the board of directors. The board of directors shall have
the following duties.
      (1)   The board of directors will review and tentatively approve an
annual budget prepared by the Experience Sioux Falls CEO for the use of the
occupation tax collected by the BID. The budget must be in accordance with the
purposes of the BID and the requirements of SDCL ch. 9-55 and this subchapter.
Before becoming effective, the budget must be presented to and approved by the
Experience Sioux Falls board of directors or its executive committee and the
city council.
      (2)   The board of directors will have those other duties as may be
specified in SDCL ch. 9-55, or as otherwise necessary to carry out the intent
of ch. 9-55 and this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 39-194) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
§ 37.201 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section, clause or provision of this subchapter be declared by
the courts to be invalid, the same will not affect the validity of the
subchapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be
invalid.
(1992 Code, § 39-195) (Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-
2022)
TAX INCREMENTAL DISTRICTS
§ 37.216 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
municipalities under SDCL ch. 11-9 to create tax incremental districts. The
city may create tax incremental districts for any of the purposes allowed by
SDCL ch. 11-9. Nothing in this subchapter shall limit the city's ability to
utilize tax incremental districts unless specifically stated herein.
(Ord. 64-13, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 37.217 APPLICATION.
   An application requesting the establishment of a tax incremental district
shall be completed and submitted to the community development department on an
application form prepared by the department.
(Ord. 64-13, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 37.218 FEES AND COST RECOVERY.
   (a)   Application fee. Any applicant under this subchapter shall submit a
nonrefundable application fee with the completed application form in the amount
of $2,500.
   (b)   Payment processing and administration fee. A processing and
administrative fee of $250 per reimbursement payment made during the
reimbursement period shall be recovered by the city of
Sioux Falls from the tax incremental district revenue reimbursement.
   (c)   All direct costs incurred by the city in the evaluation of an
application under this subchapter shall be reimbursed by the applicant in a
timeframe established by the city.
(Ord. 64-13, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 37.219 EVALUATION, DOCUMENTS, AND PRESENTATION.
   The Community Development Department shall be responsible for:
   (a)   Evaluating each application under this subchapter and providing a
recommendation to the planning commission and city council for consideration.
   (b)   Creating a project plan and district boundary maps.
   (c)   Presenting the request at all public hearings.
(Ord. 64-13, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 37.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.999.
   (b)   Retail sales and service tax. Any person failing or refusing to make
reports or payments prescribed by §§
37.001 through
37.007 and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and
collection of the tax levied in §§
37.001 through
37.007 shall be guilty of a violation of a city ordinance and upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in §
10.999. In addition, all collection remedies authorized by SDCL ch. 10-45 and
acts amendatory thereof are hereby authorized for the collection of these taxes
by the department of revenue.
(1992 Code, § 39-21)
   (c)   Use tax. Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments
prescribed by §§
37.020 through
37.023 and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and
collection of the tax levied in §§
37.020 through
37.023 shall be guilty of a violation of a city ordinance and upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in §
10.999. In addition, all collection remedies authorized by SDCL ch. 10-46, and
acts amendatory thereof are hereby authorized for the collection of these
excise taxes by the department of revenue.
(1992 Code, § 39-50)
   (d)   Lodging establishment occupation tax. All remittances of occupancy tax
collected pursuant to §§
37.113 through
37.120 will be due and received in the office of the city finance office on or
before the 20th day of the month following the month for which the occupancy
tax remittances are due. All amounts that are not received on or before the
20th day of the month will be charged a late fee in the amount of 10% of the
total amount due. In the event the delinquent tax and late fee is not paid in
full within 60 days of delinquency, a $200 administrative collection fee shall
be imposed on the 61st day of delinquency and each month thereafter the tax and
late fee remains unpaid. Failure to pay the tax will also constitute a
violation of §§
37.113 through
37.120 and subject the violator to the penalty provisions of §
10.999. Each month that the payment is overdue will constitute a separate
offense. Any unpaid balance under §§
37.113 through
37.120 and this section will constitute a lien upon the property owned by the
lodging establishment or user of space being taxed and will become a lien
against and will run with the property and may be enforced and collected in the
same manner as other unpaid real property taxes and assessments. The city
finance director will certify all unpaid amounts or balances to the county
treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are
collected. Further, the city will have the ability to deny the issuance of any
permits or license or any renewals thereof to any lodging establishment or
premises that fails to conform to the provisions of §§
37.113 through
37.120 and this section including, but not limited to, building permits, malt
beverage licenses, and liquor licenses. Nothing within the body of §§
37.113 through
37.120 may be construed as limiting any other rights which the city has or may
pursue in seeking collection of monies received but not paid under the terms of
§§
37.113 through
37.120. In the event that this tax becomes subject to supervision by the state
through the state's department of revenue, any rights which the city has herein
will be deemed cumulative to any powers which inure to the benefit of the
state.
   (e)   Occupancy tax. All remittances of occupancy tax collected pursuant to
§§
37.190 through
37.201 will be due and received in the office of the city finance office on or
before the 20th day of the month following the month for which the occupancy
tax remittances are due. All amounts that are not received on or before the
20th day of the month will be charged a late fee in the amount of 10% of the
total amount due. In the event the delinquent tax and late fee is not paid in
full within 60 days of delinquency, a $200 administrative collection fee shall
be imposed on the 61st day of delinquency and each month thereafter the tax and
late fee remains unpaid. Failure to pay the tax will also constitute a
violation of §§
37.190 through
37.201 and subject the violator to the penalty provisions of §
10.999. Any unpaid balance under §§
37.190 through
37.201 and this section will constitute a lien upon the property owned by the
business or user of space being taxed and will become a lien against and will
run with the property and may be enforced and collected in the same manner as
other unpaid real property taxes and assessments. The finance director will
certify all unpaid amounts or balances to the county treasurer for collection
in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Further, the city
will have the ability to deny the issuance of any permits or license or any
renewals thereof to any business or premises that fails to conform to the
provisions of §§
37.190 through
37.201 and this section including, but not limited to, building permits, malt
beverage licenses, and liquor licenses. Nothing within the body of §§
37.190 through
37.201 may be construed as limiting any other rights which the city has, or may
pursue in seeking collection of monies received but not paid under the terms of
§§
37.190 through
37.201. In the event that this tax becomes subject to supervision by the state
through the state's department of revenue, any rights which the city has herein
will be deemed cumulative to any powers which inure to the benefit of the
state.
(1992 Code, § 39-190)
(Ord. 51-79, passed 6-4-1979; Ord. 78-10, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 30-12, passed
4-16-2012; Ord. 72-22, passed 7-5-2022)
CHAPTER 38: ELECTIONS
Section
   
38.001   Preamble
   
38.002   Council districts
   
38.003   Election precincts
   
38.004   Requirement of registration with city clerk to precede petition
circulation for initiative or referendum in a municipal election
   
38.005   Persons and entities required to submit campaign finance disclosures;
time for submission
   
38.006   Investigation and prosecution of violations by board of ethics
   
38.007   Access to records by investigating authority
   
38.008   Confidentiality of records
   
38.009    Establishing council positions
   
38.010   Election results
 
   
38.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   City council, see
ch. 30
Statutory reference:
   Municipal elections, see SDCL ch. 9-13
§ 38.001 PREAMBLE.
   The provisions of the general election laws and administrative rules
promulgated thereto of the State of South Dakota shall apply to all municipal
elections unless specifically provided by city charter or city ordinance. The
provisions of state law on campaign finance applicable to state legislative
office shall also apply to all elected municipal positions.
   The city clerk shall conduct all municipal elections provided by this
chapter and by city charter.
Any statement, form, or filing required by the general
election laws of the state of South Dakota applicable to municipal elections
shall be submitted to the city clerk's office.
   The city council by ordinance may adopt specific filing and campaign finance
reporting requirements for any municipal election in addition to those provided
by state law.
   By ordinance, the city may call for an advisory election on any issue to be
presented to the voters at any regularly scheduled or special municipal
election as otherwise allowed by law.
(Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 38.002 COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   For all purposes relating to city elections beginning with the April
11, 2006, election, there shall be five city council districts.
   (b)   The districts shall be comprised of the following precincts:
      (1)   District 1—Southwest is comprised of all precincts designated with
the prefix 1.
      (2)   District 2—Southeast is comprised of all precincts designated with
the prefix 2.
      (3)   District 3—Northwest is comprised of all precincts designated with
the prefix 3.
      (4)   District 4—Northeast is comprised of all precincts designated with
the prefix 4.
      (5)   District 5—Central is comprised of all precincts designated with
the prefix 5.
(1992 Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 90-01, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 34-02, passed 5-6-
2002; Ord. 48-06, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 38.003 ELECTION PRECINCTS.
   (a)   The city shall be divided into election precincts.
   (b)   Each election precinct is described as follows.
      Precinct 1-4; described.
      Election precinct number 1-4 shall be bounded on the north by 41st St.,
from Louise Ave. east to Western Ave.; on the
      east by Western Ave., from 41st St. south to 57th St.; on the south by
57th St. from Western Ave. to Louise Ave.; on the west by Louise Ave. from 57th
St., north to 41st St.
      Precinct 1-5; described.
      Election precinct number 1-5 shall be bounded on the north by 41st St.,
from Interstate 29 east to Louise Ave.; on the east by Louise Ave., from 41st
St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St. from Louise Ave. to Interstate
29; on the west by Interstate 29 from 57th St., north to 41st St.
      Precinct 1-6; described.
      Election precinct number 1-6 shall be bounded on the north by 32nd St.,
from Marion Rd. east to Interstate 29; on the east by Interstate 29, from 32nd
St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St., from Interstate 29 west to
Marion Rd.; on the west by Marion Rd., from 57th St. north to 32nd St.
      Precinct 1-9; described.
      Election precinct number 1-9 shall be bounded on the east by Marion Rd.
from 41st St. to 57th St., on the south by 57th St. from Marion Rd. west to
Holbrook Ave.; on the west by Holbrook Ave. from 57th St. to 41st St.; on the
north by 41st St. from Holbrook Ave. to Marion Rd.
      Precinct 1-10; described.
      Election precinct number 1-10 shall be bounded on the east by Holbrook
Ave. from 41st St. to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St. from Holbrook Ave. to
Sertoma Ave.; on the west by Sertoma Ave. from 57th St. to 41st St.; on the
north by 41st St. from Sertoma Ave. to Holbrook Ave.
      Precinct 1-11; described.
      Election precinct number 1-11 shall be bounded on the west by Louise Ave.
from Bitterroot St. to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St. from Louise Ave. to
Western Ave.; on the east by Western Ave. from 57th St. to Bitterroot St.; and
on the south by Bitterroot St. from Western Ave. to Louise Ave.
      Precinct 1-12; described.
      Election precinct number 1-12 shall be bounded on the west by Tallgrass
Ave. from 85th St. north to the quarter section line between the north half and
the south half of the southeast quarter, west on the quarter section line
between the north half and the south half of the southeast quarter to
Interstate 29, north on Interstate 29 to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St.
from Interstate 29 east to Louise Ave.; on the east by Louise Ave. from 57th
St. south to 69th St., west on 69th St. from Louise Ave. to Mogen Ave., south
on Mogen Ave. from 69th St. to 74th St., east on 74th St. from Mogen Ave. to
Hughes Ave., south on Hughes Ave. from 74th St., south to 85th St., and on the
south by 85th St. from Hughes Ave. west to Tallgrass Ave.; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 1-13; described.
      Election precinct number 1-13 shall be bounded on the north by 57th St.
from the northwest property line of 5001 S. Anthony Ave. east to Marion Rd.; on
the east by Marion Rd. from 57th St. south to W. Bakker Park Rd.; on the south
by W. Bakker Park Rd., from Marion Rd. west to 61st St., west on 61st St. to
Sundowner
      Ave.; on the west, north by Sundowner Ave. from 61st St. to the south
property line of 5209 W. Sundowner Ave., west to the southwest property line of
5209 W. Sundowner Ave., north to the property line of 5204 S. Anthony Ave.,
west to Anthony Ave., north to the northwest property line of 5001 S. Anthony
Ave.
      Precinct 1-14; described.
      Election precinct number 1-14 shall be bounded on the west by the west
city limits from the south city limits to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St.
from the west city limits to the northeast corner of 6601 W. 57th St.; on the
east by 6601 W. 57th St. from 57th St. south to the southeast property line of
5208 S. Gazena Pl. (including 5305 S. Sundowner Ave.), west along the north
property lines of W. 61st St. to the northeast property line of 6720 W. 61st
St., south from the northeast property line of 6720 W. 61st St. south to the
southeast property line of 6909 W. Jacob St.; on the south by the southeast
property line of 6909 W. Jacob St. west to the west city limits, including
6001-6009 S. Sundowner Ave.
      Precinct 1-15; described.
      Election precinct number 1-15 shall be bounded on the west by Hughes Ave.
from the south city limits north to 74th St., west on 74th St. to Mogen Ave.,
north on Mogen Ave. from 74th St. to 69th St.; on the north by 69th St. from
Mogen Ave. to Louise Ave.; on the east by Louse Ave. from 69th St. to the south
city limits; and on the south by the south city limits.
      Precinct 1-16; described.
      Election precinct number 1-16 shall be bounded on the north by the even-
numbered properties along W. 61st St. from 6716 W. 61st St. east to Sundowner
Ave.; along 61st St. east to W. Bakker Park Rd. and south and east on Bakker
Park Rd. to Marion Rd.; on the east by Marion Rd. from Bakker Park Rd. north to
57th St., east to Interstate 29, south to the south city limits; on the south
by the south city limits, from Interstate 29 west to Sundowner Ave.; on the
west by the property line of 6125 S. Aaron Ave. to the north including the
even- and odd-numbered properties along S. Aaron Ave. to the northwest property
line of 6716 W. 61st St.
      Precinct 1-17; described.
      Election precinct number 1-17 shall be bounded on the east by Sertoma
Ave. from 41st St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St. from Sertoma
Ave. west to the west city limits; on the west by the west city limits from
57th St. north to 41st St.; on the north by 41st St. from the west city limits
east to Sertoma Ave.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 1-18; described.
      Election precinct number 1-18 shall be bounded on the west by Louise Ave.
from the south city limits to Bitterroot St.; on the north by Bitterroot St.
from Louise Ave. to Western Ave.; on the east by Western Ave. from Bitterroot
St. to the south city limits; and on the south by the city limits from Western
Ave. to Louise Ave.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 1-19; described.
      Election precinct number 1-19 shall be bounded on the east by Minnesota
Ave. from 37th St. to the Big Sioux River; on the south by the Big Sioux River
from Minnesota Ave. to Western Ave.; on the west by Western Ave. from the Big
Sioux River to 37th St.; and on the north by 37th St. from Western Ave. to
Minnesota Ave.
      Precinct 1-20; described.
      Election precinct number 1-20 shall be bounded on the west by S.
Tallgrass Ave. from the south city limits north to 85th St., west on 85th St.
to Interstate 29, north by Interstate 29 to the quarter section line between
the north half and the south half of the southeast quarter; on the north by the
quarter section line between the north half and the south half of the southeast
quarter east to Tallgrass Ave., south on Tallgrass Ave. to 85th St., east on
85th St. from Tallgrass Ave. east to Hughes Ave.; on the east by Hughes Ave.
from 85th St. south to south city limits; and on the south by the south city
limits from Hughes Ave. west to S. Tallgrass Ave.; excluding all unincorporated
areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-1; described.
      Election precinct number 2-1 shall be bounded on the south by 57th St.
from Cliff Ave. to Western Ave.; on the west and north by Western Ave. north to
the Big Sioux River, then east along the Big Sioux River to Cliff Ave.; on the
east by Cliff Ave. from the Big Sioux River south to 57th St.
      Precinct 2-2; described.
      Election precinct number 2-2 shall be bounded on the north by 26th St.
from the Big Sioux River east to Southeastern Ave.; on the east by Southeastern
Ave. from 26th St. south to 41st St., then east on 41st St. to Bahnson Ave.,
then on the east by Bahnson Ave. from 41st St. to 49th St.; on the south by
49th St. from Bahnson Ave. to Cliff Ave.; on the west by Cliff Ave. from 49th
St. to the Big Sioux River, north along the Big Sioux River to 26th St.
      Precinct 2-3; described.
      Election precinct number 2-3 shall be bounded on the north by 26th St.
from Southeastern Ave. to Bahnson Ave.; on the east by Bahnson Ave. from 26th
St. to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St. from Bahnson Ave. to Southeastern
Ave.; on the west by Southeastern Ave. from 41st St. to 26th St.
      Precinct 2-6; described.
      Election precinct number 2-6 shall be bounded on the north by 26th St.
from Bahnson Ave. to Sycamore Ave.; on the east by Sycamore Ave. from 26th St.
to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St. from Sycamore Ave. to Bahnson Ave.; on
the west by Bahnson Ave. from 41st St. to 26th St.
      Precinct 2-7; reserved.
      Precinct 2-8; described.
      Election precinct number 2-8 shall be bounded on the north by 49th St.
from the South Dakota Railroad Authority tracks east to Bahnson Ave.; on the
east by Bahnson Ave. from 49th St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St.
from Bahnson Ave. west to the South Dakota Railroad Authority tracks; on the
west by the South Dakota Railroad Authority tracks from 57th St. north to 49th
St; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-9; described.
      Election precinct number 2-9 shall be bounded on the north by 49th St.
from Cliff Ave. to the South Dakota Railroad Authority tracks; on the east by
the South Dakota Railroad Authority tracks from 49th St. to 57th St.; on the
south by 57th St. from the South Dakota Railroad Authority tracks to Cliff
Ave.; on the west by Cliff Ave., from 57th St. to 49th St.
      Precinct 2-10; described.
      Election precinct number 2-10 shall be bounded on the west by Western
Ave. from Laquinta St. to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St. from Western Ave.
to Minnesota Ave.; on the east by Minnesota Ave. from 57th St. to Laquinta St.;
on the south by Laquinta St. from Minnesota Ave. to S. Killarney Ct., follow
along S. Killarney Ct. to W. Laquinta St., north on Laquinta St. to Western
Ave.
      Precinct 2-11; described.
      Election precinct number 2-11 shall be bounded on the west by Minnesota
Ave. from the south city limits to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St. from
Minnesota Ave. to Tomar Rd.; on the east by Tomar Rd. from 57th St. along the
extension of Tomar Rd. to the south city limits; on the south by the extension
of Tomar Rd. at the south city limits from the east city limits to Minnesota
Ave.
      Precinct 2-12; described.
      Election precinct number 2-12 shall be bounded on the west by Tomar Rd.
from the south city limits to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St. from Tomar Rd.
to S. Cliff Ave.; on the east by S. Cliff Ave. from 57th St. to the south city
limits; on the south by the south city limits from Cliff Ave. to the extension
of Tomar Rd. at the south city limits.
      Precinct 2-13; described.
      Election precinct number 2-13 shall be bounded on the west by S. Cliff
Ave. from the south city limits to 57th St.; on the north by 57th St. from S.
Cliff Ave. to Southeastern Ave.; on the east by Southeastern Ave. from 57th St.
to the south city limits; on the south from Southeastern Ave. to S. Cliff Ave.;
excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-14; described.
      Election precinct number 2-14 shall be bounded on the north by 41st St.
from Bahnson Ave. east to Sycamore Ave.; on the east by Sycamore Ave. from 41st
St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St. from Sycamore Ave. west to
Bahnson Ave.; on the west by Bahnson Ave. from 57th St. north to 41st St.;
excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-15; described.
      Election precinct number 2-15 shall be bounded on the west by Western
Ave. from the south city limits to Laquinta St.; on the north by Laquinta St.
from Western Ave. to S. Killarney Ct., follow S. Killarney Ct. to W. Laquinta
St., east on W Laquinta St. to Minnesota Ave.; on the east by Minnesota Ave.
from Laquinta St. to the south city limits; on the south by the south city
limits; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-16; described.
      Election precinct number 2-16 shall be bounded on the west by
Southeastern Ave. from the south city limits to 57th St.; on the north by 57th
St. from Southeastern Ave. to the east city limits; on the east by the east
city limits from 57th St. to the south city limits; on the south by the south
city limits from the east city limits to Southeastern Ave.; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-17; described.
      Election precinct number 2-17 shall be bounded on the north by 41st St.
from Sycamore Ave. to Veterans Parkway; on the east by Veterans Parkway from
41st St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St. from Veterans Parkway west
to Sycamore Ave.; on the west by Sycamore Ave. from 57th St. north to 41st St.;
excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 2-18; described.
      Election precinct number 2-18 shall be bounded on the north by 41st St.
from Veterans Parkway east to the east city limits; on the east by the east
city limits from 41st St. south to 57th St.; on the south by 57th St. from the
east city limits west to Veterans Parkway; on the west by Veterans Parkway from
57th St. to 41st St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 3-1; described.
      Election precinct number 3-1 shall be bounded on the west by Interstate
29, from 26th St. south to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St., from Interstate
29 east to Western Ave; on the east by Western Ave., from 41st St. north, to
37th St., then west on 37th St. to Kiwanis Ave., then on Kiwanis Ave. north to
26th St.; on the north by 26th St., from Kiwanis Ave. west to Interstate 29.
      Precinct 3-5; described.
      Election precinct number 3-5 shall be bounded on the west by Interstate
29 from 6th St. (along the quarter section line extension) north to 60th St.
N.; on the north by 60th St. N. from Interstate 29 east to Minnesota Ave.; on
the east by Minnesota Ave. from 60th St. N. south to Russell St.; on the south
by Russell St. from Minnesota Ave. west to West Ave., then south on West Ave.
from Russell St. to 6th St; on the south by 6th St. (along the quarter section
line extension) from West Ave. west to Interstate 29; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 3-9; described.
      Election precinct number 3-9 shall be bounded on the north by 12th St.,
from Skunk Creek to Interstate 29; on the east by Interstate 29 from 12th St.
to Skunk Creek; on the south and west by Skunk Creek, from Interstate 29 to
12th St.
      Precinct 3-10; described.
      Election precinct number 3-10 shall be bounded on the east by Sertoma
Ave., north to 32nd St., then east on 32nd St. from Sertoma Ave. to Queens
Ave., then north to 26th St.; on the north by 26th St. from Queens Ave. to
Discovery Ave.; on the west by Discovery Ave. south to Alexandra St., then east
to Grinnell Ave., then south to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St. from
Grinnell Ave. to Sertoma Ave.
      Precinct 3-11; described.
      Election precinct number 3-11 shall be bounded on the east by Coughran
Ct. from 26th St. to Severn Ln., then north to Skunk Creek; on the north by
Skunk Creek from Severn Ln. to 12th St., then west to Sertoma Ave.; on the west
by Sertoma Ave. from 12th St. to 26th St.; on the south by 26th St. from
Sertoma Ave. to Coughran Ct.
      Precinct 3-12; described.
      Election precinct number 3-12 shall be bounded on the south by 12th St.
from Interstate 29 west to Skunk Creek; on the west by Skunk Creek from 12th
St. north to Madison St.; on the north by Madison St. from the west city limits
east to Interstate 29; on the east by Interstate 29 from Madison St. south to
12th St; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 3-13; described.
      Election precinct number 3-13 shall be bounded on the north by 32nd St.,
from Sertoma Ave. east to Marion Rd.; on the east by Marion Rd., from 32nd St.
south to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St., from Marion Rd. west to Sertoma
Ave.; on the west by Sertoma Ave., from 41st St. north to 32nd St.
      Precinct 3-14; described.
      Election precinct 3-14 shall be bounded on the south by Maple St. from
Interstate 29 west to the west city limits; on the west by the west city limits
from Maple St. north to Benson Rd.; on the north by Benson Rd. from the west
city limits east to Marion Rd., north on Marion Rd. from Benson Rd. to 60th St.
N.; on the north by 60th St. N. from Marion Rd. east to Interstate 29; on the
east by Interstate 29 from 60th St. N. south to Maple St.; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 3-15; described.
      Election precinct number 3-15 shall be bounded on the north by Skunk
Creek, from Severn Ln. east to Interstate 29; on the east by Interstate 29,
from Skunk Creek south to 32nd St.; on the south by 32nd St., from Interstate
29 west to Queens Ave.; on the west by Queens Ave., from 32nd St. north to 26th
St., then east on 26th St. to Coughran Ct., then north on Coughran Ct. to
Severn Ln., then north on Severn Ln. to Skunk Creek; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 3-16; described.
      Election precinct number 3-16 shall be bounded on the east by Skunk Creek
from Sands St. south to 12th St., west on 12th St. from Skunk Creek to Sertoma
Ave.; on the east by Sertoma Ave. from 12th St. south to 22nd St.; on the south
by 22nd St. from Sertoma Ave. west to the west city limits; on the west by the
west city limits from 22nd St. north to 12th St., west on 12th St. from
Lakeside Dr. to the west city limits; on the west by the west city limits from
SD HWY 42 north to Sands St.; on the north by Sands St. from the west city
limits east to Skunk Creek; excluding all unincorporated areas within the
bounded area.
      Precinct 3-17; described.
      Election precinct number 3-17 shall be bounded on the south by 41st St.
from Grinnell Ave. west to the west city limits; on the west by the west city
limits from 41st St. north to Broek Dr.; on the north by Broek Dr. from the
west city limits east to 32nd St., then east along 32nd St. to Grinnell Ave.;
on the east by Grinnell Ave. from 32nd St. south to 41st St.; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 3-18; described.
      Election precinct 3-18 shall be bounded on the south by Madison St. from
Interstate 29 west to the west city limits; on the west by the west city limits
from Madison St. north to Maple St.; on the north by Maple St. from the west
city limits east to Interstate 29; on the east by Interstate 29 from Maple St.
south to Madison St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 3-19; described.
      Election precinct number 3-19 shall be bounded on the south by 32nd St.
from Grinnell Ave. west to Broek Dr., then west along Broek Dr. to the west
city limits; on the west by the west city limits from Broek Dr. north to 22nd
St.; on the north by 22nd St. from the west city limits east to Sertoma Ave.;
on the east by Sertoma Ave. from 22nd St. south to 26th St., west on 26th St.
from Sertoma to Discovery Ave.; on the east by Discovery Ave. from 26th south
to Alexandra St., then east to Grinnell Ave., then south to 32nd St.; excluding
all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 3-20; described.
      Election precinct 3-20 shall be bounded on the south by 60th St. N. from
the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks west to Marion Rd.; on the east by
Marion Rd. from 60th St. N. south to Benson Rd; on the south by Benson Rd. from
Marion Rd. west to the west city limits; on the west by the west city limits
from Benson Rd. north to the north city limits; on the north by the north city
limits from the west city limits east to Interstate 29; on the east by
Interstate 29 from the north city limits south to Interstate 90, then east
along the north side of Interstate 90 from Interstate 29 to the Burlington
Northern Railroad tracks; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area; on the east by the Burlington Norther Railroad tracks from Interstate 90
south to 60 St. N.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 4-2; described.
      Election precinct number 4-2 shall be bounded on the east by Interstate
229 from 10th St. to the Big Sioux River; on the south by the Big Sioux River
from Interstate 229 to Cliff Ave.; on the west by Cliff Ave. from the Big Sioux
River to 10th St.; and on the north by 10th St. from Cliff Ave. to Interstate
229.
      Precinct 4-3; described.
      Election precinct number 4-3 shall be bounded on the east by Interstate
229 from 6th St. south to 10th St.; on the south by 10th St. from Interstate
229 to Cliff Ave.; on the west by Cliff Ave. from 10th St. north to 6th St.;
and on the north by 6th St. from Cliff Ave. to Interstate 229.
      Precinct 4-4; described.
      Election precinct number 4-4 shall be bounded on the east by Interstate
229 from the Burlington Northern Railroad to 6th St.; on the south by 6th St.
from Interstate 229 to Cliff Ave.; on the west by Cliff Ave. from 6th St. to
the Burlington Northern Railroad; on the north by the Burlington Northern
Railroad from Cliff Ave. to Interstate 229.
      Precinct 4-5; described.
      Election precinct number 4-5 shall be bounded on the west by Minnesota
Ave. from Maple St. north to 60th St. N.; on the north by 60th St. N. from
Minnesota Ave. east to Interstate 229; on the east by Interstate 229 from 60th
St. N. south to Maple St.; and on the south by Maple St. from Interstate 229
west to Minnesota Ave; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 4-6; described.
      Election precinct number 4-6 shall be bounded on the west by Cliff Ave.
from Rice St. north to Maple St., then east on Maple St. to Interstate 229; on
the west by Interstate 229 from Maple St. north to 60th St. N., then west on
60th St. N. to the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks, then north from 60th
St. N. to Dike Rd.; on the north by Dike Rd. from the Burlington Northern
Railroad tracks east to Cliff Ave., then north on Cliff Ave. from Dike Rd. to
72nd St. N.; on the north by 72nd St. N. from Cliff. Ave. east to 476th Ave.,
then north along the north city limits to the east city limits; on the east by
the east city limits from Interstate 90 south to Veterans Parkway, then south
by Veterans Parkway to Rice St.; on the south by Rice St. from Veterans Parkway
southwest to Cliff Ave.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 4-7; described.
      Election precinct number 4-7 shall be bounded on the south by Madison St.
from the east city limits west to Sycamore Ave.; on the west by Sycamore Ave.
from Madison St. north to Rice St.; on the north by Rice St. from Sycamore
northeast to the east city limits; on the east by the east city limits from
Rice St. south to Madison St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the
bounded area.
      Precinct 4-8; described.
      Election precinct number 4-8 shall be bounded on the south by 18th St.
from Sycamore Ave. west to Bahnson Ave.; on the west by Bahnson Ave. from 18th
St. north to 10th St., then from a point where a line would cross through Hills
of Rest Cemetery from Bahnson Ave. to Locust Ave., then along Locust Ave. to
6th St.; on the north by 6th St. from Locust Ave. east to Sycamore Ave.; on the
east by Sycamore Ave. from 6th St. south to 18th St.; excluding all
unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 4-9; described.
      Election precinct number 4-9 shall be bounded on the east by Locust Ave.
from 6th St. south along a line which would cross through Hills of Rest
Cemetery to Bahnson Ave. to 18th St.; on the south by 18th St. from Bahnson
Ave. west to Interstate 229; on the west by Interstate 229 from 18th St. north
to 6th St.; and on the north by 6th St. from Interstate 229 east to Locust Ave;
excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 4-10; described.
      Election precinct number 4-10 shall be bounded on the east by Veterans
Parkway from Arrowhead Parkway south to 18th St.; on the south by 18th St. from
Veterans Parkway west to Sycamore Ave.; on the west by Sycamore Ave. from 18th
St. north to Arrowhead Parkway; and on the north by Arrowhead Parkway from
Sycamore Ave. east to the east city limits; excluding all unincorporated area
within the bounded area.
      Precinct 4-11; described.
      Election precinct number 4-11 shall be bounded on the north by Madison
St. from Sycamore Ave. east to Veterans Parkway; on the east by Veterans
Parkway from Madison St. south to 10th St./South Dakota Highway 42; on the
south by 10th St./South Dakota Highway 42 from Veterans Parkway west to
Sycamore Ave.; on the west by Sycamore Ave. from 10th St./South Dakota Highway
42 north to Madison St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 4-12; described.
      Election precinct number 4-12 shall be bounded on the east by the east
city limits from 18th St. to 26th St.; on the south by 26th St. from the east
city limits to Bahnson Ave.; on the west by Bahnson Ave. from 26th St. to 18th
St.; on the north by 18th St. from Bahnson Ave. to the east city limits.
      Precinct 4-13; described.
      Election precinct number 4-13 shall be bounded on the east by Bahnson
Ave. from 18th St. to 26th St.; on the south by 26th St. from Bahnson Ave. to
the Big Sioux River; on the west by the Big Sioux River and Interstate 229 from
26th St. to 18th St.; and on the north by 18th St. from Interstate 229 to
Bahnson Ave.
      Precinct 4-14; reserved.
      Precinct 4-15; described.
      Election precinct number 4-15 shall be bounded on the north by 26th St.
from Sycamore Ave. east to Veterans Parkway; on the east by Veterans Parkway
from 26th St. south to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St. from Veterans Parkway
west to Sycamore Ave.; on the west by Sycamore Ave. from 41st St. north to 26th
St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 4-16; reserved.
      Precinct 4-17; described.
      Election precinct number 4-17 shall be bounded on the north by Madison
St. from Veterans Parkway east to the east city limits; on the east by the east
city limits from Madison St. south to South Dakota Highway 11/42; on the south
by South Dakota Highway 11/42 from the east city limits west to 26th St., then
west on 26th St. to Veterans Parkway; on the west by Veterans Parkway from 26th
St. north to Madison St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded
area.
      Precinct 4-18; described.
      Election precinct number 4-18 shall be bounded on the north by 26th St.
from Veterans Parkway east to Six Mile Rd.; on the east by Six Mile Rd. from
26th St. south to 41st St.; on the south by 41st St. from Six Mile Rd. west to
Veterans Parkway; on the west by Veterans Parkway from 41st St. north to 26th
St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 4-19; described.
      Election precinct number 4-19 shall be bounded on the south by 6th St.
from Sycamore Ave. west to Interstate 229; on the west by Interstate 229 from
6th St. north to Rice St.; on the north by Rice St. from Interstate 229
northeast to Sycamore Ave.; on the east by Sycamore Ave. from Rice St. south to
6th St.; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area.
      Precinct 5-1; described.
      Election precinct number 5-1 shall be bounded on the east by Minnesota
Ave. from 10th St. to 18th St.; on the south by 18th St. from Minnesota Ave. to
Hawthorne Ave.; on the west by Hawthorne Ave. from 18th St. to 12th St.; and on
the north by 12th St. from Hawthorne Ave. continuing on 10th St. to Minnesota
Ave.
      Precinct 5-2; described.
      Election precinct number 5-2 shall be bounded on the east by the Big
Sioux River from 8th St. to Cliff Ave., then on Cliff Ave. from the Big Sioux
River to 14th St.; on the south by 14th St. from Cliff Ave. to Minnesota Ave.;
on the west by Minnesota Ave. from 14th St. to 8th St.; on the north by 8th St.
from Minnesota Ave. to the Big Sioux River.
      Precinct 5-3; described.
      Election precinct number 5-3 shall be bounded on the east by Minnesota
Ave. from 18th St. to 26th St.; on the south by 26th St. from Minnesota Ave. to
Menlo Ave.; on the west by Menlo Ave. from 26th St. to 18th St.; and on the
north by 18th St. from Menlo Ave. to Minnesota Ave.
      Precinct 5-4; described.
      Election precinct number 5-4 shall be bounded on the east by Cliff Ave.
from 14th St. to 21st St.; on the south by 21st St. from Cliff Ave. to
Minnesota Ave.; on the west by Minnesota Ave. from 21st St. to 14th St.; on the
north by 14th St., then east by 14th St. from Minnesota Ave. to Cliff Ave.
      Precinct 5-6; described.
      Election precinct number 5-6 shall be bounded on the north and east by
the Big Sioux River from Cliff Ave. to a point where 33rd St. extended
intersects the Big Sioux River; on the south by 33rd St. extended from the Big
Sioux River to Cliff Ave.; and on the west by Cliff Ave. from 33rd St. north to
the Big Sioux River.
      Precinct 5-7; described.
      Election precinct number 5-7 shall be bounded on the east by Cliff Ave.
from 21st St. to 33rd St.; on the south by 33rd St. from Cliff Ave. to 4th
Ave.; on the west by 4th Ave. from 33rd St. to 21st St.; and on the north by
21st St. from 4th Ave. to Cliff Ave.
      Precinct 5-8; described.
      Election precinct number 5-8 shall be bounded on the east by 4th Ave.
from 21st St. to 31st St.; on the south by 31st St. from 4th Ave. to Minnesota
Ave.; on the west by Minnesota Ave. from 31st St. to 21st St.; and on the north
by 21st St. from Minnesota Ave. to 4th Ave.
      Precinct 5-9; described.
      Election precinct number 5-9 shall be bounded on the east by Minnesota
Ave. from 26th St. to 37th St.; on the south by 37th St. from Minnesota Ave. to
Grange Ave.; on the west by Grange Ave. from 37th St. to 26th St.; and on the
north by 26th St. from Grange Ave. to Minnesota Ave.
      Precinct 5-10; described.
      Election precinct number 5-10 shall be bounded on the east by Grange Ave.
from 26th St. to 37th St.; on the south by 37th St. from Grange Ave. to Willow
Ave.; on the west by Willow Ave. from 37th St. to 26th St.; and on the north by
26th St. from Willow Ave. to Grange Ave.
      Precinct 5-12; described.
      Election precinct number 5-12 shall be bounded on the east and south by
the Big Sioux River to Minnesota Ave.; on the west by Minnesota Ave. from the
Big Sioux River to 31st St.; and on the north by 31st St. from Minnesota Ave.
to 4th Ave., south on 4th St. to 33rd St., continuing east on 33rd St. to a
point where 33rd St. extended intersects the Big Sioux River.
      Precinct 5-15; described.
      Election precinct number 5-15 shall be bounded on the east by Cliff Ave.
from the Burlington Northern Railway south to the Big Sioux River; on the south
and west by the Big Sioux River from Cliff Ave. to 6th St.; on the north by 6th
St. from the Big Sioux River to the Burlington Northern Railway, then the
Burlington Northern Railway to Cliff Ave.
      Precinct 5-18; described.
      Election precinct number 5-18 shall be bounded on the east by Minnesota
Ave. from 1st St. to 10th St.; on the south by 10th St. from Minnesota Ave. to
Prairie Ave.; on the west by Prairie Ave. from 10th St. to 6th St., then on 6th
St. from Prairie Ave. to West Ave., then north from 6th St. to Russell St.; and
on the north by Russell St. from West Ave. to Prairie Ave., then on Prairie
Ave. from Russell St. to 1st St., then on 1st St. from Prairie Ave. to
Minnesota Ave.
      Precinct 5-19; described.
      Election precinct number 5-19 shall be bounded on the north by 26th St.,
from Kiwanis Ave. east to Willow Ave.; on the east by Willow Ave., from 26th
St. south to 37th St.; on the south by 37th St., from Willow Ave. west to
Kiwanis Ave.; on the west by Kiwanis Ave., from 37th St. north to 26th St.
      Precinct 5-20; described.
      Election precinct number 5-20 shall be bounded on the east by Hawthorne
Ave. from 12th St. to 18th St.; on the south by 18th St. extended from
Hawthorne Ave. to Interstate 29; on the west by Interstate 29 from a point
where 18th St. extended intersects Interstate 29 to 12th St.; on the north by
12th St. from Interstate 29 to Hawthorne Ave.
      Precinct 5-21; described.
      Election precinct number 5-21 shall be bounded on the east by Menlo Ave.
from 18th St. to 26th St.; on the south by 26th St. from Menlo Ave. to
Interstate 29; on the west by Interstate 29 from a point where 26th St.
extended intersects Interstate 29, to a point where 18th St. extended
intersects Interstate 29; on the north by extended 18th St. from Interstate 29
to Menlo Ave.
      Precinct 5-22; described.
      Election precinct number 5-22 shall be bounded on the east by Prairie
Ave. from 6th St. to 10th St.; then on 10th St. from Prairie Ave. to Menlo
Ave., then on Menlo Ave. from 10th St. to 11th St. and the South Dakota Highway
42 intersection; on the south by South Dakota Highway 42 and 12th St. from
Menlo Ave. to Interstate 29; on the west by the Interstate 29 from 12th St. to
a point where 6th St. extended intersects Interstate 29; on the north by 6th
St. extended from Interstate 29 to Prairie Ave.
      Precinct 5-23; described.
      Election precinct number 5-23 shall be bounded on the east by Cliff Ave.
from Maple St. to the Burlington Northern Railroad; on the south by the
Burlington Northern Railroad from Cliff Ave. to 6th St., then by 6th St. from
the Burlington Northern Railroad to the Big Sioux River, the Big Sioux River
from 6th St. to 8th St.; on the south by 8th St. from the Big Sioux River to
Minnesota Ave.; on the west by Minnesota Ave. from 8th St. to 1st St., then by
1st St. from Minnesota Ave. to Prairie Ave., then by Prairie Ave. from 1st St.
to Russell St., then by Russell St. from Prairie Ave. to Minnesota Ave., then
by Minnesota Ave. from Russell St. to Maple St.; on the north by Maple St. from
Minnesota Ave. to Cliff Ave.
(1992 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 90-01, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 34-02, passed 5-6-
2002; Ord. 20-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 33-04, passed 3-8-2004; Ord. 47-05,
passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 112-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 93-06, passed 8-7-2006;
Ord. 23-08, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 24-08, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 58-08, passed
5-12-2008; Ord. 126-08, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 74-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 5-
10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 88-11, passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-
2015; Ord. 6-16, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 77-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 124-19,
passed 12-3-2019; Ord. 158-21, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 117-23, passed 12-19-
2023; Ord. 11-24, passed 2-13-2024)
§ 38.004 REQUIREMENT OF REGISTRATION WITH CITY CLERK TO PRECEDE PETITION
CIRCULATION FOR INITIATIVE OR REFERENDUM IN A MUNICIPAL ELECTION.
   Persons seeking to propose or refer an ordinance or resolution shall first
register with the city clerk's office before the petitions are circulated for
signatures. Registration shall include the name of the organization, address,
contact person and language of the proposed ordinance or resolution, or the
title and date of passage of the ordinance or resolution being referred. A copy
of the proposed resolution or ordinance will become public when petition
circulation effort commences.
(1992 Code, § 14-50) (Ord. 102-80, passed 10-27-1980; Ord. 25-84, passed 2-13-
1984; Ord. 39-84, passed 3-5-1984; Ord. 30-94, passed 4-4-1994; Ord. 41-02,
passed 5-13-2002; Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 8-12, passed 2-6-2012;
Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 38.005 PERSONS AND ENTITIES REQUIRED TO SUBMIT CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURES;
TIME FOR SUBMISSION.
   (a)   A campaign finance disclosure whose contents are specified by state
law shall be signed and submitted to the city clerk's office by the treasurer
of every municipal candidate or candidate campaign committee, municipal or
nonmunicipal political action committee, municipal ballot question committee,
and municipal public office holder pertaining to city elections. Any statement
pursuant to this section shall be consecutive and shall cover contributions and
expenditures since the last statement submitted.
   (b)   Submissions shall occur pursuant to the following schedule:
      (1)   Municipal candidates shall submit a statement of financial interest
within 15 days after submitting nominating petitions.
      (2)   Municipal candidates, municipal candidate campaign committees,
municipal ballot question committees, and municipal political action committees
shall submit a statement of organization as provided in SDCL 12-27.
      (3)    Municipal candidates, municipal candidate campaign committees, and
municipal political action committees shall have submitted a finance disclosure
report by 5:00 p.m. within three business days following and complete through:
         A.   December 31 of each year;
         B.   The last business day of February preceding the election in an
election year;
         C.    The last Monday one week prior to the election; and
         D.    The last business day of June of each year.
      (4)   Ballot question committees shall have submitted a finance
disclosure statement by 5:00 p.m. within three business days following and
complete through:
         A.   The last business day of each month during the 90-day period
immediately preceding the election;
         B.   The last Monday one week prior to the election;
         C.   Sixty calendar days following the election, and shall include the
disposition of any remaining funds or obligations of the person or committee;
and
         D.   The requirements of this division (b)(4) shall also apply to any
person raising, collecting, or disbursing money for the adoption or defeat of
any question submitted to the voters at any election unless the person is
engaging in these activities on behalf of a ballot question committee.
         E.   A ballot question committee that does not meet the signature
requirements for placement of the ballot issue on an election ballot shall
submit a termination report to the city clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the first Monday
in February following the year the statement of organization was submitted to
the city clerk.
      (5)   Nonmunicipal political action committees shall submit a finance
disclosure statement with the city clerk by 5:00 p.m. within three business
days from the last Monday one week prior to each city election. The statement
shall cover the contributions and expenditures of the political action
committee from the last submission with the secretary of state's office. A
political action committee that regularly submits a campaign finance disclosure
statement with the Federal Election Commission or a report of contributions and
expenditures with the Internal Revenue Service is not required to submit a
campaign disclosure statement.
      (6)   Public office holders for the city shall, not more than 15 days
after the person assumes office and then not later than the first day of
January of every year the person continues to hold the office, file an elected
official statement of financial interest setting forth any additions or
corrections to any previous statement of financial interest filed pursuant to
this chapter or state law.
      (7)   Any treasurer or other person filing a statement or report pursuant
to this chapter shall file an amended statement or report within three days of
discovering any omission, inaccuracy, or other change necessary to make the
statement or report accurate.
(1992 Code, § 14-68) (Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 125-08, passed 10-
20-2008; Ord. 91-09, passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 8-12, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 100-15,
passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17, passed 9-12-2017; Ord. 11-20, passed 2-3-2020)
§ 38.006 INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS BY BOARD OF ETHICS.
   The city attorney shall investigate violations of the provisions of this
chapter by any persons not currently holding an elected office within the city
and may prosecute any violation thereof not otherwise subject to the
jurisdiction of the South Dakota attorney general or applicable state's
attorney. The Sioux Falls board of ethics shall investigate and make
recommendations on possible violations of this chapter relating to any current
city-elected official pursuant to the Ethics chapter of this Code. Any penalty
recovered shall be paid to the city general fund. An action brought by the city
attorney shall be commenced in Minnehaha County, in the county where the person
resides, or in the county where the organization, political party, or political
committee has its principal office.
(1992 Code, § 14-78) (Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 8-12, passed 2-6-
2012; Ord. 77-13, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17,
passed 9-12-2017)
§ 38.007 ACCESS TO RECORDS BY INVESTIGATING AUTHORITY.
   The investigating authority may, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
of this chapter, inspect or examine any candidate campaign committee, political
action committee, ballot question committee, or political party records
required to be maintained by this chapter. No person having charge, control, or
possession of candidate campaign committee, political action committee, ballot
question committee, or political party records may neglect or refuse the
investigating authority reasonable access to any records required to be
maintained by this chapter, which is necessary to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 14-79) (Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 8-12, passed 2-6-
2012; Ord. 77-13, passed 12-3-2013; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17,
passed 9-12-2017) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.008 CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.
   The investigating authority shall keep each record inspected or examined
confidential except when the records are used to enforce provisions of this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 14-80) (Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 8-12, passed 2-6-
2012; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 38.009 ESTABLISHING COUNCIL POSITIONS.
   (a)    The clerk shall designate alphabetically each individual at-large
council position to be filled by election. The position that is assigned to an
individual at-large council person is assigned also to the council person's
successor in office.
   (b)    A candidate for council member at-large shall indicate on his or her
nominating petition the specific position for which the candidate is running.
(1992 Code, § 14-84) (Ord. 104-98, passed 10-5-1998; Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-
2007; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17, passed 9-12-2017)
§ 38.010 ELECTION RESULTS.
   All elections by majority. In all elections for elective office within the
city, including at-large council members and district council members and
mayor, if no candidate in a race involving three or more candidates receives a
majority of the votes cast for that particular elective office, a runoff
election shall be held three weeks from the date of the first election. At the
runoff election, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes at
the first election shall be on the ballot. However, if there is a tie for
second place in the first election and there is no tie for first place, all
tying second place candidates shall be placed along with the first place
candidate on the ballot for the runoff election. The runoff election shall be
held at the same polling places and shall be conducted, returned, and canvassed
in the same manner as the first election. The person receiving the highest
number of votes at the runoff election is elected.
(1992 Code, § 14-85) (Ord. 104-98, passed 10-5-1998; Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-
2007; Ord. 94-11, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17,
passed 9-12-2017)
§ 38.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.999.
   (b)    A candidate or political committee that fails to timely file any
statement, amendment, or correction required by this chapter subjects the
treasurer responsible for filing to a civil penalty of $50 per day for each day
that the statement remains delinquent not to exceed $3,000. The civil penalty
shall be in addition to any criminal sanctions and shall be paid to the city
clerk and deposited in the city general fund.
(1992 Code, § 14-73) (Ord. 182-07, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 91-09, passed 11-2-
2009; Ord. 100-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 87-17, passed 9-12-2017)
CHAPTER 39: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS AND BENEFITS; RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
39.001   Definitions
   
39.002   Salary grades
   
39.003   Bonds for officers, employees
   
39.004   Employees’ workers’ compensation fund
   
39.005   Workers’ compensation coverage for city council members
   
39.006   Irrevocable 115 Trust established
Human Resources Department
   
39.020   Created
   
39.021   Functions
   
39.022   Director of Human Resources
Civil Service; Generally
   
39.035   Scope
   
39.036   Application to appointive officers
   
39.037   Acts prohibited
   
39.038   Political activity
   
39.039   Political interference
   
39.040   Unlawful payments
   
39.041   Unlawful influence
   
39.042   Discrimination
   
39.043   Examinations generally
   
39.044   Application required
   
39.045   False statements in application
   
39.046   Examiners
   
39.047   Preference for former military personnel
   
39.048   Medical examinations; and/or alcohol and drug screening
   
39.049   Disqualifications
   
39.050   Names certified; new hires
   
39.051   Names certified; promotion/transfer
   
39.052   Temporary assignments and appointments
   
39.053   Promotions generally
   
39.054   Promotional examination
   
39.055   Eligibility for promotion
   
39.056   Probation period
   
39.057   Demotion allowed
   
39.058   Demotion, discharge, suspension; generally
   
39.059   Demotion, discharge, suspension; causes
   
39.060   Demotion, discharge, suspension; notice
   
39.061   Demotion, discharge, suspension; appeal allowed
   
39.062   Demotion, discharge, suspension; hearing
   
39.063   Demotion, discharge, suspension; determination by board
   
39.064   Reinstatement
   
39.065   Matters to be reported
   
39.066   Staff reduction
   
39.067   Benefits for laid off employees
   
39.068   Reemployment of separated employee
   
39.069   Application for uniformed police and fire positions
   
39.070   Mandatory retirement for uniformed police and fire positions
Civil Service Board
   
39.080   Created; composition
   
39.081   Qualifications
   
39.082   Appointment
   
39.083   Terms
   
39.084   Compensation
   
39.085   Temporary member
   
39.086   Chairperson
   
39.087   Quorum
   
39.088   Affirmative vote for action
   
39.089   Rules to be adopted
   
39.090   Scope of rules
   
39.091   Annual report
   
39.092   Court review of action
Appointive Officers
   
39.105   Job descriptions
   
39.106   Method and term of appointment
   
39.107   Qualification
   
39.108   Commissions and certificates of appointment
   
39.109   Notice of adoption
Classification and Pay Plan
   
39.120   Application of plan; employees covered
   
39.121   Operation of plan; step advancement
   
39.122   Promotion/transfer; salary changes
   
39.123   Reassignment; salary changes
   
39.124   Starting above minimum step
   
39.125   Acting pay
   
39.126   Pay upon re-employment of a separated employee
   
39.127   Exempt/nonexempt classification
   
39.128   Hours of work
   
39.129   Exempt and nonexempt employees; overtime and compensatory time
   
39.130   Right to set hours and pay
   
39.131   Temporary employees
   
39.132   Standby, shift differential, and emergency call-in pay
   
39.133   Regular part-time employees
   
39.134   Pay of temporary employees
   
39.135   Certification of payrolls
   
39.136   Incentive plan
Leave Program; Generally
   
39.155   Absence without leave
   
39.156   Holidays enumerated
   
39.157   Employees eligible for holiday leave
   
39.158   Jury duty and witness fees
   
39.159   Military service leave
   
39.160   Seniority rights for military service leave
   
39.161   Probationer entitled to leave for military service or for United
States government work
   
39.162   Leave of absence
   
39.163   Leave in national emergency
   
39.164   Personal leave days
   
39.165   Family/medical leave
   
39.166   Legislative leave
   
39.167   Health/life/dental
   
39.168   Deferred compensation program
   
39.169   Uniform/miscellaneous allowance
Vacation Leave
   
39.180   Eligibility and accumulation; full-time non-collective bargaining unit
employees
   
39.181   Eligibility and accumulation; other employees
   
39.182   Use
   
39.183   Maximum balance and payment
Sick Leave
   
39.195   Nature of leave
   
39.196   Accumulation and annual payout; generally
   
39.197   Accumulation and annual payout; midmanagement fire shift department
employees
   
39.198   Accrual by regular part-time employees
   
39.199   Temporary employees
   
39.200   Reporting off duty
   
39.201   Medical certification
   
39.202   Use for funerals
   
39.203   Use on vacation
   
39.204   Other uses
   
39.205   Payout at retirement or resignation in good standing
   
39.206   Duty-incurred injury
   
39.207   Mayor may grant additional sick leave
Employee’s Retirement System; Generally
   
39.220   Definitions
   
39.221   Officers of retirement system
   
39.222   Composition of membership
   
39.223   Termination of membership
   
39.224   Credited service
   
39.225   Military service credit
   
39.226   Member’s service accounts
   
39.227   Voluntary retirement
   
39.228   Early retirement; reduction of benefit
   
39.229   Mandatory retirement, police officer members
   
39.230   Retirement allowance; general member
   
39.231   Retirement allowance; police officer member
   
39.232   Terminal payment
   
39.233   Minimum retirement allowance
   
39.234   Mobility in city employment
   
39.235   Deferred retirement allowance
   
39.236   Retirement allowance options
   
39.237   Duty incurred disability
   
39.238   Duty disability allowance; retirement after voluntary retirement age
   
39.239   Duty disability allowance; retirement before voluntary retirement age
   
39.240   Non-duty-incurred disability
   
39.241   Non-duty-disability retirement allowance
   
39.242   Adjustment of disability allowance
   
39.243   Reexamination of disability retirants
   
39.244   Workers’ compensation offset
   
39.245   Service-connected death benefits
   
39.246   Natural death pensions
   
39.247   Refund of accumulated contributions
   
39.248   Accumulated contribution accounts
   
39.249   Retirement system payments
   
39.250   Retirement system contributions
   
39.251   Establishment of general division, police division
   
39.252   Limit of city’s contributions
   
39.253   Pensions allowed prior to 1951
   
39.254   Administrative expenses
   
39.255   Investment of assets
   
39.256   Method of making payments
   
39.257   Retirement system fund; allowance of regular interest
   
39.258   Group insurance deduction
   
39.258.1   Stipend
   
39.259   Assignments prohibited
   
39.260   Correction of errors
   
39.261   Redetermination of retirement allowances
   
39.262   Application of other ordinances
   
39.263   Adoption of department of community development employee’s pension
plan and trust for employees thereof
   
39.264   Changes in employee contribution levels
   
39.265   Change or modification of benefits; actuarial statement
   
39.266   City to maintain records; information to be furnished to administrator
   
39.267   Remarriage of surviving spouse
   
39.268   Termination of plan
Employee’s Retirement System; Board of Trustees
   
39.280   Administration of retirement system
   
39.281   Composition
   
39.282   Election of trustees
   
39.283   Terms of office
   
39.284   Oath of office
   
39.285   Filling of vacancies
   
39.286   Compensation
   
39.287   Meetings
   
39.288   Rules of procedure
   
39.289   Manner of action
   
39.290   Records of proceedings
   
39.291   Record of members
   
39.292   Annual report
   
39.293   Adoption of experience tables
   
39.294   Responsibility of fiduciary
Firefighters’ Pension Fund; Generally
   
39.305   Definitions
   
39.306   Officers of pension fund
   
39.307   Composition of membership
   
39.308   Termination of membership
   
39.309   Credited service
   
39.310   Military service credit
   
39.311   Members’ service accounts
   
39.312   Voluntary retirement
   
39.313   Early retirement; reduction of benefit
   
39.314   Normal retirement
   
39.315   Superannuation pension generally and benefit limits
   
39.316   Deferred superannuation retirement pension
   
39.317   Retirement pension options
   
39.318   Disability incurred
   
39.319   Disability pensions
   
39.320   Conditions affecting disability retirants
   
39.321   Workers’ compensation offset
   
39.322   Death in line of duty
   
39.323   Natural death benefits
   
39.324   Refund of accumulated contributions
   
39.325   Accumulated contribution accounts
   
39.326   Pension fund contributions
   
39.327   Pension fund payments
   
39.328   Crediting of state contributions, gifts and the like
   
39.329   Prorate of pensions
   
39.330   Pensions previously allowed
   
39.331   Administrative expenses
   
39.332   Investment of funds
   
39.333   Method of making payments
   
39.334   Allowance of regular interest
   
39.335   Assignments prohibited
   
39.336   Errors
   
39.337   Redetermination of pensions
   
39.338   Change in employee contribution levels
   
39.339   Limits of contributions
   
39.340   Changes or modifications of benefits; actuarial statement
   
39.341   Records; information furnished to administrator
   
39.342   Group insurance deduction
   
39.343   Remarriage of surviving spouse
   
39.344   Termination of plan
   
39.345   Stipend
Firefighters’ Pension Fund; Retirement Board
   
39.355   Administration
   
39.356   Composition, terms
   
39.357   Oath of office
   
39.358   Filling of vacancies
   
39.359   Compensation
   
39.360   Meetings
   
39.361   Rules of procedure
   
39.362   Manner of action
   
39.363   Record of proceedings
   
39.364   Administrative records
   
39.365   Annual reports
   
39.366   Mortality and other tables
   
39.367   Responsibilities of fiduciary
Cross-reference:
   City council, see
ch. 30
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   City retirement systems and pensions, see SDCL ch. 9-16
   Civil service regulations authorized, see SDCL 9-14-14, 9-14-15
   Municipal officers and employees, see SDCL ch. 9-14
   Salaries and compensation of municipal officers, see SDCL 9-14-28
   State retirement system, see SDCL ch. 3-12
   Veterans’ preference in employment, see SDCL 3-3-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 39.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
39.001 through
39.005,
39.020 through
39.022,
39.035 through
39.068,
39.080 through
39.092,
39.105 through
39.109,
39.120 through
39.136,
39.155 through
39.169,
39.180 through
39.183 and
39.195 through
39.207, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANNIVERSARY DATE.  The date used to determine eligibility for step
advancement.
   APPOINTIVE AUTHORITY.  The mayor or his or her authorized representative.
   APPOINTIVE OFFICER. Those employees in classifications appointed by and
subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor or the city council that
require the advice and consent of the council. This definition shall also
include medical-appointed staff and mayoral-appointed staff that do not require
advice and consent of the council.
   BOARD.  The civil service board.
   CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEE.  An employee providing support services to a director,
elected official, human resources, or the city attorney as determined by
executive order of the mayor. Classified employees are nonexempt under the Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNIT. An organization selected by secret ballot by a
majority vote of the employees of a unit chosen for the purpose of collective
bargaining and shall be the exclusive representative of all employees in the
unit.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD.  A director of a major organizational unit.
   DISABILITY.  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more of the major life activities of an employee and/or applicant for
employment. A qualified individual with a disability means the disabled
individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of the employment position he or she holds or desires.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES EMPLOYEE. An employee providing direct support to 911
emergency response for police, fire, and medical services not represented by a
collective bargaining unit. Emergency services employees are nonexempt under
the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
   EMPLOYMENT ANNIVERSARY DATE. The date used for determining vacations, sick
leave, and other benefits. This date shall be the date the officer or employee
entered service with the city continuously as a regular full-time or regular
part-time employee.
   EXEMPT EMPLOYEE.  An employee exempted from the minimum wage and overtime
provisions of FLSA. An exempt employee is classified as a salaried employee.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY.  For purposes of sick leave usage, means parent, child,
spouse, parents of the spouse, dependent residing in the employee's home, or an
employee's grandparent, grandchild, or sibling afflicted with a serious medical
condition.
   INTERIM EMPLOYEE.  An employee who based on exceptional business needs
regularly works greater than 28 hours per week and longer than six months per
year and who is not under civil service nor eligible to receive employee
benefits other than access to the city's health plan. The director shall
oversee and approve all interim employee hiring procedures.
   MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE.  An employee and classification in the salary system
not represented by a collective bargaining unit. Midmanagement employees are
classified as exempt under FLSA.
   NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEE.  An employee covered by FLSA. A nonexempt employee is
classified as an hourly employee.
   OFFICERS.  Those employees exempt from civil service and designated
appointive officers.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An employee who works 28 hours or less per week during
a calendar year and who is not under civil service nor eligible to receive
employee benefits.
   PAY GRADE.  A portion of the pay plan into which positions are assigned,
consisting of minimum, maximum, and intermediate steps.
   PROMOTION.  Applies to an actual vacancy resulting in the movement of an
employee from his or her present job classification to another job
classification having a higher maximum biweekly or hourly rate of pay.
   REASSIGNMENT.  Applies to personnel action where no actual vacancy exists
but an employee's job classification and/or salary grade has changed.
   RECREATION SEASONAL EMPLOYEE. An employee who is employed in a position
where the nature of the work involves employment in a recreational
establishment and/or program for a duration of no greater than six months (180
days) in a calendar year, is not under civil service nor eligible to receive
employee benefits, and who must incur a 13-week break in service from one six-
month duration of employment to the beginning of the next six-month duration of
employment. Recreation seasonal establishments include ice skating rinks,
swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, summer camps, or similar
activities
   REGULAR FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee in the civil service of the city who
is legally an incumbent of a position in the classified service. Appointive
officials, for purposes of §§
39.001 through
39.005,
39.020 through
39.022,
39.035 through
39.068,
39.080 through
39.092,
39.105 through
39.109,
39.120 through
39.136,
39.155 through
39.169,
39.180 through
39.183 and
39.195 through
39.207, are  considered regular full-time employees.
   REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEE (RPT). An employee in the civil service of the
city who is regularly scheduled to work less than 40 hours a week but more than
19 hours a week.
   SEASONAL EMPLOYEE.  An employee who is employed in a seasonal position for a
duration of no greater than six months (180 days) in a calendar year, is not
under civil service nor eligible to receive employee benefits, and who must
incur a 13-week break in service from one six-month duration of employment to
the beginning of the next six-month duration of employment. Seasonal work
includes, but is not limited to, snow removal, construction, parks maintenance,
street maintenance, etc.
   SECRETARY.  The civil service board secretary.
   SEPARATION.  Resignation from civil service in good standing, discharge,
retirement, or death.
   SICK LEAVE.
      (1)   The absence of the mayor and any appointive officer and employee,
midmanagement, and classified employee because of illness or attendance upon a
member of immediate family due to illness, provided that no officer or
employee, unless officially assigned to special duty, shall be granted sick
leave for any injuries or illness resulting from any employment other than that
required in the course of his or her assigned duties.
      (2)   The officer or employee shall receive full compensation during sick
leave.
   STEPS.  The salary allocated to a pay grade and listed steps 1 through 9.
   TRANSFER.  The movement of an employee:
      (1)   From one department to another department without a change in job
classification; or
      (2)   From one job classification to another job classification having an
equal or lower maximum biweekly or hourly rate of pay.
   WORKWEEK.
      (1)   Forty hours in each seven-day fixed and reoccurring period.
      (2)   Pertains to nonexempt employees only.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.209; 1992 Code, § 30-1) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970; Ord.
82-73, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 39-80, passed 5-19-1980; Ord. 45-82, passed 4-26-
1982; Ord. 99-84, passed 6-25-1984; Ord. 8-89, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 59-89,
passed 6-19-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994;
Ord. 66-95, passed 5-1-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed
4-10-2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 50-05, passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 94-06,
passed 8-7-2006; Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-2014; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016;
Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 39.002 SALARY GRADES.
   The various salary grades and schedules for the several officers and
employees of the city shall be as provided by executive order of the mayor or
as separately provided by a negotiated agreement for members of that collective
bargaining unit only. All salary grades shall be on file in the office of the
city clerk.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.205; 1992 Code, § 30-5) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970; Ord.
2682, passed 5-18-1970; Ord. 2724, passed 12-7-1970; Ord. 2735, passed 2-8-
1971; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.003 BONDS FOR OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES.
   When required by the mayor or by state law, the various officers and
employees of the city other than those appointed officers described in §§
39.106 and
39.107 shall furnish an under taking to be approved by the mayor in an amount
as designated by the mayor from time to time conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of their positions and to account, pay over and
deliver all money or property coming into their hands by virtue of their
position according to law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.204; 1992 Code, § 30-6) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970; Ord.
87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.004 EMPLOYEES’ WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FUND.
   (a)   The city workers’ compensation fund is hereby created.
   (b)   Funding shall be made through appropriations and/or transfer of
unencumbered funds to maintain current liability reserves and a balance to
provide sufficient monies to meet future liabilities.
   (c)   None of the monies appropriated or paid into the fund shall be drawn
out of the fund except:
      (1)   For the purpose of paying claims received by employees of the city,
resulting from injuries received while in the discharge of their employment as
employees of the city as provided in §
39.206 and arising out of and during the course of their employment; and
      (2)   For special purposes related to workers’ compensation as identified
and authorized by mayor action.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.401; 1992 Code, § 30-7) (Ord. 77-86, passed 8-25-1986;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 28-00, passed
4-10-2000)
§ 39.005 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COVERAGE FOR CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (a)   Members of the city council shall be treated as employees for the
purpose of extending the state workers' compensation coverage.
   (b)   A council member shall provide written notice of a work-related injury
claim to the human resources department not later than three business days
after the actual occurrence of an injury. The notice shall include the date,
location, and relationship of the injury to the job. Failure to provide the
required notice shall result in a denial of the claim. The city shall not be
liable if notice is not provided pursuant to this section.
(1992 Code, § 30-8) (Ord. 46-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001;
Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.006 IRREVOCABLE 115 TRUST ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   The city of Sioux Falls Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) 115
Trust Fund Agreement established in this chapter effective January 1, 2017,
shall be irrevocable and shall conform to all applicable sections of the
Internal Revenue Code, the statement and purpose of this section, and all
ordinances, rules, regulations interpreting the foregoing provisions.
   (b)   The 115 Trust shall consist of city contributions and may contain
employee contributions. The 115 Trust shall be used as a funding vehicle
whereby the trustee of the 115 Trust will accept contributions to the 115 Trust
for holding and administration. The trustee will: (i) hold, invest, and
reinvest the 115 Trust, and (ii) pay benefits from the 115 Trust solely to
provide health and welfare benefits to retirees and eligible spouses and
dependents of retirees entitled to health coverage under this chapter.
   (c)   The 115 Trust provides that in no event will Trust assets be
distributed to or revert to any entity that is not a state, a political
subdivision of a state, or an entity whose income is excluded from gross income
under section 115 of the Internal Revenue Code. Contributions to fund the
benefits under the 115 Trust shall be designated by the city. None of the
contributions are elective or discretionary, directly or indirectly. The amount
of the contributions is established by the city and is not subject to any
election of the employees.
(Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
§ 39.020 CREATED.
   There is hereby created the human resources department for the city, which
shall function and operate under the direct supervision and direction of the
mayor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.301; 1992 Code, § 30-2) (Ord. 1958, passed 6-23-1958;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.021 FUNCTIONS.
   The human resources department shall recruit, examine and qualify applicants
for the various city jobs. It shall administer the following programs: employee
benefits, equal opportunity and affirmative action, civil service including
position classification and compensation plans and system, labor contract
administration and negotiations, employee development and communication;
maintain employee personnel records and payroll administration for all
temporary and regular full-time and part-time employees; assure conformance
with established personnel rules and ordinances; and administer the employees’
and firefighters’ pension funds.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.303; 1992 Code, § 30-3) (Ord. 1958, passed 6-23-1958;
Ord. 44-80, passed 5-27-1980; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.022 DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
   The director of human resources, in this chapter hereinafter referred to as
director, shall not be a member of the civil service board. The director is
responsible for the overall operation, planning, development and administration
of the human resources department, citywide benefits, the civil service system,
personnel policies and procedures and labor relations activities.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.302; 1992 Code, § 30-4) (Ord. 1958, passed 6-23-1958;
Ord. 44-80, passed 5-27-1980; Ord. 99-84, passed 6-25-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed
11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-
00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-05, passed 1-10-2005)
CIVIL SERVICE; GENERALLY
§ 39.035 SCOPE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, this subchapter shall apply to
all employees, except that it shall not apply to temporary employees not under
civil service. If an employee is represented by a collective bargaining unit
which has entered into an agreement with the city, the terms of the agreement
will be controlling if in conflict with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.102; 1992 Code, § 30-18) (Ord. 1999, passed 9-21-1959;
Ord. 2454, passed 10-31-1966; Ord. 8-89, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed
11-25-1991; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.036 APPLICATION TO APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   (a)    This subchapter shall not apply to elective or appointive officers
unless otherwise specifically stated. The term APPOINTIVE OFFICERS as used in
this section shall include all appointive officers specifically provided for by
statutes of the state and all other officers appointed to fill appointive
offices created by ordinance, executive order, or resolution as authorized by
the statutes of the state or city charter.
   (b)    Except for the city attorney, police chief, and fire chief, anyone
holding an appointive office on or before December 31, 2015, who at the time of
his or her appointment thereto, was in the civil service of the city shall,
upon his or her removal from appointive office, be returned to his or her
former position and pay as an employee of the city, and the period of his or
her tenure as an appointive officer shall be included in his or her civil
service rights. This provision does not apply to any appointive officer who has
been removed from appointive office for any reason that would warrant a
demotion, suspension, or discharge of any employee who is subject to this
chapter.
   (c)   The city attorney, police chief, and fire chief, irrespective of
appointment date, who at the time of his or her appointment thereto, was in the
civil service of the city shall, upon his or her removal from appointive
office, or absence of reappointment, or resignation in good standing be
returned to his or her former position and pay grade and classification as an
employee of the city, and the period of his or her tenure as an appointive
officer shall be included in his or her civil service rights. This provision
does not apply to a city attorney, police chief, or fire chief who has been
removed from appointive office for any reason that would warrant a demotion,
suspension, or discharge of any employee who is subject to this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 3.102–3.104; 1992 Code, § 30-19) (Ord. 1999, passed 9-21-
1959; Ord. 2153, passed 9-17-1962; Ord. 55-80, passed 6-23-1980; Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 133-15, passed 12-15-2015;
Ord. 86-20, passed 10-6-2020; Ord. 6-22, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 39.037 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   No person or officer shall willfully and corruptly obstruct any employee or
applicant in respect to his or her right of examination. No person or officer
shall falsely grade or report upon the examination or proper standing of any
employee or applicant examined under the civil service rules. No person or
officer shall willfully make any false representations concerning either the
employee or applicant or the results of his or her examination. No person or
officer shall furnish to any employee or applicant any special or confidential
information for the purpose of improving or injuring the chances of that
employee or applicant on the promotional or employment examination.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.121; 1992 Code, § 30-22) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.038 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   No officer or employee under the civil service or appointive officers shall,
directly or indirectly, contribute money or anything of value to or render
service in behalf of the candidacy of any candidate for nomination or election
to any city office. The expression in private of personal views concerning
candidates for political office is not prohibited hereby. Violation of this
section shall be grounds for discharge or other disciplinary action.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.124; 1992 Code, § 30-23) (Ord. 98-89, passed 9-18-1989;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.039 POLITICAL INTERFERENCE.
   No officer or employee of the city shall discharge, degrade or promote or in
any manner change the official rank of any other officer or employee or promise
or threaten to do so for giving or withholding any contribution of money or
other valuable thing for any party or political purpose or for refusal or
neglect to render any party political service.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.123; 1992 Code, § 30-24) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.040 UNLAWFUL PAYMENTS.
   (a)   No applicant for appointment in the civil service, either directly or
indirectly, shall pay or promise to pay any money or other valuable thing to
any person for or on account of his or her appointment or proposed appointment.
   (b)   No officer or employee shall pay or promise to pay, either directly or
indirectly, any money or other valuable thing to any person on account of his
or her promotion.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.125; 1992 Code, § 30-25) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.041 UNLAWFUL INFLUENCE.
   No person while holding any office in the government of the city or any
nomination for or while seeking a nomination for appointment to any office
shall corruptly use or promise to use, either directly or indirectly, any
official authority or influence in the way of conferring upon any person, or in
order to secure or aid any person in securing any office or public employment
or any nomination, confirmation, promotion or increase in salary, upon the
consideration or condition that the vote or political influence or action of
the last named person or any other person shall be given or used in behalf of
any candidate, officer or party, or upon any other corrupt condition or
consideration.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.126; 1992 Code, § 30-26) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.042 DISCRIMINATION.
   No person in the civil service or seeking admission thereto shall be
appointed, reduced or removed, or in any way favored or discriminated against
because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national
origin, creed, ancestry, pregnancy, age, genetic information or disability.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.127; 1992 Code, § 30-27) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.043 EXAMINATIONS GENERALLY.
   All applicants for employment in the civil service shall be subject to
examination under the rules made by the civil service board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.113; 1992 Code, § 30-29) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.044 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   In order to entitle the applicant for a position in the civil service
to appear for examination or to be examined, he or she must sign a verified
application stating:
      (1)   Full name, residence and post office address;
      (2)   Previous employment; and
      (3)   Education.
   (b)   Other information shall be furnished by the applicant as may
reasonably be required by the civil service board concerning the applicant’s
qualifications for the public service.
   (c)   Applicants may be required to file their fingerprints.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.114; 1992 Code, § 30-30) (Ord. 99-84, passed 6-25-1984;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.045 FALSE STATEMENTS IN APPLICATION.
   Any false statement knowingly made by any applicant in his or her
application for a position in the civil service for admission to any
examination or made at his or her request or with his or her knowledge in any
certificate which may accompany his or her application, or other fraudulent
conduct, shall be regarded as good cause for excluding him or her from the
examination or for removing his or her name from any eligible list.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.116; 1992 Code, § 30-32) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.046 EXAMINERS.
   The director or designee may act as or appoint examiners who may either be
in or out of the official service of the city whose duty it shall be to
participate in civil service examinations and who shall perform those other
duties as the board may prescribe.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 3.110, 3.119; 1992 Code, § 30-33) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-
25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.047 PREFERENCE FOR FORMER MILITARY PERSONNEL.
   Veterans shall be given preference in the hiring process consistent with
state law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.108; 1992 Code, § 30-34) (Ord. 82-73, passed 10-1-1973;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 97-16, passed
8-9-2016)
§ 39.048 MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS; AND/OR ALCOHOL AND DRUG SCREENING.
   A preemployment medical examination and/or alcohol and drug screening shall
be administered following a conditional offer of employment to all entering
employees in a particular classification of the civil service. Temporary
employees shall be subject to the drug screen examination following an offer of
temporary employment. The results of all examinations shall be used in
accordance with regulations issued under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.137; 1992 Code, § 30-35) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 97-16, passed
8-9-2016)
§ 39.049 DISQUALIFICATIONS.
   The civil service board and/or designee may refuse to examine an applicant
or after examination to certify an eligible person and may remove his or her
name from the eligible list for any of the following reasons:
   (a)   He or she is found to lack any of the established preliminary
requirements for the position and grade for which he or she applies; or where
bona fide, physical job requirements exist in a position that cannot be
reasonably accommodated;
   (b)   He or she poses a significant risk to the health and safety of others
or to property that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodations;
   (c)   He or she has been guilty of a crime or immoral conduct;
   (d)   He or she tests positive for drugs or alcohol as a result of an
alcohol and drug screening;
   (e)   He or she has been guilty of a dishonest act;
   (f)   He or she has been dismissed from public service for delinquency or
misconduct;
   (g)   He or she has used or attempted to use any personal or political
influence to further his or her eligibility or appointment;
   (h)   He or she is found by the board to have committed any act, either
while in the service of the city or otherwise, or to have any deficiency or
disqualification which in the judgment of the board would be sufficiently
serious to constitute a just cause for discharge from the city service; or
   (i)   He or she has been found to be deficient in personal qualifications
requisite for the position for which he or she applies.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.132; 1992 Code, § 30-36) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.050 NAMES CERTIFIED; NEW HIRES.
   The civil service board or its designee, shall, as soon as possible after
the examinations, certify to the hiring authority the names of the eligible
candidates for each class of position in alphabetical order and absent test
scores. The hiring authority may select any one of the candidates certified by
the civil service board or its designee subject to review by the human
resources department. All vacancies and positions under civil service which
shall occur before the holding of the next examination shall be filled from the
list, except when there exists a reinstatement eligible list.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.120; 1992 Code, § 30-37a) (Ord. 45-82, passed 4-26-1982;
Ord. 39-89, passed 5-8-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed
3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.051 NAMES CERTIFIED; PROMOTION/TRANSFER.
   The civil service board or its designee shall, as soon as possible after the
examinations required in this subchapter, certify to the hiring authority the
names of the eligible candidates for each class of position. The eligible list
for nonmanagement uniformed police and fire department vacancies shall be
certified by name in order of highest score. All other eligibility lists shall
be certified by name in alphabetical order and absent test scores. All
vacancies in the positions under civil service which shall occur before the
holding of the next examination shall be filled from the list.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.120; 1992 Code, § 30-37b) (Ord. 45-82, passed 4-26-1982;
Ord. 39-89, passed 5-8-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 71-10, passed
10-4-2010)
§ 39.052 TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENTS AND APPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   To prevent the delay of public business or to meet extraordinary
exigencies, a department head may make temporary assignments or appointments
within a department or to another department.
   (b)   If the temporary assignment or appointment is of an employee from one
department to another department, it shall be with the consent of the head of
the receiving department and at the discretion of the head of the transferring
department, from those employees in the transferring department who are
qualified to perform the assigned duties with the receiving department.
   (c)   When employees from other departments are temporarily assigned or
appointed to another department under division (a) above, they shall be subject
to the direction and supervision of the receiving department personnel only for
the purposes of accomplishing the immediate required tasks and hours of work.
Otherwise and for all other purposes, the temporarily assigned or appointed
employees remain subject to the rules, regulations and rights of the department
from which they were temporarily assigned. The temporarily assigned or
appointed employees shall receive wages at their normal scale of pay with their
normal employing department, when temporarily assigned to another department,
which wages will be paid from the budget of the receiving department. Any
overtime wages accrued, as defined by §
39.129, will be computed on the employee’s normal scale of pay with their
normal employing department, and will be paid from the budget of the receiving
department.
   (d)   In the specific implementation of this section, when a snow removal
alert as defined in §
96.102 is declared, the department head of any department may temporarily
assign or appoint to the public works department as many of the employees of
that department as are available, or are required by the public works
department for the purpose of efficient snow removal.
   (e)   Nothing in division (d) above shall prevent persons not presently
employed by the city from being so temporarily assigned or appointed to a
department under the provisions of division (a) above.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.128; 1992 Code, § 30-38) (Ord. 87-83, passed 11-14-1983;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.053 PROMOTIONS GENERALLY.
   The civil service board shall provide by rule for promotions to all
positions in the classified service, based on merit, efficiency, character,
conduct and seniority.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.129; 1992 Code, § 30-39) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.054 PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATION.
   (a)   Promotion to any position in the classified service shall be by means
of examination, except as otherwise provided by the ordinances and civil
service rules of the city. Examinations for promotion shall be held when there
are one or more persons eligible to take the examinations and it is considered
for the good of the city to hold the examination.
   (b)   An original entrance examination may also be held when:
      (1)   There are not more than two persons eligible for promotion to a
class of position covered by a collective bargaining agreement, unless
otherwise specifically set forth in that agreement; or
      (2)   There are not more than six persons eligible for promotion to a
class of position under civil service not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.133; 1992 Code, § 30-40) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 84-92, passed 9-28-1992)
§ 39.055 ELIGIBILITY FOR PROMOTION.
   (a)   The length of city service necessary to qualify a person for promotion
shall be prescribed by the board at the time of examination, provided that the
time shall not be less than six months. This six-month minimum service
requirement may be waived by the mayor upon recommendation of the director
based on individual circumstances to meet organizational needs.
   (b)   SERVICE as used in this section means service as a result of regular
appointment. Persons on leave of absence or on the reinstatement list, if
otherwise qualified, shall be eligible to take a promotional examination only
with the approval of the board.
   (c)   If the employee is represented by a bargaining unit which has entered
into an agreement with the city concerning eligibility for promotion, the terms
of that agreement will govern that employee’s eligibility for promotion within
that bargaining unit.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.134; 1992 Code, § 30-41) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.056 PROBATION PERIOD.
   (a)   An appointment is not complete until a 12-month probation has elapsed.
An interdepartmental promotion/transfer is not complete until a six-month
probation has elapsed unless otherwise specified in a collective bargaining
agreement. Completion of a probation period may be waived by the sending and
receiving departments for an interdepartmental promotion/transfer. A
probationer may be discharged or demoted at any time within a probationary
period upon the recommendation of the head of the department. The department
head shall notify the board at the end of the probation period as to acceptance
or rejection of the probationer.
   (b)   A reclassification shall not require the completion of a probation
period. The employee will progress in the normal prescribed intervals based on
the effective date of his or her last increase unless the anniversary date is
adjusted as the result of a change in the hourly or biweekly rate of pay.
   (c)   Should a probationer be absent from the job for more than 30 days
during the probationary period, the probationary period will be extended for a
period of time equal to the absence in order to enable the probationer to
complete the full probationary period.
   (d)   Should a promoted probationary employee decide within 30 calendar days
of promotion to return to his or her former position, the employee shall make
the request to the current department head and shall be returned to the former
position within ten calendar days of the request. Should a transferred
probationary employee decide within 30 calendar days of transfer to return to
his or her former position, the employee shall make the request to his or her
current department head and may be returned to the former position within ten
calendar days if that former position has not yet been filled or eliminated.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.130; 1992 Code, § 30-42) (Ord. 2129, passed 2-5-1962;
Ord. 84-75, passed 12-15-1975; Ord. 24-91, passed 3-25-1991; Ord. 87-91, passed
11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.057 DEMOTION ALLOWED.
   An employee may be demoted from a higher rated position to a lower rated
position for cause. The request may be made by the department head, but the
demotion shall become effective only upon recommendation of the supervising
department director and concurrence by the human resources department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.138; 1992 Code, § 30-44) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-05, passed
1-10-2005)
§ 39.058 DEMOTION, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION; GENERALLY.
   No employee shall be suspended, discharged or demoted from his or her
position except for just cause, which shall not be race, color, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, national origin, creed, ancestry, pregnancy, age, genetic
information or disability.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.122; 1992 Code, § 30-45) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.059 DEMOTION, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION; CAUSES.
   The following will be considered as causes for discharge, suspension, or
demotion of an officer or an employee in the classified civil service, although
discharges, suspensions, or demotions may be made for other causes:
   (a)   Has been convicted of a criminal offense or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude;
   (b)   Has willfully, wantonly, or through culpable negligence been guilty of
brutality or cruelty to a prisoner or to a person in custody, provided the act
committed was not necessarily or lawfully done in self-defense, or to protect
the lives of others, or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully in custody;
   (c)   Has willfully violated any of the provisions of the civil service or
of the rules of the board;
   (d)   Has violated any lawful and reasonable official regulation or order,
or failed to obey any lawful or reasonable direction made and given by his or
her superior officer, where the violation or failure to obey amounts to an act
of insubordination or a serious breach of proper discipline, or resulted or
reasonably might be expected to result in loss or injury to the city, or to the
public or to the prisoners or wards of the city;
   (e)   Has been guilty of acts constituting insubordination or of any conduct
unbecoming an officer or employee of the city;
   (f)   Has committed any one of the following unless it is committed by a
public safety officer who is legally or specifically authorized to do so while
acting in the line of duty:
      (1)   Has unlawfully used, possessed, manufactured, distributed,
dispensed, or been under the influence of any controlled substance on or off
the job;
      (2)   Has unlawfully used, possessed, manufactured, distributed, or
dispensed drug paraphernalia on or off the job;
      (3)   Has at any time used, possessed, or been under the influence of
alcohol while working, while performing job duties, while on the city's
premises, or while operating city vehicles, machinery, or equipment; or
      (4)   Has violated any provision of the city's substance abuse prevention
policy.
   (g)   Is wantonly offensive in his or her conduct or language toward the
public or toward city officers or employees;
   (h)   Is incompetent or inefficient in the performance of the duties of his
or her position;
   (i)   Is careless or negligent of the property of the city;
   (j)   Has disclosed privileged or confidential city information to
unauthorized person(s) without the specific authorization of a director or
manager to do so;
   (k)   Has used or threatened to use, or attempted to use political influence
in securing promotion, leave of absence, transfer, change of grade, pay, or
character of work;
   (l)   Has induced or has attempted to induce an officer or employee in the
service of the city to commit an unlawful act or to act in violation of any
lawful and reasonable department or official regulation or order; or has taken
any fee, gift, or other valuable thing in the course of his or her work or in
connection with it for his or her personal use from any citizen, when the fee,
gift, or other valuable thing is given in the hope or expectation of receiving
a favor or better treatment than that accorded other citizens;
   (m)   Has induced or attempted to induce any person doing business with the
city to give employment to any relative of the city officer or employee, or has
induced or attempted to induce any person to show any material favor or
consideration of any kind to any relative of the city officer or employee, when
the officer or employee holds a position in a department or office having
direct contact with the person;
   (n)   Has been guilty of an immoral or criminal act; or
   (o)   Has been guilty of any other act or omission deemed sufficient cause
by the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.139; 1992 Code, § 30-46) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 97-16, passed
8-9-2016)
§ 39.060 DEMOTION, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION; NOTICE.
   (a)   Notice of disciplinary action to include warning, suspension,
reduction, or discharge from a position in the civil service shall be
documented on an incident report form and immediately forwarded to the human
resources department. A copy of this incident report shall be provided to the
disciplined employee.
   (b)   If an employee is being discharged, he or she shall be given a copy of
the reasons for his or her discharge in writing and shall be afforded a
predetermination opportunity to respond to intended disciplinary action.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.122; 1992 Code, § 30-47) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed
4-10-2000; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.061 DEMOTION, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION; APPEAL ALLOWED.
   Within ten calendar days after the issuance of the employee incident report
identifying the removal, discharge, suspension or reduction of a person holding
a position in the classified civil service of the city, the person may appeal
the action to the civil service board by filing a written notice of the appeal
with the human resources department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.122; 1992 Code, § 30-48) (Ord. 82-73, passed 10-1-1973;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed
4-10-2000; Ord. 04-04, passed 1-12-2004)
§ 39.062 DEMOTION, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION; HEARING.
   (a)   Within 30 days after receiving notice of appeal from a person holding
a position in the classified civil service of the city, the civil service board
shall set a date for hearing on or investigation of the reasons for the
removal, discharge, suspension or reduction. Notice of the time and place of
the hearing or investigation shall be delivered to the employee appealing
either personally or by certified mail. Notice by regular mail shall also be
given the officer taking the action appealed from.
   (b)   If the conduct which is the subject of the action is pending before a
grand jury or court, the board may, upon request by the person subject to the
action, postpone consideration of the matter. Upon making the request, the
person shall, in writing, waive all right to pay during the postponement. The
person may terminate the postponement upon ten days’ written notice to the
board.
   (c)   A hearing panel composed of three board members shall conduct the
hearing or investigation. The employee appealing shall have full opportunity to
be heard and may be represented by counsel or a union representative. The city
attorney or unit director taking the action shall be represented by the office
of the city attorney. However, a unit director retains additional counsel, the
expense so incurred shall not be paid by the city.
   (d)   In the course of the hearing or investigation any member of the board
shall have the power to administer oaths and shall have power to secure by
subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
books and papers relevant to the hearing or investigation. The board may order
all evidence to be taken by a competent reporter. The investigation shall be
confined to the determination of the question of whether the removal,
suspension, demotion or discharge was or was not made for race, color,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, creed, ancestry, pregnancy,
age, genetic information or disability and was or was not made in good faith
for cause.
   (e)   Failure of the appealing employee to appear before the civil service
board at the time, date and place as indicated upon the notice of hearing
delivered to the employee will cause the board to find in favor of the city. In
addition, the appealing employee will be charged with all expenses connected
with arranging a civil service board appeals hearing. The city shall collect
those expenses from the appealing employee as the city deems appropriate.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.122; 1992 Code, § 30-49) (Ord. 50-83, passed 7-11-1983;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 99-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 4-05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 39.063 DEMOTION, DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION; DETERMINATION BY BOARD.
   After an investigation into the discharge, removal, suspension or reduction
of a person in the civil service, the civil service board may, if in its
estimation the evidence is conclusive, affirm the removal, or if it shall find
that the removal, suspension or demotion was made for race, color, religion,
sex, sexual orientation, national origin, creed, ancestry, pregnancy, age,
genetic information or disability or was not made in good faith for cause,
shall order the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of the person in the
office, place, position or employment from which the person was removed,
suspended, demoted or discharged. The reinstatement may be retroactive with pay
from the time of the removal, suspension, demotion or discharge. The board upon
the investigation, in lieu of affirming the removal, suspension, demotion or
discharge, may modify the order of removal, suspension, demotion or discharge
by directing a suspension without pay for a given period and subsequent
restoration of duty or demotion in classification, grade or pay. The findings
of the board shall be certified in writing to the director, and shall be
forthwith enforced by the officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.122; 1992 Code, § 30-50) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 4-05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 39.064 REINSTATEMENT.
   Any officer or employee suspended or under suspension shall be entitled to
reinstatement only in the discretion of the department head, unless otherwise
ordered by the board following a hearing on appeal.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.140; 1992 Code, § 30-51) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.065 MATTERS TO BE REPORTED.
   The director shall report to the board:
   (a)   A complete list of civil service employees prepared by listing the
rank and position of each employee;
   (b)   Every resignation, discharge, reduction or suspension from service of
employees certified to him or her and the cause for the resignation, discharge,
reduction or suspension;
   (c)   Leaves of absence; and
   (d)   The name of each new employee or appointee and the position of
employment or appointment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.141; 1992 Code, § 30-52) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997)
§ 39.066 STAFF REDUCTION.
   (a)   Whenever it becomes necessary to reduce the civil service classified,
emergency services, or exempt management work force in any classification, the
appointing officer shall designate the classification in the department from
which layoffs shall take place. The person serving in that classification shall
be laid off in inverse order of their appointment to that classification, the
last one so appointed to be the first one laid off. The temporary appointees in
that classification and grade of position shall in all cases be first laid off.
The names of the civil service employees laid off shall be placed upon a
reinstatement eligible list under the classifications applicable to the
employees for two years.
   (b)   Any officer or employee who has been laid off shall be eligible for
reinstatement to the position of the same classification and grade and as to
the position from which the layoff took place. Whenever it is desired to
increase the force or fill a vacancy in any department, the names on the
reinstatement eligible list under the appropriate classification shall be
certified for reemployment in the same order as originally appointed. They
shall be reemployed according to seniority of service, provided that when
eligibles upon the reinstatement eligible list have been exhausted, the general
eligible lists may be used.
(1992 Code, § 30-53) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-
1997; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.067 BENEFITS FOR LAID OFF EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   (1)   Civil service classified, emergency services, or exempt
management employees who are laid off will retain their accrued hours of sick
leave for 24 months following their layoff. After 24 months of being laid off
from city service, all accrued sick leave will not be recognized by the city
and eliminated from official records.
      (2)   Any employee who is laid off from the city civil service may not
earn or accrue additional sick leave nor be paid for any personal sickness
after their layoff. Employees who retire from the city’s service before or
during their layoff will be paid for their accrued sick leave according to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Any employee who is reemployed by the city before 24 months have
elapsed since their layoff will have their sick leave accrual reinstated, and
the employee will earn sick leave at the existing accrual rate.
   (b)   When civil service classified, emergency services, or exempt
management employees are laid off from the city’s service, they will be paid
for vacation hours earned to date in accordance with § 39.183. If the employee
is reemployed with the city before 24 months have elapsed since their layoff,
the employee will begin to accrue vacation leave at the same rate as when that
employee was laid off. If the employee is rehired after being laid off for 24
months, that employee will accrue vacation benefits at the same rate as a new
employee.
   (c)   Under the provisions of the city’s health plan, any civil service
classified, emergency services, or exempt management employee that is laid off
and later reemployed by the city must apply for and qualify for coverage as a
new employee unless reemployed within 18 months of layoff, provided the
employee retains and pays for the coverage during the 18-month period of
layoff.
   (d)   If the employee is rehired in the same classification and department
that the employee held before the layoff took place, there is no requirement
for a probationary period if the employee has passed the original probationary
period for that classification.
   (e)   Employees called back to their former positions will receive their
former regular base salary or hourly rate of pay and all increases in pay which
were applied during the period of layoff.
(1992 Code, § 30-54) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-
1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23,
passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.068 REEMPLOYMENT OF SEPARATED EMPLOYEE.
   A civil service employee who has resigned or otherwise separated from a
position with the city in good standing, may upon recommendation of the
director and approval of the mayor, be reemployed without examination in a
former position or similar position with an equal or lessor pay grade for which
the employee is qualified within one year from the date of separation from
service. No probationary period shall be required for a civil service employee
so reemployed.
(1992 Code, § 30-55) (Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.069 APPLICATION FOR UNIFORMED POLICE AND FIRE POSITIONS.
   In addition to the application requirements in §
39.044, police and fire applicants must be: (1) at least 21 years of age at the
time of the entrance civil service examination, and (2) no greater than 44
years of age at the time of the entrance civil service examination.
(Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.070 MANDATORY RETIREMENT FOR UNIFORMED POLICE AND FIRE POSITIONS.
   Any member of the Class B South Dakota Retirement System, with the exception
of uniformed employees of the fire prevention division, who has attained or
attains age 60 years shall be retired on the first day of the calendar month
following the month in which the member attains age 60 years.
(Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
CIVIL SERVICE BOARD
§ 39.080 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   A city civil service board is hereby created. It shall consist of four
members.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1992 Code, § 30-58) (Ord. 37-73, passed 4-30-1973;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 99-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 39.081 QUALIFICATIONS.
   No officer or employee of the city shall be a member of the civil service
board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1992 Code, § 30-59) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-1999)
§ 39.082 APPOINTMENT.
   The members of the civil service board shall be appointed by the mayor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1992 Code, § 30-60) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.083 TERMS.
   The members of the civil service board shall be appointed for staggered
terms of five years.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1992 Code, § 30-61) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.084 COMPENSATION.
   The civil service board shall establish the compensation of board members
for attendance at meetings. Compensation shall not exceed $5 per meeting or $25
per hearing.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.111; 1972 Code, § 30-63; 1992 Code, § 30-62) (Ord. 2016,
passed 12-28-1959; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.085 TEMPORARY MEMBER.
   If a member of the civil service board is unable to act as a member, by
reason of illness, or disqualification to act at a hearing on appeal, and in
the opinion of the board the business at hand requires immediate attention, the
mayor may appoint a person, meeting the qualifications set forth in this
section, to act instead of the ill or disqualified member until the particular
business requiring immediate action has been transacted. The compensation for
the services of the acting member of the board shall be the same as provided
for the regular members of the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1972 Code, § 30-64; 1992 Code, § 30-63) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.086 CHAIRPERSON.
   The civil service board, at its first meeting each year, shall appoint from
its members a chairperson.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1972 Code, § 30-65; 1992 Code, § 30-64) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.087 QUORUM.
   Three members of the civil service board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1972 Code, § 30-66; 1992 Code, § 30-65) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 99-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 39.088 AFFIRMATIVE VOTE FOR ACTION.
   No rule shall be adopted, nor shall any decision on an appeal be made except
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the civil service board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.101; 1972 Code, § 30-67; 1992 Code, § 30-66) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.089 RULES TO BE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The civil service board shall adopt, amend and enforce a code of rules
and regulations providing for appointment and employment in all positions in
the position classification plan based on merit, efficiency, character and
industry, and shall make investigations concerning the enforcement and effect
of the rules so adopted.
   (b)   All rules so made shall be subject to the approval of the mayor, and
they may with like approval be from time to time altered or rescinded by the
civil service board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.105; 1972 Code, § 30-68; 1992 Code, § 30-67) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.090 SCOPE OF RULES.
   The civil service rules adopted by the civil service board shall provide
among other things for the following:
   (a)   Open, competitive examinations and other examinations by which to test
applicants for office or for employment as to their practical fitness to
discharge the duties of the positions which they desire to fill, which
examinations shall be public and free to all persons;
   (b)   The filling of vacancies in offices and places of employment in
accordance with the results of the examinations and the selection of persons
for public employment in accordance with the results, or otherwise, as may seem
most desirable to carry out in the provisions of this chapter; and
   (c)   The promotions in offices or positions on the basis of ascertained
merit, efficiency, character, conduct and seniority in service, or by
examination, or by both, as may be deemed desirable.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.109; 1972 Code, § 30-69; 1992 Code, § 30-68) (Ord. 82-73,
passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 13-77, passed 2-22-1977; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.091 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The civil service board shall on or before the first day in May in each year
report to the mayor all actions relating to the appointment and employment in
all positions in the city’s position classification system.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.109; 1972 Code, § 30-70; 1992 Code, § 30-69) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.092 COURT REVIEW OF ACTION.
   The action of the civil service board or any officer taken pursuant to this
subchapter shall be subject to judicial review in the manner provided by
statute and rules of court.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.142; 1972 Code, § 30-71; 1992 Code, § 30-70) (Ord. 87-91,
passed 11-25-1991)
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
§ 39.105 JOB DESCRIPTIONS.
   The duties and functions of each appointive officer shall be contained in a
job description. The job description shall be deemed to be a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth in this section and shall be filed with
Ordinance No. 27-76 in the office of the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 30-83) (Ord. 27-76, passed 4-19-1976; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-
1991)
§ 39.106 METHOD AND TERM OF APPOINTMENT.
   All appointive officers of the city shall be appointed as provided by city
charter, §
4.02(a). The term of each employee or officer classified as appointive shall
expire when the term of the mayor making the appointment expires or a majority
of the members of the city council terminates the appointment of the employees
appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the city council.
However, all appointive officers requiring advice and consent of the city
council shall remain in an acting appointive office status for a period not to
exceed 60 days following the expiration of the mayor’s term. All appointive
officers not requiring advice and consent of the city council shall enter upon
the discharge of their duties as soon as they shall have duly qualified and
following expiration of their appointment as provided herein, shall remain in
an acting appointive office status until either their reappointment, removal or
the appointment and qualification of a successor.
(1992 Code, § 30-84) (Ord. 27-76, passed 4-19-1976; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-
1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 51-03, passed 6-9-2003; Ord. 50-05,
passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 94-06, passed 8-7-2006)
§ 39.107 QUALIFICATION.
   (a)   All appointive officers shall, before entering upon the discharge of
their duties, take and subscribe on oath or affirmation of office in the form
required by the constitution.
   (b)   Each officer except the city finance officer shall furnish an
undertaking to be approved by the mayor payable to the city in the sum of
$10,000 conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their
respective offices and to account, pay over and deliver all money or property
coming into their hands by virtue of their office according to law.
   (c)   The amount of the bond of the city finance officer shall be annually
established by the mayor in an amount equal to the maximum amount estimated to
be on hand at any one time but the amount of the bond required of the finance
director shall not exceed the sum set out in SDCL 9-14-6.1, as amended.
   (d)   All undertakings after approval by the mayor shall be filed with the
city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 30-85) (Ord. 27-76, passed 4-19-1976; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-
1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997)
§ 39.108 COMMISSIONS AND CERTIFICATES OF APPOINTMENT.
   All appointive officers shall receive a certificate of appointment signed by
the mayor and city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 30-86) (Ord. 27-76, passed 4-19-1976; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-
1991; Ord. 139-95, passed 11-6-1995)
§ 39.109 NOTICE OF ADOPTION.
   The job descriptions made a part of this subchapter are on file in the
office of the city clerk and the human resources department and are available
for examination and inspection.
(1992 Code, § 30-87) (Ord. 27-76, passed 4-19-1976; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-
1991; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLAN
§ 39.120 APPLICATION OF PLAN; EMPLOYEES COVERED.
   This subchapter applies only to those employees in the civil service of the
city as provided in §§
39.035 through
39.068 and
39.080 through
39.092, except as specifically provided in this section. A position
classification plan, prepared by the director and approved by the civil service
board and the mayor, as amended, shall constitute a description of the duties
and responsibilities of civil service positions. The plan shall serve as a
guide for the development and implementation of a systematic salary plan for
those employees and development of examination, transfer, promotion,
reassignment and training procedures. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
subchapter as they existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which
this section is derived, as amended, the operation and application of any
previous classification and pay plans including the step placement and step
advancement of all city employees, including appointive officers, prior to the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, as amended,
are ratified.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.208; 1992 Code, § 30-96) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 24-91, passed 3-25-1991; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed
4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.121 OPERATION OF PLAN; STEP ADVANCEMENT.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an employee's
eligibility for step advancements within the city's position classification and
pay plan is pursuant to the completion of the waiting period within each step
as shown in the following table:
From Step To Step Waiting Period in Months
From Step To Step Waiting Period in Months
1         2       12
2         3       12
3         4       12
4         5       12
5         6       24
6         7       24
7         8       24
8         9       24
 
   (b)   New employees under the city's classification and pay plan will start
at step 1 except as specifically provided in §
39.124. Upon completing the waiting period in each step as shown in division
(a) above, the employee will advance to the next step unless cause for denial
is shown by the employer. If cause is shown by the employer and an employee is
denied step advancement at the time of eligibility, the employer may grant the
employee that step advancement at any time thereafter.
   (c)   The employee's anniversary date for purposes of step advancement
eligibility will be the month and day of the actual hire date unless cause for
denial is shown by the employer. When a step is denied, the anniversary date
for future step advancement eligibility will be the effective date of the next
step increase that is granted.
   (d)   Should an employee be absent from the job on unpaid leave for more
than 30 days during the waiting period for step advancement eligibility, the
waiting period for that step will be extended for a period of time equal to the
absence, and the employee's anniversary date for future step advancement
eligibility will be adjusted to the effective date of the next step increase
that is granted.
   (e)   If step advancement is granted, it shall be granted on the first day
of the biweekly pay period which is nearest to the anniversary date of the
employee.
   (f)   A midmanagement employee may be eligible for an annual accelerated
step advancement under the city's position classification and pay plan.
Accelerated step placement will be based upon documented excellence in employee
performance. Any acceleration of step advancement for excellence in performance
must be recommended by the director and approved by the director of human
resources and the mayor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.210; 1992 Code, § 30-97) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 84-75, passed 12-15-1975; Ord. 100-76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 130-81,
passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 41-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 97-83, passed 11-21-1983;
Ord. 24-91, passed 3-25-1991; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed
3-6-1995; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 73-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 97-16,
passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.122 PROMOTION/TRANSFER; SALARY CHANGES.
   (a)   The word PROMOTION as used in this section applies to an actual
permanent vacancy resulting in the movement of an employee from his or her
present job classification to another job classification having a higher
maximum biweekly or hourly rate of pay. The word TRANSFER as used in this
section applies to an actual permanent vacancy resulting in the movement of an
employee from his or her present job classification or position to another job
classification or position having an equivalent or lower maximum biweekly or
hourly rate of pay.
   (b)   An employee promoted to fill a vacant position shall be placed into
the salary step of the pay grade which is at least, and is closest to, 5%
higher than the salary received prior to the promotion. Based upon
qualifications and the needs of the city, and upon the recommendation of the
director of human resources, the mayor may approve placements above 5%.
However, if salary Step 9 of the new position is less than 5% higher than the
salary amount received prior to promotion, the employee will be placed at Step
9 and receive the lower percentage increase in pay. A promoted employee is not
eligible for a step increase upon completion of probation. Upon recommendation
of the director of human resources, the mayor may adjust salary steps.
   (c)   When an employee transfers from a position in one department to a
position in another department without a change in job classification, the
employee’s salary step and rate of pay shall remain the same.
   (d)   When an employee transfers to a job classification with the same or
lower maximum biweekly or hourly rate of pay, the employee must have completed
a minimum of one year of experience in the same field at the same level of
difficulty for each step granted above step 1 in the new pay scale. The salary
step placement will be made at the discretion of the department head, subject
to approval by the director of human resources.
   (e)   After successful completion of a six-month probationary period, a
transferred employee may be eligible to advance to the next step in the salary
grade. An employee shall only be eligible for a probationary step advancement
if the employee’s biweekly or hourly rate of pay was reduced at the time of
transfer. The anniversary date for future step advancement eligibility shall be
the effective date of the probationary step advancement if one is granted.
   (f)   The anniversary date for future step advancement eligibility will not
be adjusted at the time of promotion or transfer unless there is a change in
the biweekly or hourly rate of pay. If the biweekly or hourly rate of pay is
changed, the anniversary date for future step advancement eligibility shall
become the effective date of promotion or transfer.
(1992 Code, § 30-98) (Ord. 24-91, passed 3-25-1991; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-
1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 129-99,
passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 30-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 39.123 REASSIGNMENT; SALARY CHANGES.
   Those employees not represented by a collective bargaining unit are subject
to the following provisions:
   (a)   Reassignment for employees applies to a personnel action where no
actual vacancy exists but an employee's job classification and/or pay grade is
changed. This personnel action will result from a management-initiated job
audit or reorganization.
   (b)   When the pay grade for a classification is upgraded or if an employee
is reassigned to a classification having a higher maximum or hourly rate of
pay, the employee's salary shall:
      (1)   Go to the step with the salary amount in the new pay grade which is
at least and closest to 3% over the salary amount received in the prior pay
grade if the employee has not been performing the duties commensurate with
their higher pay grade prior to their reassignment; or
      (2)   Go to the step in the new pay grade which is at least and closest
to 5% over the salary amount received in the prior pay grade if the employee
is, through a management-initiated audit, determined to have been performing
duties commensurate with the higher pay grade prior to the reassignment.
   (c)   When an employee is reassigned to a job classification due to a
management-initiated job audit or reorganization having the same maximum
biweekly or hourly rate of pay, the employee's salary step rate of pay and the
step anniversary date for future advancement shall remain the same.
   (d)   When the pay grade for a classification is downgraded or when an
employee is reassigned to a job classification due to a management-initiated
job audit or reorganization having a lower maximum biweekly or hourly rate of
pay, the employee shall be placed into the salary step of the new pay grade
which is next, lower than and closest to the salary amount received prior to
the reassignment, and the step anniversary date for future advancement shall
remain the same. When the employee's salary level, prior to reassignment, is
greater than step 9 of the newly assigned pay grade, the employee's biweekly or
hourly rate of pay shall be frozen as of the date of the reassignment. The
employee's salary rate shall remain frozen until a time as step 9 of the pay
grade assigned to the employee's classification is equal to or greater than the
employee's frozen salary rate of pay. When that occurs, the employee shall be
placed into step 9 of the new pay grade assigned to the employee's
classification.
   (e)   If reassignment occurs and the employee is reassigned to a higher pay
grade, the employee's anniversary date for future step advancement eligibility
will be the effective date of the reassignment.
(1957 Rev. Ord., § 2.211; 1992 Code, § 30-99) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970; Ord.
80-77, passed 11-28-1977; Ord. 58-83, passed 8-29-1983; Ord. 24-91, passed 3-
25-1991; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 97-92, passed 11-9-1992; Ord. 44-
93, passed 5-24-1993; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-
2016)
§ 39.124 STARTING ABOVE MINIMUM STEP.
   New employees under the city’s classification and pay plan may be placed in
a step above step 1. Any placement above step 1 must be approved by the
director of human resources. Any placement above step 5 must also be approved
by the mayor. Upon recommendation of the director of human resources and
approval of the mayor, salary step adjustments may be made for incumbents
affected by entrance salary placements.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.212; 1992 Code, § 30-100) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 99-84, passed 6-25-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed
3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 9-99, passed 1-4-1999; Ord. 28-00,
passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001)
§ 39.125 ACTING PAY.
   (a)   A nonexempt employee not represented by a collective bargaining unit
who is assigned duties by the city to a position with a higher maximum rate of
pay than that of the nonexempt employee’s regular assigned salary scale shall
receive an acting pay differential of $1 per hour in addition to their regular
base hourly rate of pay, for all hours actually worked in an acting capacity.
The acting pay differential will not be applied to the use of paid time off
benefits, or any other type of leave during the acting period. This temporary
assignment period and associated salary increase shall not exceed six months
when the position is vacant.
   (b)   Any increase under this section shall be approved by the department
head and director of human resources.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.214; 1992 Code, § 30-101) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 16-84, passed 1-30-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed
4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 131-
98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 67-00, passed 8-14-
2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001)
§ 39.126 PAY UPON RE-EMPLOYMENT OF A SEPARATED EMPLOYEE.
   An employee who voluntarily resigns from city employment and is reemployed
under the provisions of § 39.068 shall be placed into the same pay grade and
step for the position held as of the date of resignation. If the reemployed
employee is placed into a similar position with an equal or lesser pay grade
for which he or she is qualified, he or she shall be placed into the pay grade
and step for the position which is closest to but not more than the rate of pay
received as of the date of his or her resignation. The employee’s employment
anniversary date for purposes of vacation accrual, sick leave and other benefit
eligibility shall be the date of his or her reemployment. The employee shall be
credited with seniority accumulated in his or her position prior to the
separation for purposes of eligibility for future promotional opportunities.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.215; 1992 Code, § 30-102) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.127 EXEMPT/NONEXEMPT CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   Any employee employed in a bona fide executive, administrative or
professional capacity is exempt from the wage and hour provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act. An employee employed in a bona fide executive,
administrative or professional capacity shall be paid on a salary basis within
the meaning of the FLSA regulations. The employees employed in a bona fide
executive, administrative or professional capacity shall be defined as EXEMPT
employees.
   (b)   Employees who are within the general coverage of the FLSA and are not
specifically exempt from the overtime pay requirements shall be defined as
NONEXEMPT employees. The regular hourly rate of pay of a nonexempt employee is
determined by dividing his or her total remuneration for employment (except
statutory exclusions) in any work week by the total number of hours actually
worked by him or her in that work week for which the compensation was paid.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.213; 1992 Code, § 30-103) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994)
§ 39.128 HOURS OF WORK.
   (a)   Each department shall establish the scheduled hours of work for exempt
employees within that department. The workweek shall begin at 12:01 a.m. Monday
and end at 12:00 midnight Sunday.
   (b)   The regular workweek of 40 hours in each seven-day period shall remain
in effect for purposes of overtime computation for all nonexempt employees.
   (c)   The exempt employee shall regularly receive each pay period a
predetermined amount constituting all of his or her compensation without regard
to the number of days or hours worked, subject to the exceptions listed below.
      (1)   Deductions from accrual banks may be made when the exempt employee
absents himself or herself from work for full days of absence for personal
reasons, holidays, sickness or disability.
      (2)   Deductions of less than one week from the exempt employee’s salary
may be made for disciplinary actions.
      (3)   The exempt employee shall not be paid for any workweek in which he
or she performs no work or is not on paid time-off benefit leave.
      (4)   Exempt employees working under regular part-time agreements shall
be paid one-half or prorated equivalent of the established pay grade for the
identified classification.
      (5)   No deductions in hours for exempt employees will be made for
absences occasioned by the city or by the operating requirements of the city,
absences caused by jury duty, attendance as a witness and for military leave
less than a full week in duration.
      (6)   Flex-time scheduling may be implemented where feasible upon
approval of the department head.
   (d)   No improper pay deductions shall be made from an exempt employee’s
salary. Any exempt employee may file a complaint with the human resources
department within 30 days of learning of an alleged improper deduction. The
human resources department will investigate the complaint to determine if any
pay deductions were improper. Exempt employees will be reimbursed for any
improper deductions. The human resources department shall communicate the
provisions of this section to employees by appropriate means.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.216; 1992 Code, § 30-104) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 04-04, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 4-
05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 39.129 EXEMPT AND NONEXEMPT EMPLOYEES; OVERTIME AND COMPENSATORY TIME.
   (a)   Overtime compensation for nonexempt employees who are eligible for
representation by a collective bargaining unit shall be accumulated and paid as
overtime or compensatory time according to
   (b)   Overtime compensation for nonexempt employees not represented by a
collective bargaining unit who work a 40-hour workweek shall be paid at the
rate of time and one-half for hours actually worked in excess of their
regularly scheduled workweek. To earn overtime either as pay or compensatory
time, an employee must be on duty for the overtime hours. Employees may not use
paid leave benefits to accumulate hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a work
week, or in excess of the regularly scheduled number of hours in a work day.
   (c)   For purposes of computing overtime pay for nonexempt employees not
represented by a collective bargaining unit, hours actually worked shall
include holiday, vacation, personal leave and sick leave.
   (d)   Nonexempt employees not represented by a collective bargaining unit
may accrue compensatory time off or receive monetary compensation for all
authorized overtime hours worked in excess of 40 hours per seven-day workweek.
Compensatory time shall be awarded at one and one-half times the overtime hours
actually worked. In all cases, management shall determine whether to award
overtime pay or compensatory time off.
   (e)   Nonexempt employees not represented by a collective bargaining unit
are not required to accrue and maintain a minimum level of compensatory time
off before being eligible for overtime pay. Accrued compensatory time may be
carried forward from year to year. Nonexempt employees may accrue no more than
160 hours of compensatory time. The 160 hours represents not more than 106.50
hours of actual overtime worked. In case of discharge, resignation in good
standing, or retirement or death, the date of employment may not extend beyond
the actual working day by designating compensatory paid hours. Compensatory
hours unused and remaining in the nonexempt employee’s bank at the time of
separation from employment shall be compensated for in cash to the nonexempt
employee or to the surviving spouse or, if no spouse survives, to the nonexempt
employee’s estate up to a maximum of 160 hours.
   (f)   Appointive officials and exempt employees not eligible for additional
monetary compensation or compensatory time who carry a balance of accrued
compensatory time as of May 9, 1994, may carry that balance forward from year
to year or may use the compensatory time off in increments of not less than
eight hours. Compensatory hours not exceeding 160 hours which are unused and
remaining in the mayor, appointed official and exempt employee’s bank at the
time of separation from employment with the city shall be compensated for in
cash to the exempt employee or to the surviving spouse or, if no spouse
survives, the exempt employee’s estate. In case of discharge, resignation in
good standing, or retirement or death, the date of employment may not extend
beyond the last actual working day by designating compensatory paid hours.
   (g)   The mayor and appointive officials and all exempt employees must
report absences of full days that require the use of a paid time off benefit
for record keeping and payroll purposes.
   (h)   All nonexempt employees must complete a weekly time sheet for
reporting, recordkeeping and payroll purposes.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.217; 1992 Code, § 30-105) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 108-73, passed 12-3-1973; Ord. 64-74, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 12-82, passed
2-1-1982; Ord. 15-84, passed 1-30-1984; Ord. 32-84, passed 2-21-1984; Ord. 95-
84, passed 6-4-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-
1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 115-23,
passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.130 RIGHT TO SET HOURS AND PAY.
   The mayor shall at all times have the final right to set hours and wages in
accordance with FLSA requirements and amend the rules and regulations as deemed
necessary in the best interest of the public and for the efficient operation of
any city department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.226; 1992 Code, § 30-106) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.131 TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
   Temporary employees are necessary to meet the staffing needs of various city
departments. Employment as a temporary employee is at-will and can be
terminated at any time with or without notice for any reason. Hours in excess
of 40 hours in a workweek shall be paid in accordance with FLSA. Temporary city
employees include employees classified as follows: part-time employee, seasonal
employee, recreation seasonal employee, and interim employee. A change from one
temporary employee classification to another temporary employee classification
shall require a 13-week break in service, unless total hours worked does not
exceed the identified limitations.
   A former civil service and/or appointed employee is not eligible for
reemployment as a temporary employee until there has been a 13-week break in
city service.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.218; 1992 Code, § 30-107) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 8-89, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 59-89, passed 6-19-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed
11-25-1991; Ord. 66-95, passed 5-1-1995; Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-2014)
§ 39.132 STANDBY, SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL, AND EMERGENCY CALL-IN PAY.
   (a)   When an exempt midmanagement employee not represented by a collective
bargaining agreement is designated to be on call or standby, the employee shall
be eligible for standby pay.
   (b)   If an employee is represented by a collective bargaining unit which
has entered into an agreement with the city concerning standby pay and
emergency call in pay, the terms of that agreement will govern the method and
amount of compensation.
   (c)   An emergency services employee may be eligible for standby, on call,
shift differential, tactical dispatch and emergency call-in pay as determined
by department policy and procedure.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.219; 1992 Code, § 30-108) (Ord. 2747, passed 4-12-1971;
Ord. 108-73, passed 12-3-1973; Ord. 80-77, passed 11-28-1977; Ord. 128-81,
passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 110-83, passed 12-19-1983; Ord. 14-84, passed 1-30-
1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95,
passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.133 REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Employees hired for regular part-time work shall be paid the hourly
equivalent of the assigned scale. A regular part-time employee must serve hours
equal to a regular full-time position in order to advance through the pay
steps.
   (b)   Persons hired as regular part-time employees must meet the minimum
qualifications for the position as established in the classification plan; and
qualify for employment through examination.
(1958 Rev. Ords., § 2.220; 1992 Code, § 30-109) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 41-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 8-89, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed
11-25-1991)
§ 39.134 PAY OF TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
   Temporary employees employed as part-time or seasonal employees shall be
paid at the hourly rate of pay established by the appointing authority. Part-
time and seasonal employees are not civil service or eligible to receive
employee benefits.
   Temporary employees employed as recreation seasonal employees are exempt
from the FLSA and shall be paid at a rate determined by the appointive official
or his or her designee. Recreation seasonal employees are not civil service or
eligible to receive employee benefits.
   Temporary employees employed as interim employees shall be paid at an hourly
rate of pay if classified as a nonexempt employee or at a biweekly rate of pay
if classified as an exempt employee. The rate of pay shall be established by
the hiring authority and approved by the director. Interim employees are not
civil service or eligible to receive employee benefits other than access to the
city's health plan.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.221; 1992 Code, § 30-110) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 8-89, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 86-14, passed
11-12-2014)
§ 39.135 CERTIFICATION OF PAYROLLS.
   (a)   The director of human resources shall compare the payroll with the
official roster or other record to determine the accuracy of employee job
information.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any auditing, disbursing or other officer of
the city to pay or cause to be paid, directly or indirectly, any salary, wage
or other compensation to any person whose name appears on the payroll whose
appointment and employment has not been in accordance with the rules
established by the civil service board or appropriate state statutes.
   (c)   No payroll proposing the payment of wages or salary to any person in
the city service whose name does not appear on the office roster or whose name
has been ordered removed therefrom shall be certified or approved for payment
for the period between the end of the last payroll period and date when the
employee’s name is removed or ordered removed from the official roster.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.228; 1972 Code, § 30-112; 1992 Code, § 30-111) (Ord.
2669, passed 3-3-1970; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-
1997; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001)
§ 39.136 INCENTIVE PLAN.
   (a)   A lump sum payment may be made in addition to the midmanagement
employee’s normal salary for a fiscal calendar year in order to recognize the
extraordinary demands of the business and/or completion of a key project that
requires extraordinary effort.
   (b)   The incentive payment is determined at the sole discretion of the
mayor and not pursuant to any prior contract agreement or promise causing the
employee to expect the payment regularly.
   (c)   The midmanagement employee shall have no contract right expressed or
implied to any amount. In no case shall the incentive payment exceed 5% of the
midmanagement employee’s annual salary as of January 1 of a calendar year.
   (d)   Any recommendation for incentive pay shall be prepared by the
department head, reviewed by the director and approved by the mayor. The
recommendation shall contain statements and facts supporting the extraordinary
demands and/or key project requiring extraordinary effort.
(1992 Code, § 30-112) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
LEAVE PROGRAM; GENERALLY
§ 39.155 ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE.
   Absence from duty without leave or failure to report after leave has expired
or has been disapproved, revoked or cancelled shall be grounds for suspension,
reduction or discharge as provided by the civil service rules.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.207; 1992 Code, § 30-123) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.156 HOLIDAYS ENUMERATED.
   (a)   (1)   Holidays shall mean days in which the mayor, appointive officers
and regular employees not represented by a collective bargaining unit,
excluding uniformed nonmanagement fire department employees, of the city, whose
services are not essential on holidays, are permitted to absent themselves from
work with pay. The following are official holidays of the city:
New Year’s Day           January 1
Martin Luther King Jr. Day 3rd Monday in January
President’s Day          3rd Monday in February
Memorial Day               Last Monday in May
Juneteenth Day             June 19
Independence Day           July Fourth
Labor Day                  1st Monday in September
Native American’s Day    2nd Monday in October
Veterans’ Day            November 11
Thanksgiving Day           4th Thursday in November
Christmas Day              December 25
 
      (2)   When an official holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday
shall be designated as a substitute holiday and observed as an official
holiday. When an official holiday falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday shall
be designated as a substitute holiday and observed as an official holiday.
   (b)   Employees are eligible for holiday pay from their first day of
employment. Unless otherwise provided, employees shall receive eight hours pay
for the day on which a designated holiday is observed.
   (c)   Shift fire management employees and shift police lieutenant employees
shall be granted annually an equal number of additional shifts off as there are
legal holidays recognized by the city. Holiday leave for terminating employees
and employees on an approved unpaid leave of absence shall be prorated
according to the number of official holidays having occurred as of the
employees’ separation date.
   (d)   Classified and emergency services employees shall be paid at
guaranteed overtime rate of two times the employee’s regular base hourly rate
for all hours worked on Thanksgiving and Christmas.
   (e)   Upon discharge, resignation in good standing, retirement or death,
holiday leave not used shall not be compensated for in cash nor shall the date
of separation be extended through the use of unused holiday leave.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.222; 1992 Code, § 30-124) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 108-73, passed 12-3-1973; Ord. 64-74, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 100-76,
passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 117-78, passed 11-27-1978; Ord. 126-81, passed 12-28-
1981; Ord. 42-82, passed 4-19-1982; Ord. 4-83, passed 1-31-1983; Ord. 96-83,
passed 11-21-1983; Ord. 13-84, passed 1-30-1984; Ord. 24-85, passed 4-1-1985;
Ord. 124-90, passed 12-24-1990; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95,
passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord.
93-21, passed 8-17-2021; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.157 EMPLOYEES ELIGIBLE FOR HOLIDAY LEAVE.
   (a)   The mayor and every officer and civil service employee is eligible for
holiday leave. An employee shall not be paid holiday pay for holidays which
occur during an approved, unpaid leave of absence. If a holiday immediately
precedes or follows the approved unpaid leave of absence, the employee must
work or be on authorized paid leave the regularly scheduled work day preceding
or following the holiday to be paid for that holiday.
   (b)   Regular part-time employees shall earn holiday pay prorated according
to paid regular hours in the preceding year in comparison to holidays granted
to regular full-time employees. In the first year of part-time status, an
employee’s holiday pay will be prorated based on their regular work schedule.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.223; 1992 Code, § 30-125) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.158 JURY DUTY AND WITNESS FEES.
   (a)   Any nonexempt employee who is called upon for jury duty during
regularly scheduled work hours shall not suffer any loss of regular base pay;
provided, however, upon the termination of jury duty, the employee shall remit
to human resources any fees, mileage, or other remuneration received for their
participation in jury duty. An employee who is compensated for jury duty on a
day that is other than a regular scheduled workday shall retain such
compensation for that day.
   (b)   Any witness fees, allowances, or other remuneration received by an
exempt or nonexempt employee for acting as a witness on behalf of and in the
course of city duties must be remitted to the city. Failure to submit the funds
to the city will result in the deduction of the amount from the employee's
regular compensation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.224; 1992 Code, § 30-126) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.159 MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE.
   (a)   Request for military leave of absence. An employee who wishes to be
granted military leave of absence must submit the request and a copy of his or
her official orders or other records from the military service to the immediate
supervisor or department head prior to the dates of attendance. If the
reservist or National Guard member submits a copy of his or her official annual
training schedule prior to the beginning of the year’s military activities,
theemployee need only submit a separate request and orders for those training
duties not included on the annual schedule or when the annual schedule is
modified.
   (b)   Active duty.
      (1)   An employee who enlists or is called into active duty for the
military service of the United States or who in time of national emergency
voluntarily enlists for active duty shall be granted military leave for the
time necessary to permit completion of the military service. In order to have
reemployment rights, a person leaving active duty in the military service of
the United States must apply to the city for reemployment within the applicable
timeframes established under federal law. This applies to inductees and
enlistees as well as to reservists and National Guard members performing full
active duty as opposed to initial active duty for training or active or
inactive duty training or other active duty where different reemployment rights
are defined by federal statute.
      (2)   Employees activated to service by the President of the United
States because of war or reasons attributed to the war on terrorism may be
eligible to receive pay augmentation in those cases where their base military
rate of pay is less than the base rate of pay received from the city at the
time they went on active duty. When an employee’s base military pay is less
than the employee’s base city pay at the time of activation, the employee may
be eligible for payment for the difference under the following provisions and/
or guidelines:
         A.   Pay augmentation will be based upon the employee’s base hourly/
biweekly rate and monthly military base rate as of the date of activation;
         B.   Pay augmentation shall begin the first full day following
activation;
         C.   Activated employees who use paid time-off benefits in any given
month are not eligible for the pay augmentation for that month as described in
this division (b)(2);
         D.   Hours actually worked in any full month while activated shall be
deducted from any pay augmentation;
         E.   Any cost of living adjustments shall be included when determining
eligibility for any monthly pay augmentation;
         F.   Those employees eligible to receive pay augmentation must submit
the actual monthly military pay stub to the city. Once the calculations have
been computed, the city will provide the payment in the next available
scheduled pay period;
         G.   Employees who are eligible and receive pay augmentation, as set
forth in this division (b)(2), will have the employee pension contribution
temporarily suspended only for purposes of pay augmentation as described in
this division (b)(2); and
         H.   Employees activated to service pursuant to this section shall be
entitled to accrue sick and vacation leave benefits, subject to the limitations
in this agreement, as if they had remained in continuous service to the city.
   (c)   Reserve or National Guard; initial active duty for training, annual
encampment, weekend drill and other training duty. Appointive officers,
midmanagement, classified, or emergency services employees who enlist as a
reservist or a member of the National Guard shall be granted time off for two-
week annual encampment, weekend drill duty and training, initial active duty
for training and other active and inactive training duty. The period of
military leave shall be taken without pay. The reservist or National Guard
member must report back to his or her civilian job at the beginning of his or
her first regularly scheduled shift on the first day after the completion of
initial active duty for training or other training duty plus the necessary
travel time to return from the training site to the place of employment. He or
she is also entitled to a reasonable rest time and a reasonable time thereafter
if return is delayed by factors beyond his or her control. If an employee fails
to report to his or her job within the specified time period, he or she may be
subject to the penalties which would be imposed on any employee who is tardy or
absent without permission. If an employee separates employment with the city in
order to enlist in the Reserves or National Guard, he or she must reapply to
the city within 31 days after his or her separation from initial active duty
for training in the Reserves or National Guard in order to retain employment
rights.
   (d)   Holidays. An employee shall not be paid holiday pay for holidays which
occur during an approved unpaid leave of absence for military service. If a
holiday immediately precedes or follows the approved unpaid leave of absence
for military service, the employee must work the regularly scheduled workday
preceding or following the holiday to be paid for that holiday.
   (e)   Applicability of federal law. Any employee who participates in any
branch of the military service of the United States is covered by and subject
to federal statute, 38 U.S.C. § 43 and all other applicable statutes.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.225; 1992 Code, § 30-127) (Ord. 2669, passed 3-3-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 04-
04, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.160 SENIORITY RIGHTS FOR MILITARY SERVICE LEAVE.
   During an unpaid military leave of absence, the seniority rights of an
employee shall continue and accumulate in the same manner and to the same
extent as if the leave of absence had not been granted and the employee had
been continuously in the employ of the city. An employee on military leave of
absence shall be entitled to all rights and benefits as are defined by
applicable federal statutes. The employee shall not be entitled to payment of
salary or wages by the city during the military leave of absence except as
provided in §
39.159.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.202; 1992 Code, § 30-128) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 04-04, passed 1-12-2004)
§ 39.161 PROBATIONER ENTITLED TO LEAVE FOR MILITARY SERVICE OR FOR UNITED
STATES GOVERNMENT WORK.
   An employee or officer who is serving on probation may likewise be granted a
leave of absence under the provisions of §§
39.160 and
39.163.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.204; 1992 Code, § 30-129) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.162 LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (a)   Department heads may approve a maximum of 14 consecutive calendar days
for an unpaid leave of absence. Requests for unpaid leaves of absence for a
duration longer than 14 consecutive calendar days shall require the approval of
the mayor or his or her designee. No leave of absence, whether granted,
extended, or continued shall exceed one year except as otherwise provided in
this subchapter. Requests for unpaid leave will only be considered if the
employee has used all available pay time including but not limited to vacation,
personal leave and compensatory leave. Time off without pay, without requiring
the employee to first use all available paid leave time, will be permitted only
where specifically noted in this subchapter.
   (b)   Leave of absence without pay from duties shall in no case be granted
to an employee who has been in the service of the city for less than 12 months,
including time on probation, immediately preceding his or her time of leave,
except in the case of absence on the grounds of sickness, disability, military
leave or family/medical leave as set forth in this subchapter, or urgent
necessity.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.201; 1992 Code, § 30-130) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 131-98, passed
12-7-1998; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000)
§ 39.163 LEAVE IN NATIONAL EMERGENCY.
   In time of national emergency an employee or officer of the city may be
granted leave of absence in the discretion of the department head to permit him
or her to engage in work for the United States which may reasonably and fairly
be defined as aiding in the national defense of the United States. The leave of
absence, if granted by the department head, shall be for a period of time as
may be necessary to permit the employee or officer to complete the service for
the United States government, together with any additional time, not exceeding
90 days, as may be reasonably necessary to enable the employee or officer to
resume his or her duties with the city; but the leave of absence may only be
granted upon written request of the government of the United States or any of
its authorized agencies.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.203; 1992 Code, § 30-131) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991;
Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.164 PERSONAL LEAVE DAYS.
   The mayor, appointive officers and employees, midmanagement, classified, and
emergency services employees not represented by a collective bargaining unit
shall receive personal leave days as follows.
   (a)   An employee (excluding fire shift) who is on the payroll as of January
1, or hired between January 1 and June 30, shall be granted 16 hours of
personal leave for that year.
   (b)   An employee (excluding fire shift) who is hired or takes office
between July 1 and November 30 shall receive eight hours of personal leave for
the year in which he or she was hired.
   (c)   The mayor and any appointed, general midmanagement and classified
employee hired after December 21, 1981, and before January 1, 2001, may receive
an additional eight hours of personal leave for the year. An employee who is to
receive the additional eight hours of personal leave may select pay for the
day. Payment shall be made on the first payday of December based on the
employee’s base hourly or biweekly rate compensated for in that pay period. To
receive the personal leave pay, the employee must indicate a preference to
receive the pay uponnotification from human resources. If the employee does not
indicate personal leave pay, the day will be a personal leave day off.
   (d)   The police chief, fire chief and any police midmanagement and 40-hour
fire midmanagement employee hired after December 31, 1983, and before January
1, 2001, may receive an additional eight hours of personal leave for the year.
An employee who is to receive the additional eight hours of personal leave may
select pay for the day. Payment shall be made on the first payday of December
based on the employee’s base hourly or biweekly rate compensated for in that
pay period. To receive the personal leave pay, the employee must indicate a
preference to receive the pay upon notification from human resources. If the
employee does not indicate personal leave pay, the day will be a personal leave
day off.
   (e)   (1)   Fire shift midmanagement employees shall receive one personal
leave shift day per calendar year. Fire shift midmanagement employees hired
after December 31, 1983, and before January 1, 2001, are eligible for an
additional 12 hours of bonus pay for the year.
      (2)   An employee who is eligible to receive the additional 12 hours of
pay shall be paid on the first payday of December based on the employee’s
biweekly rate of pay compensated for in that pay period.
   (f)   An employee who is hired or takes office on or after December 1 shall
not be eligible for personal leave in the year in which he or she was hired.
   (g)   A regular part-time employee shall receive prorated personal leave
based on the ratio of hours scheduled weekly to 40 hours. In the first year of
part-time status, an employee’s personal leave will be prorated based on the
number of paid hours in their regular work schedule.
   (h)   Upon discharge, resignation in good standing, retirement or death,
personal leave not used shall not be compensated for in cash nor shall the
dateof separation be extended through the use of unused personal leave.
(1992 Code, § 30-132) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-
1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 4-01,
passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.165 FAMILY/MEDICAL LEAVE.
   (a)   The mayor and appointive officers and employees, midmanagement,
classified, and emergency services employees not covered by a collective
bargaining unit shall have eligible family and medical leave administered in a
manner consistent with the requirements of the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA),
29 U.S.C. § 2611 et seq. The city will utilize a “rolling” 12-month period
measured backward from the date an employee uses any FMLA leave. If an employee
has available paid leave benefits at the time FMLA leave is required, the FMLA
leave will run concurrently with the use of those paid leave benefits until
they are exhausted or until the available 12-week FMLA leave period ends,
whichever comes first. If an employee’s available paid leave benefits are
exhausted prior to the end of the 12-week FMLA period, the remainder of the
period shall be granted as unpaid leave.
   (b)   Health and dental insurance benefits will be maintained for the
employee/dependents during the FMLA leave period, provided that the employee
continues to pay the employee portion of the premium for that insurance at
least one month in advance of the coverage. If the employee chooses not to
return to work from an unpaid FMLA leave for reasons other than a continued
serious health condition or other circumstances beyond the employee’s control,
the employee will be required to reimburse to the city the amount paid by the
city for the employee’s health insurance premium during the leave.
   (c)   Employees returning from FMLA leave shall be returned to their
previous or a similar position with the same rate of pay as they received prior
to the commencement of the FMLA.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all FMLA leave will be
administered according to the requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Act.
(1992 Code, § 30-133) (Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-
1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98,
passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001;
Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.166 LEGISLATIVE LEAVE.
   The city shall grant a leave of absence without loss of job status or
seniority resulting therefrom, to any employee who is a member of the state
legislature in order that the employee may perform any official duty as a
member of the state legislature. This leave of absence may be taken without pay
or the employee may use available paid time off benefits. Seniority and benefit
accruals while on unpaid legislative leave of absence shall be as described in
§
39.162.
(1992 Code, § 30-133.1) (Ord. 76-98, passed 8-3-1998)
§ 39.167 HEALTH/LIFE/DENTAL.
   (a)   (1)   The city shall make available a health/ dental program to
eligible employees. Employees desiring coverage under the program must apply to
the city’s human resources department. The conditions of eligibility for
coverage of employees and their dependents for health benefits, dental benefits
and life insurance are outlined in the respective summary plan descriptions.
The city and the employee will pay the following percentage of health/dental
insurance premium cost:
 
City Employee Class Employer Contribution Employee Contribution
Employee            75%                   25%
Employee plus 1     75%                   25%
Family              75%                   25%
 
      (2)   The city shall provide employees with life insurance coverage equal
to one times the employee’s base annual salary rounded to the next higher
$1,000, if not already a multiple thereof. The city may provide this life
insurance through a self-insured plan or under a group insurance policy or
policies issued by an insurance company selected by the city. In addition, the
city agrees to provide additional group term life/AD&D insurance coverage and
agrees each month to pay the additional group life insurance premium on each
employee with payment not to exceed $5 per month per employee.
   (b)   The city shall make available a health promotion program aimed to
improve employee health and well-being. The program shall be published,
administered and updated by the human resources department.
(1992 Code, § 30-134) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 11-96, passed 1-16-
1996; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 28-00,
passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 80-05, passed 8-8-2005)
§ 39.168 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM.
   The mayor and all full-time employees may voluntarily participate in the
deferred compensation plan administered by Mission Square Retirement.
   (a)   For the nonexempt classified employees, the city will contribute an
amount equal to the employee’scontribution up to a maximum of 4% of his or her
base hourly rate equal to 80 hours in a pay period.
   (b)   For the mayor and appointive officials and employees and exempt
midmanagement employees, the city will contribute an amount equal to the
employee’s contribution up to a maximum of 4% of his or her biweekly rate of
pay.
(1992 Code, § 30-135) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-
1997; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.169 UNIFORM/MISCELLANEOUS ALLOWANCE.
   Police and fire appointive and midmanagement exempt employees shall receive
an annual allowance for the purchase and maintenance of uniforms.
(1992 Code, § 30-136) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-
1998; Ord. 3-00, passed 1-18-2000)
VACATION LEAVE
§ 39.180 ELIGIBILITY AND ACCUMULATION; FULL-TIME NON-COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNIT
EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the mayor, any
appointive officer or employee, or any regular full-time midmanagement,
classified, or emergency services employee of the city not represented by a
collective bargaining unit shall be granted vacation with pay based on the
employee’s years of service with the city. The vacation leave shall accrue on a
monthly basis.
   (b)   This vacation leave accrual shall begin with the employee's first day
of regular employment with the city, but may not be used until the employee has
completed one month of service for accrual purposes.
   (c)   Employees hired on or after April 1, 2022, will receive a bank of 40
hours of vacation upon hire, except those appointive officers that receive a
bank of hours under (f).
   (d)   Effective April 1, 2022, the officers and employees shall receive a
full or prorated vacation benefit with full pay based on the following
schedule. Each level in the schedule shall become effective in the month in
which the employee’s employment anniversary date occurs. Vacation may be taken
beginning the first day of the following month.
Years of Service Monthly Accrual Level
Years of Service    Monthly Accrual Level
0 but less than 1   6.75
1 but less than 2   10.00
2 but less than 3   10.50
3 but less than 4   11.00
4 but less than 5   11.50
5 but less than 6   12.00
6 but less than 7   12.50
7 but less than 8   13.00
8 but less than 9   13.50
9 but less than 10  14.00
10 but less than 11 14.50
11 but less than 12 15.00
12 but less than 13 15.50
13 but less than 14 16.00
14 and over         16.75
 
Current officers and employees shall be placed at the monthly accrual level
commensurate with the new accrual schedule effective April 1, 2022. Employees
hired between April 1, 2021, and March 31, 2022, will be placed at the ten-hour
per month accrual level effective April 1, 2022.
   (e)   Fire midmanagement employees assigned to a 24-hour shift schedule not
represented by a collective bargaining unit shall receive a full or prorated
vacation benefit with full pay based on the following schedule. Each new level
in the schedule shall become effective in the month in which the employee’s
employment anniversary date occurs. Vacation may be taken beginning the first
day of the following month.
 
Years of Service   Monthly Accrual Level
Less than 4        14.00 hours
4 but less than 7  16.00 hours
7 but less than 9  18.00 hours
9 but less than 11 20.00 hours
11 and over        22.00 hours
 
Current employees shall be placed at the monthly accrual level commensurate
with the new accrual schedule effective April 1, 2022.
   (f)   A bank of vacation hours may be established for a newly hired
appointive officer upon recommendation of the director of human resources and
approval of the mayor. Upon the appointive officer’s one-year employment
anniversary date, regular monthly accrual of vacation will commence in
accordance with the established vacation level. Future advancement to the next
level of vacation accrual shall assume credited years of service commensurate
with the employee's starting accrual level and advancement will occur on the
employee's employment anniversary date. The mayor may modify the accrual level
for an appointive officer as needed.
   (g)   Emergency services employees shall be placed at the monthly accrual
level commensurate with their respective years of service at the time of
transition to the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.205; 1992 Code, § 30-137) (Ord. 2465, passed 12-12-1966;
Ord. 2467, passed 2-6-1967; Ord. 2721, passed 11-30-1970; Ord. 31-73, passed 4-
23-1973; Ord. 24-75, passed 4-28-1975; Ord. 86-75, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 127-
81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 3-83, passed 1-31-1983; Ord. 16-86, passed 2-24-
1986; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95,
passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 11-00, passed 2-14-2000;
Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 30-02, passed 4-
8-2002; Ord. 96-11, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016; Ord. 32-22,
passed 3-1-2022; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.181 ELIGIBILITY AND ACCUMULATION; OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   A regular part-time employee of the city not represented by a bargaining
unit shall be entitled to that vacation provided for by this subchapter
prorated according to the number of regular paid hours in the calendar month
preceding the most recently completed calendar month not including any overtime
hours.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.205; 1992 Code, § 30-138) (Ord. 2465, passed 12-12-1966;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997)
§ 39.182 USE.
   (a)   Vacation shall be taken at the time the department director or
designee shall designate. In designating vacation time, the seniority and
preferences of officers or employees shall be followed unless absence of the
employee or officer will impede the operation of the department.
   (b)   Employees may schedule vacation prior to its anticipated accrual, but
may not use vacation until after it has been accrued as specified in this
subchapter.
   (c)   Vacation time shall not be scheduled or used in any manner for
purposes of extending an employee's official date of separation from the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.205; 1992 Code, § 30-139) (Ord. 2465, passed 12-12-1966;
Ord. 129-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 43-82, passed 4-19-1982; Ord. 3-83, passed
1-31-1983; Ord. 150-84, passed 12-24-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord.
32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-
1997; Ord. 97-16, passed 8-9-2016)
§ 39.183 MAXIMUM BALANCE AND PAYMENT.
   (a)   Regular full-time employees may accumulate vacation as set forth in §
39.180 without limitation, provided that as of December 31 of each calendar
year the employee's maximum balance of unused vacation shall not exceed the
following:
      (1)   For employees hired before January 1, 2012, the maximum balance of
unused vacation shall not exceed 280 hours.
      (2)   For employees hired after December 31, 2011, the maximum balance of
unused vacation shall not exceed 240 hours.
      (3)   For fire management employees hired before January 1, 2012,
assigned to a shift schedule, the maximum balance of unused vacation shall not
exceed 336 hours.
      (4)   For fire management employees hired after December 31, 2011,
assigned to a shift schedule, the maximum balance of unused vacation shall not
exceed 288 hours.
Any unused vacation hours remaining in an employee’s accumulated balance in
excess of maximums identified above as of 12 midnight on December 31 of each
year shall be forfeited, except as specifically set forth in this Code. The
above forfeiture provision shall not apply for the calendar year ending
December 31, 2020.
   (b)   In the event of discharge, resignation in good standing, or death, any
vacation time the employee has accumulated and not used before the date of
separation from his or her employment, up to the applicable maximum identified
in division (a) above, shall be paid at the employee's regular base rate as of
the date of separation to the employee or to the surviving spouse, or if no
spouse survives to his or her estate. Under no circumstances shall payment be
made for accumulated vacation in excess of the prescribed maximums identified
in division (a).
   (c)   Except as specifically set forth in this section, no payment may be
made in lieu of vacation.
   (d)   Midmanagement employees may be compensated for up to 40 hours of a
scheduled and approved vacation if the vacation is cancelled after October 1 of
a calendar year due to the needs of the city and the employee risks forfeiture
of unused vacation. A copy of the employee’s time-off request form and a
statement of the reason for cancellation of the vacation shall be filed with
the director of human resources. Fire shift management employees may be
compensated for up to 48 hours of scheduled vacation pursuant to this
subsection.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §3.205; 1992 Code, §30-140) (Ord. 2465, passed 12-12-1966;
Ord. 99-84, passed 6-25-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 128-99, passed 12-13-1999; Ord.
96-11, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 103-20, passed 12-1-2020)
SICK LEAVE
§ 39.195 NATURE OF LEAVE.
   Sick leave shall be granted as a privilege and not a right, and the claim of
the leave shall be subject to an investigation as the department head deems
necessary. Abuse of sick leave privileges constitutes grounds for disciplinary
action.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-147) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.196 ACCUMULATION AND ANNUAL PAYOUT; GENERALLY.
   There is hereby established a sick leave schedule which shall apply to the
mayor, appointive officers and employees, midmanagement, classified, and
emergency services employees. It shall not apply to temporary or contractual
employees or employees represented by a collective bargaining unit.
   (a)   Eligibility for sick leave shall begin at the time of appointment. Any
officer or employee of the city covered by this section shall accrue sick leave
at the rate of three and seven-tenths hours biweekly. However, subject to the
recommendation of the director of human resources and approval of the mayor,
newly hired appointive officers may be given a bank of 96.2 hours of sick
leave. Upon the appointive officer’s one-year employment anniversary date, sick
leave will accrue at the rate of three and seven-tenths hours biweekly.
   (b)   (1)   The mayor, and any appointive officer and employees (except
police chief and fire chief), general midmanagement and classified employee
originally hired or elected prior to December 21, 1981, who does not take the
full amount of sick leave granted in any one calendar year, may accumulate the
unused amounts from year to year.
      (2)   The police chief, fire chief, sworn police department midmanagement
employees and 40-hour fire midmanagement employees hired prior to December 31,
1983, who do not take the full amount of sick leave granted in any one calendar
year, may accumulate the unused amounts from year to year.
      (3)   When the employee has accumulated a sick leave balance of 1,104
hours, the employee shall be paid for up to 48 hours of accumulated sick leave
for that year and each year thereafter in which the minimum sick leave balance
of 1,104 hours is maintained. To be eligible for the annual sick leave payout,
the employee must be employed by the city for the entire calendar year in which
the eligibility occurs. In the year in which an employee is eligible for and
will receive payment for sick leave payout at retirement as provided in §
39.205, the employee will not be eligible for the annual sick leave payout as
provided in this section. This payment of accumulated sick leave will be paid
at the employee’s regular base hourly rate as of December 31 the same calendar
year in which the payout was earned. This payout will be made to the employee
by no later than the third paycheck paid in the year following the year the
payout was earned. Each nonexempt employee covered by this section shall have
deducted from his or her accumulated sick leave one hour for each hour of
absence while on sick leave. Each elected and appointive officer and
midmanagement employee covered by this division (b) shall have deducted from
his or her accumulated sick leave eight hours for each full day of absence
while on sick leave.
   (c)   (1)   The mayor, and any appointive officer and employee (except
police chief and fire chief), general midmanagement and classified employee
originally hired after December 21, 1981, will not be eligible for an
annualized sick leave payout, but may accrue sick leave without limitation.
      (2)   The police chief, fire chief, sworn police department midmanagement
employees and 40-hour fire midmanagement employees originally hired after
December 31, 1983, will not be eligible for annualized sick leave payout, but
may accrue sick leave without limitation.
      (3)   Each classified and emergency services employee under this division
(c) will have deducted one hour of sick leave from his or her sick leave
accrual for every hour he or she is absent from work on sick leave. The mayor
and each appointive officer and employee and midmanagement employee covered by
this division (c) shall have deducted from his or her accumulated sick leave
eight hours for each full day of absence while on sick leave.
   (d)   This section does not apply to fire shift midmanagement department
employees.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-148) (Ord. 2586, passed 12-30-1968;
Ord. 2722, passed 11-30-1970; Ord. 18-74, passed 5-6-1974; Ord. 123-81, passed
12-28-1981; Ord. 77-84, passed 4-30-1984; Ord. 97-85, passed 11-25-1985; Ord.
87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-
1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 28-00,
passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 30-02, passed 4-8-2002; Ord.
115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.197 ACCUMULATION AND ANNUAL PAYOUT; MIDMANAGEMENT FIRE SHIFT DEPARTMENT
EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Eligibility for sick leave for fire shift midmanagement employees
covered by this section shall begin after the completion of six months actual
service following appointment, but accumulation shall be retroactive to the
time of appointment. Any midmanagement member of the fire department
continuously employed for a period of six months or longer shall be granted
sick leave at the rate of five and fifty-four hundredths hours biweekly.
   (b)   If any fire shift midmanagement employee, except those mentioned in
division (c) below, does not take the full amount of sick leave granted in any
calendar year, the amount not taken may be accumulated from year to year. When
the fire employee has accumulated a sick leave balance of 1,512 hours, the
employee shall be paid for up to 72 hours of his or her accumulated sick leave
for that year and each year thereafter in which he or she continues to maintain
the minimum sick leave balance of 1,512 hours. To be eligible for the annual
sick leave payout, the employee must be employed by the city for the entire
calendar year in which the eligibility occurs. In the year in which an employee
is eligible for and will receive payment for sick leave payout at retirement as
provided in §
39.205, the employee will not be eligible for the annual sick leave payout as
provided in this section. This payment of accumulated sick leave will be paid
at the employee’s regular base hourly rate as of December 31 of the same
calendar year in which the payout was earned. This payout will be made to the
employee by no later than the third pay check paid in the year following the
year the payout was earned. Each fire shift midmanagement employee covered by
this section shall have deducted from his or her accumulated sick leave not
less than 24 hours of absence while on sick leave.
   (c)   Fire shift midmanagement employees originally hired after December 31,
1983, will not be eligible for an annualized sick leave payout, but may accrue
sick leave hours without limitation. Each employee under this division (c) will
have deducted not less than 24 hours of sick leave from his or her sick leave
accrual for each shift he or she is absent from work on sick leave.
   (d)   Fire midmanagement employees for purposes of this section shall be
defined as the fire battalion chiefs.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-149) (Ord. 2586, passed 12-30-1968;
Ord. 2722, passed 11-30-1970; Ord. 18-74, passed 5-6-1974; Ord. 5-82, passed 1-
14-1982; Ord. 76-84, passed 4-30-1984; Ord. 97-85, passed 11-25-1985; Ord. 87-
91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-
1998; Ord. 28-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001)
§ 39.198 ACCRUAL BY REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   A regular part-time employee shall accrue sick leave prorated and based on
the regular paid hours in the current pay period.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-150) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.199 TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
   Temporary employees are not eligible for paid sick leave benefits.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-151) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.200 REPORTING OFF DUTY.
   Any employee or officer of the city taking sick leave shall immediately
report or cause to be reported his or her absence from work to the department
head or officer in charge of the department prior to the beginning of the
employee’s scheduled workday, and upon return to work shall immediately report
the fact.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-152) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.201 MEDICAL CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   The department director may require that sick leave be granted only by
a certificate evidencing the sickness, signed by the employee’s attending
medical doctor, or the authority may require the employee to report to the
city-designated medical doctor for a physical examination.
   (b)   In any event, no sick leave with pay, for personal illness or for
attendance upon a member of the immediate family requiring the employee’s care
or attendance, shall be granted for a period longer than three consecutive work
days unless a certificate from a duly licensed medical doctor is presented to
the department director.
   (c)   This certificate must be from the attending medical doctor and must
include a written statement indicating medical necessity for the employee’s
absence on the specific date(s) due to personal illness or attendance upon a
member of his or her immediate family.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-154) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 131-98, passed
12-7-1998)
§ 39.202 USE FOR FUNERALS.
   Any employee or officer who has to make arrangements for or attend a funeral
or has to attend to estate business following the funeral during his or her
regularly scheduled work hours shall be permitted to use up to five days’ sick
leave for that funeral. This five-day limit for a single funeral may be
extended at the discretion of the department head. An employee will be allowed
to use up to a maximum of ten days of sick leave as funeral leave in one
calendar year. Any additional time required to make arrangements for or to
attend a funeral or to attend to estate business following the funeral may be
taken as vacation, compensatory leave, personal leave or time off without pay.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-156) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.203 USE ON VACATION.
   When an employee becomes ill or is injured or quarantined while on vacation,
the period of the illness, injury or quarantine may be charged to sick leave if
the employee submits a written certification from a medical doctor or other
recognized practitioner confirming his or her illness, injury or quarantine.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-157) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.204 OTHER USES.
   A classified or emergency services employee may use sick leave pay while
actually attending either physician or dental appointments, provided the
appointment has been scheduled during the employee’s regularly scheduled work
hours.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-158) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 87-97, passed
12-2-1997; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.205 PAYOUT AT RETIREMENT OR RESIGNATION IN GOOD STANDING.
   (a)   If the employee is represented by a bargaining unit which has entered
into an agreement with the city concerning sick leave payout at retirement or
resignation in good standing, the terms of the agreement will govern.
   (b)   Payout for all employees except fire shift midmanagement employees
shall be as follows.
      (1)   The mayor, and any appointive officer and employee, general
midmanagement, classified, 40-hour fire midmanagement and police midmanagement
employee originally hired prior to December 31, 1983, with an accumulated sick
leave balance of 528 hours or more upon retirement from the city service shall
be paid sick leave as follows. The first 528 earned sick leave hours shall be
paid at the rate of one-half the earned value of the employee’s accrued sick
leave. Earned sick leave in excess of the first 528 hours will be paid at the
full earned value up to a maximum of the sum equal to two months current pay.
Any additional sick leave balance remaining shall be paid at the rate of one-
half the earned value of the employee’s accrued sick leave. However, for
purposes of this subchapter, the earned value of sick leave accrued on or
before December 31, 1983, shall be equal to the employee’s highest 1983 wages;
and the earned value of sick leave accrued after December 31, 1983, shall be
equal to the rate of pay at which the sick leave was accrued. These amounts
shall be paid in a lump sum included with the employee’s final check for active
service. This benefit may not be used to increase length of service for
retirement purposes. In case of death while in the service of the city, the
employee’s beneficiary shall be paid in a valued lump sum for sick leave
accumulated, up to the date of death, under the provisions prescribed for
retirement.
      (2)   Any employee class named in this section, including emergency
services employees, hired after December 31, 1983, who has accumulated a base
amount of sick leave equal to or greater than 48 hours times the number of
years employed by the city shall upon retirement or resignation in good
standing from the city or death while in the service of the city be entitled to
receive one-fourth of his or her accrued sick leave bank hours paid at the date
of retirement or separation at current pay. In case of death while in service
of the city, the employee’s beneficiary, if the employee has qualified as set
out in the preceding sentence, shall be entitled to receive one-fourth of the
employee’s accrued sick leave bank hours paid at the employee’s rate of pay at
the date of death.
   (c)   Payout for fire shift midmanagement employees shall be as follows.
      (1)   Any fire shift midmanagement employee originally hired prior to
December 31, 1983, with an accumulated sick leave balance of 720 hours or more,
upon retirement from city service, shall be paid sick leave as follows. The
first 720 earned sick leave hours shall be paid at the rate of one-half of the
earned value of the employee’s accrued sick leave. Earned sick leave in excess
of the first 720 hours will be paid at the full earned value, up to a maximum
of a sum equal to two months’ current pay. Any additional sick leave balance
remaining shall be paid at the rate of one-half of the earned value of the
employee’s accrued sick leave. However, for purposes of this subchapter, the
earned value of sick leave accrued on or before December 31, 1983, shall be
equal to the employee’s highest 1983 wages; and the earned value of sick leave
accrued after December 31, 1983, shall be equal to the rate of pay at which the
sick leave accrued. These amounts shall be paid in a lump sum and included with
the employee’s final check for active service. This benefit may not be used to
increase length of service for retirement purposes. In case of death while in
service of the city, the employee’s beneficiary shall be paid in a valued lump
sum for sick leave accumulated, up to the date of death, under the provisions
prescribed for retirement.
      (2)   Any fire shift midmanagement employee originally hired after
December 31, 1983, who has accumulated a base amount of sick leave equal to or
greater than 72 hours times the number of years employed by the city shall upon
retirement from the city, resignation in good standing or death while in the
service of the city be entitled to receive one-fourth of his or her accrued
sick leave bank hours paid at the date of retirement or separation at current
pay. In case of death while in the service of the city, the employee’s
beneficiary, if the employee has qualified as set out in the preceding
sentence, shall be entitled to receive one-fourth of the employee’s accrued
sick leave bank hours paid at the employee’s rate of pay at the date of death.
   (d)   (1)   If the employee’s employment with the city is separated prior to
eligibility to receive retirement benefits payments, and the employee elects to
defer retirement benefits, the payment of sick leave benefits as defined above
shall be made as part of the employee’s final pay at the time of separation.
If, after receiving the sick leave payment at time of deferral, the employee
withdraws his or her contributions to the pension plan, the amount paid for
sick leave at the time of deferral shall be deducted from the amount
contributed to the pension plan, prior to the payment of these contributions.
      (2)   If an employee defers retirement benefits, any reference made to
the employee’s rate of pay at date of retirement in this subchapter means the
employee’s rate of pay as of the last day of active employment with the city
prior to deferral of retirement benefits.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-159) (Ord. 2686, passed 6-15-1970;
Ord. 18-74, passed 5-6-1974; Ord. 122-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 6-82, passed
1-14-1982; Ord. 79-84, passed 5-3-1984; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-
94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-
1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23,
passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.206 DUTY-INCURRED INJURY.
   (a)   The mayor, and any appointive officer, midmanagement employee,
classified or emergency services employee who sustains a disabling injury by
accident arising out of and in the course of employment for the city, and the
disabling injury was not caused by willful neglect on the part of the officer
or employee, shall in lieu of sick leave be reimbursed at the rate of 80% of
their regular base salary as of the date of injury for a period of six months.
Thereafter, the disability weekly amount will be as specified from time to time
by state workers’ compensation law. While receiving workers’ compensation
payments at the state rate, the employee may use accrued sick leave, vacation,
personal leave, compensatory time or other available paid time off benefits to
maintain regular base weekly earnings as of the employee’s last day worked
immediately preceding the most recent absence from work due to a duty-incurred
injury or illness. If, in the opinion of the city’s designated physician, the
employee is physically able to perform duties of another nature, the employee
may be assigned to those duties for the duration of the disability.
   (b)   If a city-designated holiday occurs while an employee in this section
is absent from work due to a duty-incurred injury or illness, the employee
shall be paid regular holiday pay for that day at the employee’s regular
holiday pay for that day at the employee’s regular base hourly rate of pay as
of the employee’s last day worked immediately preceding the absence from work.
This regular holiday pay shall be taxable, and shall be paid in lieu of the
workers’ compensation payment at the rates specified in this section for that
day. This substitution of holiday pay is only administrative, and will not
otherwise affect the employee’s workers’ compensation status.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.206; 1992 Code, § 30-160) (Ord. 2174, passed 12-10-1962;
Ord. 13-79, passed 2-12-1979; Ord. 2-83, passed 1-31-1983; Ord. 95-83, passed
11-21-1983; Ord. 87-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 32-94, passed 4-11-1994; Ord.
37-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 87-97, passed 12-2-1997; Ord. 131-98, passed 12-7-
1998; Ord. 4-01, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 115-23, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 39.207 MAYOR MAY GRANT ADDITIONAL SICK LEAVE.
   In the case of an employee or officer under the civil service who has been
employed by the city for a period of 20 years or more, the mayor in its
discretion when found necessary for the care and maintenance of the employee or
officer, may grant to the employee or officer additional sick leave for the
period as determined by the city council with pay not exceeding 50% of the
average compensation of the employee or officer.
(1992 Code, § 30-161) (Ord. 37-95, passed 3-6-1995)
EMPLOYEE’S RETIREMENT SYSTEM; GENERALLY
§ 39.220 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS. The sum of all amounts deducted from the
compensation of a member and credited to his or her individual accumulated
contributions account, together with regular interest thereon.
   ANNUITY.  An annual amount, derived from a member's accumulated
contributions, payable in equal monthly installments throughout the future life
of a person, or for a temporary period.
   BENEFICIARY. Any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of, or who is
designated to receive, a retirement allowance or other benefit payable by the
retirement system.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD.  The board of trustees provided in this
subchapter.
   CHILD. An eligible child who is an unmarried child under age 18, born to or
legally adopted by the member.
   COMPENSATION. A member's regular salary or wages paid to the member by the
city for personal services rendered to the city. If a member's COMPENSATION is
not all paid in money, the council shall fix the value of the portion of
COMPENSATION that is not paid in money. In determining regular salary or wages
paid, persons receiving workers' compensation or payments in lieu of sick leave
shall be treated as if they had not received workers' compensation payments or
payments in lieu of sick leave but had been paid their regular salary or wages
during the period of time under consideration.
   CREDITED SERVICE.  The number of years and months of service standing to a
member's credit.
   ELIGIBLE HANDICAPPED CHILD.
      (1)   An unmarried, dependent child born to or legally adopted by the
member, irrespective of age, including any child for whom an application is
currently pending, and for which the board is provided medical proof that the
child is permanently unable to hold fully self-supporting gainful employment
because of mental or physical disability. Whether the child is dependent shall
be determined in the discretion of the board on an individual basis. Factors
which may be considered in determining dependency include, but are not limited
to:
         A.   Whether the child is claimed as a dependent on another person's
federal income tax return; and
         B.   Whether, and the extent to which, the child receives economic,
social or other living assistance.
      (2)   The board shall decide in each individual case how often to require
confirming medical proof of handicapped or evidence of dependency for
continuation of benefits.
   EMPLOYER. The city of Sioux Falls.
   FINAL AVERAGE PAY.
      (1)   As it applies to all members, means the average of the highest
annual compensation paid during any three consecutive years of credited
service, selected by the member, contained within the ten years of credited
service immediately preceding the date employment with the city last
terminates. If a member has less than three years of credited service, FINAL
AVERAGE PAY shall be the average of the annual rates of compensation for the
total period of service of the member. For any year chosen, that year's annual
compensation shall include sick leave payments and vacation payments, if
received in that year, but shall  not include payments for mileage
reimbursement, car allowance, clothing allowance and other incidental payments.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the annual
compensation of each member taken into account in determining the FINAL AVERAGE
PAY used to determine benefit accruals in any calendar year beginning after
December 31, 2003, shall not exceed $205,000. The $205,000 limit on annual
compensation shall be adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with
§ 401(a)(17)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in
effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination
period that begins with or within the calendar year.
   FINAL PAY.  A member's annual rate of compensation at the time his or her
employment with the city last terminates.
   GENERAL MEMBER. Any member except a police officer member or a firefighter
member.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.
      (1)   All references to the Internal Revenue Code mean the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
      (2)   The plan year is the fiscal year commencing January 1 and ending
December 31.
      (3)   For 415 testing purposes, the limitation year is the calendar year.
   MANAGEMENT MEMBER. Any member who is elected as mayor, appointed or employed
by the city as an appointive officer, or manager of the city, but shall not
include temporary employees nor elected members of the council.
   MEMBER. Any person who is included in the membership of the retirement
system.
   PENSION. An annual amount, derived from contributions made by the city,
payable in equal monthly installments throughout the future life of a person,
or for a temporary period.
   POLICE OFFICER MEMBER. Any member who is employed in the police department
holding the rank of police officer, including probationary police officer, or
higher rank; but it shall not include any person who is privately employed as a
police officer, nor any person who is temporarily employed as a police officer
for an emergency, nor any civilian employee in the police department.
   REGULAR INTEREST. The rate of interest per annum as the board shall from
time to time adopt.
   RETIRANT. Any member who retires with a retirement allowance payable by the
retirement system.
   RETIREMENT. A member's withdrawal from city employment with a retirement
allowance payable by the retirement system.
   RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE. The sum of the annuity and pension payable to a
retirant or beneficiary.
   RETIREMENT SYSTEM. The city Employee's Retirement System. The retirement
system is established as a qualified defined benefit plan under Chapter 39 of
the city of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, Code of Ordinances as amended from time
to time, pursuant to Internal Revenue Code §§ 401(a) and 414(d) or such other
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code as applicable and applicable Treasury
Regulations and other guidance. The retirement system consists of:
      (1)   All sums of money or property that are contributed by gifts,
devises and bequests;
      (2)   All income derived from the investments of monies in the retirement
system;
      (3)   An amount as may be annually designated by the council pursuant to
law;
      (4)   All contributions by members of the retirement system; and
      (5)   All contributions by the city.
   SERVICE. Personal service rendered to the city by the mayor or appointed
officer of the city or by an employee of the city.
   VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE.
      (1)   Age 60 years with five or more years of credited service or age 55
years with 30 or more years of credited service for a general member; and
      (2)   Age 50 years for a police officer member.
   WORKERS' COMPENSATION PERIOD. The period a person is in receipt of workers'
compensation on account of a member's disability or death arising out of and in
the course of his or her city employment. If the person is paid a single sum in
lieu of his or her future workers' compensation, his or her workers'
compensation period shall be the period, if any, he or she was in receipt of
workers' compensation in weekly or other periodic payments plus the period
arrived at by dividing the single sum by his or her weekly or other periodic
payment award.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.502; 1992 Code, § 35-16) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 2757, passed 6-8-1971; Ord. 2791, passed 12-6-1971; Ord. 36-73, passed 4-
30-1973; Ord. 12-74, passed 4-8-1974; Ord. 112-80, passed 11-24-1980; Ord. 124-
81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 64-86, passed 6-30-
1986; Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987; Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-
90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 83-93, passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-
1995; Ord. 127-99, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005; Ord. 118-16,
passed 12-20-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 39.221 OFFICERS OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (a)   The board shall elect from its own members a chairperson and a
chairperson pro tem.
   (b)   The director of human resources shall serve as the administrative
officer to the board of trustees and shall transact all business of the
retirement system except for the accounting and investment activities which
shall be delegated to the city finance director.
   (c)   The city finance director shall be treasurer of the retirement system
and shall administer the accounting and investment activities of the retirement
system as well as be custodian of all the assets except those placed with a
funding agent or investment counsel as provided in §
39.255.
   (d)   The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board.
   (e)   The board shall appoint an actuary who shall be the technical advisor
to the board on matters regarding the operation of the retirement system. He or
she shall perform those other duties as are required of him or her under this
subchapter.
   (f)   The board shall appoint as medical director a physician who is neither
a retirant nor beneficiary of the retirement system. The medical director shall
be responsible to and shall serve at the pleasure of the board. He or she shall
arrange for and pass upon all medical examinations required under this
subchapter; he or she shall investigate all essential statements and
certificates of a medical nature furnished by or on behalf of a member,
retirant or beneficiary in connection with a claim for disability or service-
connected death benefits; and he or she shall report in writing to the board
his or her conclusions on medical matters referred to him or her by the board.
   (g)   The board may employ professional and other services as are required
for the proper operation of the retirement system.
   (h)   The board shall have power to select and employ a funding agent or
engage in contract for investment counsel and advice as provided in §
39.255.
   (i)   The board of trustees, by resolution, may appoint an administrator and
hire additional employees as may be required to transact the business of the
retirement system. The board of trustees shall require bonding of the
administrator in an amount set by the board of trustees, which may be included
under any city employee's blanket bond. The bond premium may be paid by the
retirement system.
   (j)   The administrator shall make available to any member of the retirement
system and to any beneficiary of the retirement system a summary retirement
system description. The summary retirement system description shall be written
in a manner to be understood by the average member of the retirement system and
shall be sufficiently accurate and comprehensive to apprise participants and
beneficiaries of their rights and obligations under the retirement system. The
summary retirement system description shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the administrator;
      (2)   Names, titles and addresses of any trustee or trustees;
      (3)   A description of the relevant provisions of any applicable
collective bargaining agreement;
      (4)   The retirement system's requirements respecting eligibility for
participation and benefits;
      (5)   A description of provisions providing for nonforfeitable pension
benefits;
      (6)   Circumstances which may result in disqualification, ineligibility
or denial or loss of benefits;
      (7)   The source of financing of the retirement system and the identity
of any organization through which benefits are provided;
      (8)   The date of the end of the retirement system year and whether the
records of the retirement system are kept on a calendar, policy or fiscal year
basis; and
      (9)   The procedures to be followed in presenting claims for benefits
under the retirement system and the remedies available under the retirement
system for the redress of claims which are denied in whole or in part.
   (k)   The administrator shall, upon written request of any participant or
beneficiary, furnish a copy of the latest updated summary retirement system
description, the latest annual report and any bargaining agreement, trust
agreement, contract or other instrument under which the retirement system is
established or operated. The administrator may make a reasonable charge to
cover the cost of furnishing complete copies.
   (l)   The administrator shall annually furnish to each retirement system
member or beneficiary a statement showing, on the basis of the latest available
information, the member's or beneficiary's accumulated contributions, if any,
total benefits accrued and nonforfeitable benefits, if any, which have accrued
or the earliest date on which the benefits will become nonforfeitable.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.508; 1992 Code, § 35-17) (Ord. 2650, passed 11-17-1969;
Ord. 2695, passed 7-27-1970; Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 36-95, passed
3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.222 COMPOSITION OF MEMBERSHIP.
   (a)   The membership of the city's retirement system shall include and be
limited to the following:
      (1)   All officers and employees of the city hired prior to July 1, 2013,
and having certified civil service status, except those employees exempt under
§§
39.263(b) and (c); but not including those who are members or retirants of the
city Firefighter's Pension Fund;
      (2)   All officers and employees of the city who do not have certified
civil service status, who were members December 31, 1966;
      (3)   All officers and employees of the city who are appointed by the
mayor and/or council prior to July 1, 2013, except those exempt under §§
39.263(b) and (c); and
      (4)   The mayor elected prior to July 1, 2013, but no other elected
council members.
   (b)   In all cases of doubt, the human resources director shall decide who
is a member of the Employee's Retirement System within the meaning of the
provisions of this article and applicable federal law.
   (c)   All officers and employees hired or appointed on or after July 1,
2013, shall participate in the South Dakota Retirement System and will not be
eligible for any benefits within this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.510; 1992 Code, § 35-18) (Ord. 78-84, passed 5-3-1984;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed
12-20-2016)
§ 39.223 TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, if any member leaves the
employ of the city for any reason except death and retirement, membership in
the retirement system shall cease and credited service at that time shall be
forfeited. If the member is reemployed by the city prior to July 1, 2013, in a
position covered by the retirement system, membership shall be restored. If the
reemployment occurs within a period of six years after the date of leaving the
employ of the city, the member's credited service last forfeited shall be
restored to the member's credit, provided the member returns to the accumulated
contributions account any amount withdrawn, together with regular interest from
the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. A reemployed member must
notify the retirement system of the member's intention to claim or reject
forfeited credited service time within 30 days after reemployment by the city
or the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived,
whichever is later. Upon death or retirement, membership in the retirement
system shall cease and credited service shall be used in the calculation of
final benefits.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.511; 1992 Code, § 35-19) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985;
Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.224 CREDITED SERVICE.
   The service rendered by a member shall be credited to the member by the
board in accordance with the rules and regulations as the board shall from time
to time adopt consistent with the provisions of this subchapter. In no case
shall less than ten days of service rendered in any calendar month by a member
be credited as a month of service other than as provided in §
39.225, nor shall less than ten months of service rendered by the member in any
calendar year be credited as a year of service, other than as provided in §
39.225, nor shall more than one year of service be credited any member for all
service rendered by the member in any calendar year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.512; 1992 Code, § 35-20) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.225 MILITARY SERVICE CREDIT.
   (a)   Except as provided otherwise in (c) through (f), if any officer or
employee, who while employed by the city, entered or enters any armed service
of the United States for active duty, active duty for training or inactive duty
for training, the member shall have the service credited as city service,
provided that:
      (1)   The employee is reemployed by the city within one year from and
after the date of termination of the armed service actually required;
      (2)   The employee returns to the employee's accumulated contributions
account the amount, if any, withdrawn therefrom at the time of entry or while
in the armed service, together with regular interest from the date of
withdrawal to the date of repayment; and
      (3)   In no case shall more than five years of city service be credited
any member for all armed service rendered, unless the employee is unable to
obtain a release from military service.
   (b)   In case of doubt as to the period to be so credited a member the board
shall have final power to determine the period consistent with applicable
federal statutes relating to military obligations. During the period of the
armed service and until reemployment by the city, the member's contributions to
the retirement system shall be suspended and any balance standing to the
member's credit in the accumulated contributions account shall be accumulated
at regular interest.
   (c)   Effective with respect to deaths occurring on or after January 1,
2007, while a member is performing qualified military service (as defined in
chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code), to the extent required by § 401(a)
(37) of the Internal Revenue Code, survivors of a member, are entitled to any
additional benefits that the retirement system would provide if the member had
resumed employment and then died, such as accelerated vesting or survivor
benefits that are contingent on the member's death while employed. In any
event, a deceased member's period of qualified military service must be counted
for vesting purposes.
   (d)   Effective with respect to deaths and/or disabilities occurring on or
after January 1, 2007, while a member is performing qualified military service
(as defined in chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code), to the extent
permitted by § 414(u)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, for benefit accrual
purposes and in the case of death, for vesting purposes, the member shall be
treated as having earned years of service for the period of qualified military
service, having returned to employment on the day before the death and/or
disability, and then having terminated on the date of death or disability. This
provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a
reasonably equivalent manner.
   (e)   Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by § 414(u)(12) of
the Internal Revenue Code, an individual receiving differential wage payments
(as defined under § 3401(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code) from an employer
shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage
payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on
annual additions under § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. This provision
shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably
equivalent manner.
   (f)   Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of
the retirement system law, contributions, benefits and service credit with
respect to qualified military service are governed by §414(u) of the Internal
Revenue Code and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
of 1994.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.513; 1992 Code, § 35-21) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.226 MEMBER’S SERVICE ACCOUNTS.
   The board shall credit each member’s service account with the number of
years and months of service to which he or she is entitled.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.514; 1992 Code, § 35-22)
§ 39.227 VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT.
   (a)   Any member may retire upon written application filed with the board
setting forth at what time, not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days
subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, the member desires to be
retired, provided that the member has satisfied the applicable age and service
requirements set forth as follows:
      (1)   If a general or general management member, upon attainment of age
60 years with five or more years of credited service or attainment of age 55
years with 30 or more years of credited service; or
      (2)   If a police officer member, upon attainment of age 60 years with 15
or more years of credited service; or upon attainment of age 50 years with 25
or more years of credited service.
   (b)   Upon retirement, the member shall receive a retirement allowance as
provided in §
39.230 if a general member, or as provided in §
39.231 if a police officer member.
   (c)   A member shall be 100 percent vested in his or her service retirement
benefit upon attaining normal retirement age as defined in paragraph (a) of
this Ordinance §
39.227.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.515; 1992 Code, § 35-23) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 2791, passed 12-6-1971; Ord. 124-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 64-86, passed
6-30-1986; Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.228 EARLY RETIREMENT; REDUCTION OF BENEFIT.
   Any member or former member on deferred status as defined in §
39.235 may retire prior to voluntary retirement as described in §
39.227 with an actuarially reduced benefit provided that the member has
completed 20 or more years of credited service. The actuarial reduction shall
be based on the interest and mortality assumptions used to calculate optional
forms of benefits and shall be computed so that the actuarial present value of
the reduced benefit is equivalent to the actuarial present value had the member
terminated employment and elected to receive a deferred benefit commencing at
his or her earliest voluntary retirement age. For the purposes of this section,
earliest voluntary retirement age shall meanthe earliest age at which the
member could have retired with unreduced benefits had the member remained in
service.
(1992 Code, § 35-23.1) (Ord. 88-91, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 39.229 MANDATORY RETIREMENT, POLICE OFFICER MEMBERS.
   (a)   Any police officer member shall be separated from the employ of the
city the first day of the calendar month next following the month in which the
member attains age 60 years. This division (a) shall be subject to division (b)
below.
   (b)   Any police officer member may continue in the employ of the city,
after attainment of the age for retirement as provided in division (a) above,
for periods not to extend beyond attainment of age 65 years, provided that the
continuance in the employ of the city is:
      (1)   Requested in writing by a member;
      (2)   Approved by his or her department head; and
      (3)   Approved by the council.
   (c)   Upon separation from the employ of the city as provided in this
section, a police officer member who has 15 or more years of credited service
shall be retired and shall receive a retirement allowance as provided in §
39.231.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.516; 1992 Code, § 35-24) (Ord. 47-80, passed 6-9-1980;
Ord. 64-86, passed 6-30-1986; Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987; Ord. 36-95, passed
3-6-1995)
§ 39.230 RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE; GENERAL MEMBER.
   (a)   Upon a general member's retirement, the member shall receive a
straight life retirement allowance and shall have the right to elect to receive
a retirement allowance under an option provided in §
39.236 in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance. The straight life
retirement allowance shall consist of the benefits provided as follows:
      (1)   An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the
accumulated contributions standing to the member's credit in his or her
accumulated contributions account at the time of retirement; and
      (2)   A pension which when added to the member's annuity will provide a
retirement allowance equal to 1.8% of his or her final average pay multiplied
by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her credited service.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the retirement system to the
contrary, the member contributions paid to and retirement benefits paid from
the plan shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the
requirements of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code for a qualified pension
plan.
   (c)   After-tax member contributions or other annual additions with respect
to a member may not exceed the lesser of $40,000 (as adjusted pursuant to § 415
(d) of the Internal Revenue Code) or 100 percent of the member's compensation.
      (1)   Annual additions are defined to mean the sum (for any year) of
employer and member contributions to a defined contribution plan, post-tax
member contributions to a defined benefit plan (except for purposes of service
purchases, if tested under the modified limit of § 415(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code), and forfeitures credited to a member's individual account.
Member contributions are determined without regard to rollover contributions
and to picked-up employee contributions that are paid to a defined benefit
plan.
      (2)   For purposes of applying § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and
for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable shall be
compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except
as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulation § 1.415(c)-2, or
successor regulation; provided, however, that member contributions picked up
under § 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code shall not be treated as
compensation.
      (3)   Compensation shall be defined as wages within the meaning of § 3401
(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and all other payments of compensation to an
employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the
employee a written statement under §§ 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 of the
Internal Revenue Code and shall be determined without regard to any rules under
§ 3401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that limit the remuneration included in
wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services
performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in § 3401(a)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code).
         A.   However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997,
compensation shall also include amounts that would otherwise be included in
compensation but for an election under §§ 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402
(k), or 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. For limitation years beginning
after December 31, 2000, compensation shall also include any elective amounts
that are not includible in the gross income of the member by reason of § 132(f)
(4) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2009,
compensation for the limitation year shall also include compensation paid by
the later of 2½ months after a member's severance from employment or the end of
the limitation year that includes the date of the member's severance from
employment if:
            1.   The payment is regular compensation for services during the
member's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the
member's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential),
commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from
employment, the payments would have been paid to the member while the member
continued in employment with the employer; or
            2.   The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or
other leave that the member would have been able to use if employment had
continued; or
            3.   The payment is pursuant to a nonqualified unfunded deferred
compensation plan, but only if the payment would have been paid to the member
at the same time if the member had continued employment with the employer and
only to the extent that the payment is includible in the member's gross income.
            4.   Any payments not described in paragraph B. above are not
considered compensation if paid after severance from employment, even if they
are paid within 2½ months following severance from employment, except for
payments to the individual who does not currently perform services for the
employer by reason of qualified military service (within the meaning of § 414
(u)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code) to the extent these payments do not exceed
the amounts the individual would have received if the individual had continued
to perform services for the employer rather than entering qualified military
service or deemed compensation to the individual if permanently and totally
disabled (as defined in § 22(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code).
            5.   An employee who is in qualified military service (within the
meaning of § 414(u)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code) shall be treated as
receiving compensation from the employer during such period of qualified
military service equal to (i) the compensation the employee would have received
during such period if the employee were not in qualified military service,
determined based on the rate of pay the employee would have received from the
employer but for the absence during the period of
qualified military service, or (ii) if the compensation the employee would have
received during such period was not reasonably certain, the employee's average
compensation from the employer during the twelve (12) month period immediately
preceding the qualified military service (or, if shorter, the period of
employment immediately preceding the qualified military service).
         C.   Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulation § 1.415(c)-2
(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the
back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation
that would otherwise be included under this definition.
      (4)   If the annual additions for any member for a plan year exceed the
limitation under § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, the excess annual
addition shall be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance
Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program).
      (5)   A member's compensation for purposes of applying these limits shall
not exceed the annual limit under § 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code
which applies for that year.
   (d)   Participation in Other Qualified Plans: Aggregation of Limits.
      (1)   The 415(b) limit with respect to any member who at any time has
been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in § 414(j) of the
Internal Revenue Code maintained by the member's employer in this plan shall
apply as if the total benefits payable under all such defined benefit plans in
which the member has been a member were payable from one (1) plan.
      (2)   The 415(c) limit with respect to any member who at any time has
been a member in any other defined contribution plan as defined in § 414(i) of
the Internal Revenue Code maintained by the member's employer in this plan
shall apply as if the total annual additions under all such defined
contribution plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one
(1) plan.
   (e)   Basic 415(b) Limitation.
      (1)   Before January 1, 1995, a member may not receive an annual benefit
that exceeds the limits specified in § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code,
subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1,
1995, a member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount
specified in § 415(b)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, subject to the
applicable adjustments in § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and subject to
any additional limits that may be specified in the retirement system. In no
event shall a member's annual benefit payable under the plan in any limitation
year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as
increased in subsequent years pursuant to § 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code
and the regulations thereunder.
      (2)   For purposes of § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, the "annual
benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life
annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable
to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to § 415(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code) and to rollover contributions (as defined in § 415(b)(2)
(A) of the Internal Revenue Code). The "benefit attributable" shall be
determined in accordance with Treasury Regulations.
   (f)   Adjustments to Basic 415(b) Limitation for Form of Benefit. If the
benefit under the plan is other than the form specified in subsection (e)(2),
then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual
benefit, using factors prescribed in Treasury Regulations.
      (1)   If the form of benefit without regard to the automatic benefit
increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and
survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the
§ 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code limit applicable at the annuity starting
date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount
[determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation § 1.415(b)-1
(c)(2)(ii)] that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of
benefit in subsections (f)(2) and (f)(3).
      (2)   For a benefit paid in a form to which § 417(e)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of:
         A.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable
to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as
the form of benefit to the member; or
         B.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a 5% interest assumption
(or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to
January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury
Regulation § 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue
Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii)
for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in
§ 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent
Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal
Revenue Code); or
      (3)   For a benefit paid in a form to which § 417(e)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of:
         A.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and
mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial
experience;
         B.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
particular form of benefit payable, computed using a 5.5 percent interest
assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years
prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution
under Treasury Regulation § 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in
Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the
applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after
December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in § 417(e)(3)(B)
of the Internal Revenue Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue
Service guidance implementing § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code); or
         C.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate
for the distribution under Treasury Regulation §1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (using the
rate in effect for the first day of the limitation year with a one-year
stabilization period) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the
applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation §
1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or
any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue
Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable
mortality tables described in § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code
(Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance
implementing § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code), divided by 1.05.
      (4)   The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting
date in accordance with the above subsections (2) and (3).
   (g)   Benefits For Which No Adjustment of the 415(b) Limit is Required. For
purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into
account in adjusting these limits:
      (1)   Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement
income benefits;
      (2)   That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a
qualified joint and survivor annuity;
      (3)   Any other benefit not required under § 415(b)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code and Treasury Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for
purposes of the limitation of § 415(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (h)   Other Adjustments in 415(b) Limitation.
      (1)   In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before
age sixty-two (62), the limit prescribed by this section for the member's
annuity starting date shall be equal to the lesser of (i) the annual amount of
a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the
member's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the one
hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000) annual limit (as adjusted under § 415
(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and, if required, under subsection (g) for
years of participation less than ten (10)), with actuarial equivalence computed
using a five percent (5%) interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality
table for the annuity starting date as defined in the plan (expressing the
member's age based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting
date), and (ii) the one hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000) annual limit
(as adjusted under § 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and, if required,
under subsection (i) for years of participation less than ten (10) multiplied
by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to the annual
amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at
age sixty-two (62), both determined without applying the limitations of this
section.
      (2)   In the event the member's benefit is based on at least fifteen (15)
years of service as a full-time employee of any police or fire department or on
fifteen (15) years of military service, the adjustments provided for in (1)
above shall not apply.
      (3)   The reductions provided for in (1) above shall not be applicable to
pre-retirement disability benefits or preretirement death benefits.
   (i)   Less than Ten (10) Years of Participation or Service Adjustment for
415(b) Limitations. The maximum retirement benefits payable to any member who
has completed less than ten (10) years of participation shall be the amount
determined under subsection (e), as adjusted under subsection (f) and/or (g),
multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's
years of participation and the denominator of which is ten (10). The limit
under subsection (j) (concerning the $10,000 limit) shall be similarly reduced
for any member who has accrued less than ten (10) years of service, except the
fraction shall be determined with respect to years of service instead of years
of participation. The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the
maximum benefit below 10% of the limit determined without regard to this
subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be
applicable to preretirement disability benefits or pre-retirement death
benefits.
   (j)   Ten Thousand Dollar ($10,000) Limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to
exceed the 415 limit if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under
this plan and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which
the member's employer contributes, do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
for the applicable limitation year and for any prior limitation year and the
employer has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan
in which the member participated.
   (k)   Effect of COLA on 415(b) Testing. For purposes of applying the limits
under § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code (the "Limit") to a member with no
lump sum benefit, the following shall apply:
      (1)   A member's applicable Limit shall be applied to the member's annual
benefit in the member's first limitation year without regard to any cost of
living adjustments;
      (2)   To the extent that the member's annual benefit equals or exceeds
the Limit, the member shall no longer be eligible for cost of living increases
until such time as the benefit plus the accumulated increases are less than the
Limit; and
      (3)   Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual
benefit, including any cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then
applicable benefit Limit including any adjustment to the § 415(b)(1)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code dollar limit under § 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code,
and the regulations thereunder.
   (l)   Effect of a Lump Sum Component on 415(b) Testing. With respect to a
member who receives a portion of the member's annual benefit in a lump sum, a
member's applicable Limit shall be applied taking into consideration both the
portion of the member's benefit subject to § 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code and the portion not subject to § 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
as required by § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and applicable Treasury
Regulations.
   (m)   Service Purchases under § 415(n). Effective for permissive service
credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31,
1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive
service credit under the plan, then the requirements of § 415(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code shall be treated as met only if:
      (1)   The requirements of § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code are met,
determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions
as an annual benefit for purposes of § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code; or
      (2)   The requirements of § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code are met,
determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes
of § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   For purposes of applying this section, the retirement system shall
not fail to meet the reduced limit under section 415(b)(2)(C) of the Internal
Revenue Code solely by reason of this subsection and shall not fail to meet the
percentage limitation under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code
solely by reason of this subsection.
      (4)   For purposes of this section the term "permissive service credit"
means service credit:
         A.   Recognized by the retirement system for purposes of calculating a
member's benefit under the retirement system;
         B.   Which such member has not received under the retirement system;
and
         C.   Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary
additional contribution, in an amount determined under the retirement system,
which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to
such service credit. Effective for permissive service credit contributions made
in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may include
service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and,
notwithstanding clause (B), may include service credited in order to provide an
increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the
retirement system.
      (5)   The retirement system shall fail to meet the requirements of this
section if:
         A.   More than five years of nonqualified service credit are taken
into account for purposes of this subparagraph; or
         B.   Any nonqualified service credit is taken into account under this
paragraph before the member has at least five years of participation under the
retirement system.
      (6)   For purposes of paragraph (5), effective for permissive service
credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31,
1997, the term "nonqualified service credit" means permissive service credit
other than that allowed with respect to:
         A.   Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical, and similar
leave) as an employee of the government of the United States, any state or
political subdivision thereof, or any agency or instrumentality of any of the
foregoing (other than military service or service for credit which was obtained
as a result of a repayment described in § 415(k)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code);
         B.   Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical, and similar
leave) as an employee (other than as an employee described in clause A.) of an
education organization described in § 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue
Code which is a public, private, or sectarian school which provides elementary
or secondary education (through grade 12), or a comparable level of education,
as determined under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the service
was performed;
         C.   Service as an employee of an association of employees who are
described in clause (A); or
         D.   Military service (other than qualified military service under §
414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code) recognized by the retirement system. In
the case of service described in clause A., B., or C., such service shall be
nonqualified service if recognition of such service would cause a member to
receive a retirement benefit for the same service under more than one plan.
      (7)   In the case of a trustee-to-trustee transfer after December 31,
2001, to which § 403(b)(13)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code or § 457(e)(17)(A)
of the Internal Revenue Code applies (without regard to whether the transfer is
made between plans maintained by the same employer):
         A.   The limitations of paragraph (5) shall not apply in determining
whether the transfer is for the purchase of permissive service credit; and
         B.   The distribution rules applicable under federal law to the
retirement system shall apply to such amounts and any benefits attributable to
such amounts.
      (8)   For an eligible member, the limitation of § 415(c)(1) of the
Internal Revenue Code shall not be applied to reduce the amount of permissive
service credit which may be purchased to an amount less than the amount which
was allowed to be purchased under the terms of a plan as in effect on August 5,
1997. For purposes of this paragraph an eligible member is an individual who
first became a member in the retirement system before January 1, 1998.
   (n)   Modification of Contributions for 415(c) and 415(n) Purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the retirement
system may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the
retirement system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits
provided in § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code by using the following methods:
      (1)   If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service
credit, the retirement system may establish a periodic payment plan for the
member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under § 415(c) or 415(n)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   If payment pursuant to subparagraph (1) shall not avoid a
contribution in excess of the limits imposed by § 415(c) or 415(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code, the retirement system may either reduce the member's
contribution to an amount within the limits of those sections or refuse the
member's contribution.
   (o)   Repayments of Cashouts. Any repayment of contributions (including
interest thereon) to the plan with respect to an amount previously refunded
upon a forfeiture of service credit under the plan or another governmental plan
maintained by the retirement system shall not be taken into account for
purposes of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, in accordance with applicable
Treasury Regulations.
   (p)   Effect of Direct Rollover on 415(b) Limit. If the plan accepts a
direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined
contribution plan qualified under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code which
is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount
that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under §
417(e) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be included in the annual benefit for
purposes of the limit under § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (q)   Reduction of Benefits Priority. Reduction of benefits and/or
contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first
reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which the
member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan
in which the member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such
priority as shall be determined by the plan and the plan administrator of such
other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined
contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made
first with respect to the plan in which the member most recently accrued
benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the plan
and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that
necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to
the agreement of the plan and the plan administrator of all other plans
covering such member.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.517A; 1992 Code, § 35-25) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 123-78, passed 12-26-1978; Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90,
passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 88-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.231 RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE; POLICE OFFICER MEMBER.
   (a)   Upon a police officer member's retirement, as provided in this
subchapter, the member shall receive a straight life retirement allowance and
shall have the right to elect to receive a retirement allowance under an option
provided in §
39.236 in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance. The straight life
retirement allowance shall consist of the benefits provided as follows:
      (1)   An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the
accumulated contributions standing to the member's credit in the accumulated
contributions account at the time of the retirement; and
      (2)   A pension which when added to the member's annuity will provide a
retirement allowance equal to the sum of 2.5% of the member's final average pay
multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of the member's
credited service not to exceed 25 years, plus 1.5% of the member's final
average pay multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of the
member's credited service which is in excess of 25 years.
   (b)   Benefits provided under this section shall not exceed the limits set
forth in Internal Revenue Code § 415 and rulings pertaining thereto. The same
provisions as is §
39.230 shall apply to the police officer member's benefit.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.517B; 1992 Code, § 35-26) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 88-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 83-93, passed 11-22-1993)
§ 39.232 TERMINAL PAYMENT.
   If a retirant dies before he or she has received in payment of his or her
straight life retirement allowance an aggregate amount equal to his or her
accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the accumulated
contributions account at the time of his or her retirement, the difference
between his or her accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of
straight life retirement allowance payments received by him or her shall be
paid to the person as he or she shall have nominated by written designation
duly executed and filed with the board. If there is no designated person
surviving the retirant, the difference, if any, shall be paid to his or her
legal representative. No benefits shall be paid under this section on account
of the death of a retirant who elected option A, B or C provided in §
39.236.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.517C; 1992 Code, § 35-27; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.233 MINIMUM RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE.
   In no case shall the straight life retirement allowance payable to any
member whose credited service includes service rendered prior to July 1, 1967,
be less than the sum of:
   (a)   An annuity which is the actuarial equivalent of his or her accumulated
contributions standing to his or her credit in the accumulated contributions
account at the time of his or her retirement; and
   (b)   A pension equal to the sum of $100 per year; plus one-one hundred
thirty fifths of his or her final average pay multiplied by the number of
years, and fraction of a year, of his or her credited service rendered after
December 31, 1950; plus two-one hundred thirty-fifths of his or her final
average pay multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his
or her credited service rendered prior January 1, 1951. The pension shall not
exceed 50% of his or her final average pay.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.517D; 1992 Code, § 35-28; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.234 MOBILITY IN CITY EMPLOYMENT.
   If a member has credited service in force for service rendered as a general
member and for service rendered as a police officer member, the retirement
allowance shall be computed upon final average pay at the time of retirement,
according to §
39.230 for general member credited service, and according to §
39.231 for police officer member credited service, provided that the portion of
retirement allowance based upon general member credited service shall not
become payable prior to attainment of age and service requirements outlined in
§
39.227 or unless the member retired under §
39.237 or §
39.240.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.517E; 1992 Code, § 35-29) (Ord. 64-86, passed 6-30-1986)
§ 39.235 DEFERRED RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE.
   (a)   If a general member with five or more years of credited service leaves
the employ of the city before satisfying the service requirements for
retirement for any reason except retirement or death, the member shall be
entitled to a retirement allowance provided in §
39.230 according to the applicable section in force at the time the member left
city employment. The retirement allowance shall begin the first day of the
calendar month next following the date the application for retirement is filed
with the board on or after attainment of age 60 years. If the accumulated
contributions are withdrawn, the right to a deferred retirement allowance shall
be forfeited. During the period of absence from the employ of the city before
the retirement allowance begins, the accumulated contributions account shall be
credited with regular interest.
   (b)   If a police officer member with 15 or more years of credited service
leaves the employ of the city before satisfying the service requirements for
retirement for any reason except retirement or death, the member shall be
entitled to a retirement allowance provided in §
39.231 according to the applicable section in force at the time the member left
city employment. The retirement allowance shall begin the first day of the
calendar month next following the date the application for retirement is filed
with the board on or after attainment of age 60 years. If the accumulated
contributions are withdrawn, the right to a deferred retirement allowance shall
be forfeited. During the period of absence from the employ of the city before
the retirement allowance begins, the accumulated contributions account shall be
credited with regular interest.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.518; 1992 Code, § 35-30) (Ord. 112-80, passed 11-24-1980;
Ord. 124-81, passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 64-86, passed 6-30-1986; Ord. 110-89,
passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.236 RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE OPTIONS.
   (a)   Prior to the effective date of retirement, but not thereafter, a
member may elect to receive a retirement allowance as a straight life
retirement allowance payable for life, or may elect to receive the actuarial
equivalent of the straight life retirement allowance in a reduced retirement
allowance, and nominate a beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of
option A, B, C, D or E set forth as follows. If a member does not elect an
option prior to the effective date of retirement, the retirement allowance
shall be paid as a straight life retirement allowance.
      (1)   Option A; allowance for ten years certain and life thereafter.
Under option A, a retirant shall receive a reduced retirement allowance payable
for the retirant's life with the provisions that, if deceased before receiving
120 monthly retirement allowance payments, the payments shall be continued for
the remainder of the 120 months to the person as the retirant shall have
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If no
designated beneficiary survives to receive the remaining monthly retirement
allowance payments, the payments as they become due shall be paid to the estate
of the last survivor of the retirant or the survivor's designated
beneficiaries.
      (2)   Option B; joint and survivor allowance. Under option B, a retirant
shall receive a reduced retirement allowance payable for life with the
provision that upon death the reduced retirement allowance shall be continued
throughout the life of and paid to the person, having an insurable interest in
the retirant's life, as shall have been nominated by written designation duly
executed and filed with the board prior to the effective date of retirement.
      (3)   Option C; modified joint and survivor allowance. Under option C, a
retirant shall receive a reduced retirement allowance payable for life with the
provision that upon death one-half of the reduced retirement allowance shall be
continued throughout the life of and paid to the person, having an insurable
interest in the retirant's life, as shall have been nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the board prior to the effective date
of retirement.
      (4)   Option D; joint and survivor pop-up allowance. Under option D a
retirant shall receive a reduced retirement allowance with the provision that
upon death the reduced retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the
life of and paid to the person, having an insurable interest in the retirant's
life, as shall have been nominated by written designation duly executed and
filed with the board prior to the effective date of retirement. If the
nominated beneficiary dies first, the retirant shall, upon the death of the
nominated beneficiary, begin to receive an allowance equal to the straight life
allowance which would have been payable had no option been elected.
      (5)   Option E; modified joint and survivor pop-up allowance. Under
option E, a retirant shall receive a reduced retirement allowance with the
provision that upon death one-half of the reduced retirement allowance shall be
continued throughout the life of and paid to the person, having an insurable
interest in the retirant's life, as shall have been nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the board prior to the effective date
of retirement. If the nominated beneficiary dies first, the retirant shall,
upon the death of the nominated beneficiary, begin to receive an allowance
equal to the straight life allowance which would have been payable had no
options been elected.
   (b)   If a retirant who elected option B, C, D or E provided in division (a)
above and the retirant's beneficiary both die before they have received, in
retirement allowances, an aggregate amount equal to the retirant's accumulated
contributions account at the time of retirement, the difference between the
accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of retirement allowance
payments received by them shall be paid to the person as the retirant shall
have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board.
If there be no designated persons surviving the retirant, the difference, if
any, shall remain in the retirement system.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the retirement system
shall pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the
requirements of Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9) and regulations pertaining
thereto, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of Internal
Revenue Code § 414(d).
      (1)   A member's benefits shall be distributed to him or her not later
than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of:
         A.   The calendar year in which the member attains age 70 and one-
half; or
         B.   The calendar year in which the member retires.
      (2)   Distributions to a member and his or her beneficiaries shall only
be made in accordance with the incidental death benefit requirements of
Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9)(G) and rulings pertaining thereto.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.519; 1992 Code, § 35-31) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 118-16,
passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.237 DUTY INCURRED DISABILITY.
   Upon the application of a member or his or her department head, a member who
becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty in the employ of the city, by
reason of a personal injury or disease which the board finds to have occurred
solely and exclusively as the natural and proximate result of causes arising
out of and in the course of his or her employment by the city, may be retired
by the board, provided that:
   (a)   Any condition of impairment of health which the board finds to have
been caused by hypertension, heart disease or respiratory disease resulting in
permanent total or partial disability to a police officer member who
successfully passed a physical examination on entering the employ of the city,
which examination failed to have any evidence of the condition, shall be
presumed to have occurred as the natural and proximate result of the
performance of his or her duty as a police officer in the employ of the city;
   (b)   After a medical examination of the member, made by or under the
direction of the medical director, the medical director reports in writing to
the board that the member is mentally or physically totally disabled for duty
in the employ of the city and that his or her disability will probably be
permanent; and
   (c)   The report of the medical director is concurred in by the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.520; 1992 Code, § 35-32) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967)
§ 39.238 DUTY DISABILITY ALLOWANCE; RETIREMENT AFTER VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE.
   (a)   A member who retires after his or her voluntary retirement age, on
account of disability as provided in §
39.237, shall receive the applicable disability retirement allowance provided
as follows.
   (b)   Upon his or her retirement he or she shall have the right to elect to
receive his or her retirement allowance under an option provided in §
39.236 in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance:
      (1)   A general member’s straight life disability retirement allowance
shall be computed according to §
39.230. His or her straight life retirement allowance shall not be less than
12.5% of his or her final average pay, and shall be subject to §
39.244; and
      (2)   A police officer member’s straight life disability retirement
allowance shall be computed according to §
39.231. His or her straight life retirement allowance shall not be less than
20% of his or her final average pay, and shall be subject to §
39.244.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.521; 1992 Code, § 35-33) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967)
§ 39.239 DUTY DISABILITY ALLOWANCE; RETIREMENT BEFORE VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE.
   (a)   A member who retires before his or her voluntary retirement age, on
account of disability as provided in §
39.237, shall receive the applicable disability retirement allowance provided
as follows.
   (b)   (1)   In computing his or her retirement allowance the credited
service used shall be the sum of:
         A.   His or her credited service in force at the time of his or her
retirement; plus
         B.   The number of years, and fraction of a year, in the period from
the date of his or her retirement to the date he or she would attain his or her
voluntary retirement age.
      (2)   His or her disability retirement allowance shall begin as of the
date of his or her disability, but not more than six months before the date his
or her application for disability retirement is filed with the board, nor prior
to the date his or her name last appeared on a city payroll with pay. Upon his
or her retirement he or she shall have the right to elect to receive his or her
retirement allowance under an option provided in §
39.236 in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.522; 1992 Code, § 35-34) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967)
§ 39.240 NON-DUTY-INCURRED DISABILITY.
   Upon the application of a member or his or her department head, a member who
has ten or more years of credited service and becomes totally and permanently
disabled for duty in the employ of the city as a result of causes not occurring
in the course of his or her actual performance of duty in the employ of the
city, may be retired by the board, provided, that after a medical examination
of the member, made by or under the direction of the medical director, the
medical director reports in writing to the board that:
   (a)   The member is mentally or physically totally disabled for duty in the
employ of the city; and
   (b)   The disability will probably be permanent.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.523; 1992 Code, § 35-35)
§ 39.241 NON-DUTY-DISABILITY RETIREMENT ALLOWANCE.
   A member who retires on account of disability as provided in §
39.240 shall receive a disability retirement allowance computed according to §
39.230 if he or she is a general member, or according to §
39.231 if he or she is a police officer member. His or her retirement allowance
shall be as of the date ofhis or her disability, but not more than six months
before the date his or her application for disability retirement is filed with
the board, nor prior to the date his or her name last appeared on a city
payroll with pay. Upon his or her retirement he or she shall have the right to
elect to receive his or her retirement allowance under an option provided in §
39.236 in lieu of a straight life retirement allowance. His or her disability
retirement allowance shall be subject to §§
39.242, 39.243 and 39.244.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.524; 1992 Code, § 35-36)
§ 39.242 ADJUSTMENT OF DISABILITY ALLOWANCE.
   If a disability retirant who has not attained his or her voluntary
retirement age is or becomes engaged in a gainful occupation, business or
employment, the amount of his or her disability retirement allowance shall not
exceed the difference between his or her final salary and the sum of his or her
earnings or other remuneration from the occupation, business or employment. If
his or her earnings are later changed his or her disability retirement
allowance shall be correspondingly adjusted.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.525; 1992 Code, § 35-37)
§ 39.243 REEXAMINATION OF DISABILITY RETIRANTS.
   (a)   The board may require a disability retirant who has not attained his
or her voluntary retirement age to undergo a medical examination to be made by
or under the direction of the medical director at least once each year during
the first five years following his or her retirement and at least once in each
three-year period thereafter. Should the disability retirant refuse to submit
to medical examination in any period, his or her disability retirement
allowance may be discontinued by the board until his or her withdrawal of the
refusal; and should the refusal continue for one year, his or her disability
retirement allowance may be revoked by the board. If upon the medical
examination of the retirant the medical director reports to the board that the
retirant is physically able and capable of resuming employment with the city,
and his or her report is concurred in by the board, the retirantshall be
returned to the employ of the city and his or her disability retirement
allowance shall be terminated. In returning the retirant to city employment,
the city shall be allowed reasonable latitude in placing him or her in a
suitable position commensurate to his or her type of work and compensation at
the time of his or her retirement.
   (b)   A disability retirant who has been or shall be returned to city
employment shall again become a member of the retirement system. His or her
credited service in force at the time of his or her disability retirement shall
be restored to full force and effect. He or she shall be given service credit
for the period he or she was in receipt of a disability retirement allowance
provided in §
39.239. He or she shall not be given service credit for the period he or she
was in receipt of a disability retirement allowance provided in §
39.241.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.526; 1992 Code, § 35-38)
§ 39.244 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION OFFSET.
   (a)   During the workers’ compensation period of a retirant or beneficiary,
his or her monthly retirement allowance payable by the retirement system shall
be reduced by the amount of his or her workers’ compensation converted to a
monthly basis.
   (b)   If a person becomes entitled to a retirement allowance payable by the
retirement system as the result of an accident or injury caused by the act of a
third party, the city shall be subrogated to the rights of the person against
the third party to the extent of the benefits which the city pays or becomes
liable to pay.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.527; 1992 Code, § 35-39)
§ 39.245 SERVICE-CONNECTED DEATH BENEFITS.
   (a)   If a member dies as the result of a personal injury or disease arising
solely and exclusively out of and in the course of his or her employment by the
city, and the board finds that his or her death, injury or disease resulting in
death is the result of his or her actual performance of duty in the employ of
the city, the applicable benefits provided in this division (a) shall be paid,
subject to the condition that workers' compensation is granted on account of
the member's death.
      (1)   The member's accumulated contributions account at the time of death
shall be paid in accordance with §
39.247.
      (2)   A pension of one-third of the deceased member's final average pay
shall be paid the spouse. The spouse's pension:
         A.   Shall terminate upon the spouse's death; and
         B.   Shall be subject to §
39.244.
      (3)   If, in addition to a spouse who is entitled to a pension payable
from the retirement system, the deceased member leaves an eligible child or
eligible handicapped child, each child shall receive a pension of an equal
share of one-sixth of the member's final average pay. A child's pension shall
terminate upon the attainment of age 18 years, or adoption, marriage or death.
A handicapped child's pension shall terminate upon adoption, marriage, full
recovery from handicap or death. Upon termination of a child's or handicapped
child's pension, the pensions payable to the member's remaining eligible
children, if any, shall be adjusted to an equal share of one-sixth of the
member's final average pay, provided, however, the minimum benefit for this
division (a)(3) shall be $200 per month for each eligible child. Any child's or
handicapped child's pension shall be subject to §
39.244.
      (4)   If there is no spouse surviving the deceased member, or if the
spouse dies and an eligible child or eligible handicapped child survives, the
child shall each receive a pension of one-fourth of the member's final average
pay. If there are more than two surviving children, each child shall receive a
pension of an equal share of one-half of the member's final average pay. Upon
termination of a child's or handicapped child's pension as provided in division
(a)(3) above, the pensions payable to the member's remaining eligible children,
if any, shall be adjusted to an equal share of one-half of the member's final
average pay, provided that any child's pension shall not exceed one-fourth of
the member's final average pay, provided, however, the minimum benefit for this
division (a)(4) shall be $200 per month for each eligible child. Any child's or
handicapped child's pension shall be subject to §
39.244.
      (5)   If the deceased member leaves neither a spouse nor children
eligible to receive pensions under this section, a father and mother, or either
of them, whom the board finds to be dependent upon the member for financial
support, shall each receive a pension of one-sixth of the member's final
average pay. A parent's pension:
         A.   Shall not exceed $600 per year; and
         B.   Shall be subject to §
39.244.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any provision in the retirement system to the
contrary, distributions upon the death of a member shall be made in accordance
with the following requirements and shall otherwise comply with Internal
Revenue Code § 401(a)(9) and the rulings pertaining thereto. If it is
determined that the distribution of a member's interest has begun and the
member dies before the entire interest has been distributed to the member, the
remaining portion of the interest shall be distributed at least as rapidly as
under the method of distribution selected by the member at retirement. If a
member dies before beginning to receive any distributions of the interest under
the retirement system, then any death benefits shall be distributed to the
beneficiaries by December 31 of the calendar year in which the fifth
anniversary of the date of death occurs. However, the five-year distribution
requirement shall not apply to any portion of the deceased member's interest
which is payable to or for a designated beneficiary. In that event, the portion
may be distributed over the life of the designated beneficiary (or over a
period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary), provided
the distributions begin not later than December 1 of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the member died.
   (c)   Any death benefit payable under this section shall be compared with
the death benefits payable under §
39.246, and the higher death benefit shall be paid.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.528; 1992 Code, § 35-40) (Ord. 49-80, passed 6-9-1980;
Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90,
passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 104-92, passed 12-7-1992; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.246 NATURAL DEATH PENSIONS.
   (a)   Any member who has ten or more years of credited service may at any
time prior to the effective date of his or her retirement, but not thereafter,
elect option B provided in §
39.236 in the same manner as if he or she were then retiring from city
employment, and nominate a beneficiary whom the board finds to be dependent
upon the member for financial support. Prior to the effective date of the
member's retirement, the member may revoke his or her election of option B and
nomination of beneficiary and he or she may again elect the option B and
nominate a beneficiary as provided in this division (a). His or her election of
option B and nomination of beneficiary shall be automatically revoked upon the
marriage or death of the beneficiary prior to the member's retirement. Upon the
death of a member who has an option B election in force, the beneficiary shall
immediately receive a retirement allowance computed according to the applicable
§
39.230 or §
39.231 in the same manner in all respects as if the member had retired the day
preceding the date of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might
not have satisfied the applicable age and service requirements for retirement
provided in §
39.227. The retirement allowance payable to the beneficiary shall not be less
than $360 per year and shall be subject to §
39.244. If a member has an option B election in force at the time of his or her
retirement, his or her election of option B and nomination of beneficiary shall
thereafter continue in force, provided, however that prior to the effective
date of the member's retirement, he or she shall have the right to elect to
receive his or her retirement allowance as a straight life retirement allowance
or under another option provided in §
39.236. No retirement allowance shall be paid under this division (a) on
account of the death of a member if any benefits are or will become payable
under §
39.245 on account of their death.
   (b)   (1)   If a member has ten or more years of credited service and does
not have an option B election provided in division (a) above in force, and dies
while in the employ of the city, and leaves a spouse, the following benefits
shall be paid:
         A.   1.   The spouse shall immediately receive a retirement allowance
computed according to the applicable §
39.230 or §
39.231 in the same manner in all respects as if the member had retired the day
preceding the date of his or her death, notwithstanding that he or she might
not have satisfied the applicable age and service requirements for retirement
provided in §
39.227, elected option B provided in §
39.236 and nominated his or her spouse as beneficiary; and
            2.   The retirement allowance payable to the spouse shall not be
less than $360 per year and shall be subject to §
39.244.
         B.   If the deceased member does not leave a spouse eligible to
receive a retirement allowance provided in this division (b), his or her
accumulated contributions account at the time of his or her death shall be paid
in accordance with §
39.247(b); and
         C.   In addition to the retirement allowance, if any, payable to the
deceased member's spouse, their eligible children or eligible handicapped child
shall each receive a pension of $200 per month, and shall be subject to §
39.244. A child's pension shall terminate upon attainment of age 18 years,
adoption, marriage or death. A handicapped child's pension shall terminate upon
adoption, marriage, full recovery from handicap or death.
      (2)   No benefits shall be paid under this division (b) on account of the
death of a member if any benefits are or will become payable under §
39.245 on account of the member's death.
   (c)   Any benefits paid under this section shall comply with the
distribution rules in §
39.245(b).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.529; 1992 Code, § 35-41) (Ord. 49-80, passed 6-9-1980;
Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 104-92,
passed 12-7-1992; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.247 REFUND OF ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   If a member ceases to be employed by the city, for any reason except
his or her retirement or death, before he or she has satisfied the age and
service requirements for retirement provided in §
39.227, he or she shall be paid his or her accumulated contributions account
upon his or her written request filed with the board.
   (b)   Should a member die and no retirement allowance or pension becomes or
will become payable by the retirement system on account of his or her death,
except as provided in §
39.245, his or her accumulated contributions account at the time of his or her
death shall be paid to that person as he or she shall have nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there is no designated
person surviving the member, his or her accumulated contributions shall be paid
to his or her legal representative.
   (c)   If a member dies without heirs, and without having nominated a
beneficiary as provided in division (b) above, his or her accumulated
contributions account at the time of his or her death may be used to pay his or
her burial expenses, not to exceed a reasonable sum to be determined by the
board, provided that he or she leaves no other estate sufficient for that
purpose.
   (d)   Payments of refunds of accumulated contributions, as provided in this
section, may be paid in a single sum or in installments according to the rules
and regulations as the board may from time to time adopt.
   (e)   (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this rule, a distributee
may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator,
to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
      (2)   For the purposes of this division (e), the following definitions
shall apply throughout this rule.
         DIRECT ROLLOVER. A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee.
         DISTRIBUTEE. Includes an employee or former employee. Effective
January 1, 2007, a DISTRIBUTEE further includes a nonspouse beneficiary who is
a designated beneficiary as defined by Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9)(E).
However, a nonspouse beneficiary may only make a direct rollover to an
individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for
the purpose of receiving the distribution, and the account or annuity shall be
treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity.
         ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN.
            1.   The following that accepts a distributee's eligible rollover
distribution;
               a.   An individual retirement account described in § 408(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   An individual retirement annuity described in § 408(b) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   An annuity plan described in § 403(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
               d.   A qualified trust described in § 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
               e.   On or after January 1, 2008, to a Roth IRA described in §
408A of the Internal Revenue Code; or
               f.   With respect to any distribution made after December 31,
2001, an annuity contract described in § 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code or
an eligible plan described under § 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, which
is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees
to separately account for amounts transferred into the plan from this plan.
An eligible rollover distribution does not include any other distribution which
the Internal Revenue Service does not consider eligible for rollover treatment,
such as certain corrective distributions necessary to comply with the
provisions of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   The definition of ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN shall also apply in
the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse.
         ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION. Any distribution of all or any portion
of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an ELIGIBLE
ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION does not include the following:
            1.   Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life
(or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life
expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of ten years or more;
            2.   Any distribution to the extent the distribution is required
under § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and
            3.   With respect to any distribution made prior to January 1,
2002, the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income
(determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation
with respect to employer securities). With respect to any distribution made
after December 31, 2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax
employee contributions that are not included in gross income. However, that
portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement account or annuity
described in § 408(a) or (b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or to a qualified
defined contribution plan described in §§ 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred,
including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution which is
includable in gross income and the portion of the distribution which is not so
includable.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.530; 1992 Code, § 35-42) (Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.248 ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The accumulated contributions accounts shall be the accounts in which
shall be accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions deducted from the
compensations of members and from which shall be made refunds and transfers of
accumulated contributions as provided in this plan.
   (b)   The contribution of a general member shall be 3% of the employee's
compensation and the contribution of a police officer member shall be 8% of the
employee's compensation. Effective January 6, 2014, the contribution of a
general member shall be 4% of the employee's compensation; effective January 5,
2015, the contribution of a general member shall be 5% of the employee's
compensation. Effective January 6, 2014, the contribution of a police officer
member shall be 9% of the employee's compensation; effective January 5, 2015,
the contribution of a police officer member shall be 10% of the employee's
compensation.
   (c)   The officer responsible for making the payroll shall cause the
contributions provided in division (b) above to be deducted from the
compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every
payroll period, so long as he or she remains a member in the employ of the
city. The members' contributions provided for in this section shall be made
notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member
shall be changed thereby. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to
the deductions made and provided for in this section, and payment of his or her
compensation less the deductions shall be a full and complete discharge and
acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services rendered by
him or her during the period covered by the payment, except as to benefits
provided by this subchapter. The contributions when deducted from the
compensation of a member shall be credited to his or her individual account in
the accumulated contributions accounts.
   (d)   At the expiration of a period of four years from and after the date a
member's employment by the city terminated, any balance in his or her
accumulated contributions account, unclaimed by him or her or his or her legal
representative shall remain with the retirement system, provided that no
retirement allowance will become payable by the retirement system on his or her
account.
   (e)   In addition to the contributions deducted from the compensation of a
member as provided in this section, the member shall pay into the accumulated
contributions accounts, by a single contribution within six months after the
date of reemployment, the amount required to be repaid by §
39.223. In no case shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior
to the date the member withdrew the accumulated contributions until the member
repays to the accumulated contributions accounts all amounts due the
accumulated contributions accounts by the member.
   (f)   (1)   The city shall pick up the member contribution required by
division (b) above for all compensation earned after the effective date of this
division (f). The contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer
contributions in determining tax treatment under the United States Internal
Revenue Code. The city shall pick up the member contributions from funds
established and available in the salaries account, which funds would otherwise
have been designated as member contributions and paid to the retirement system.
Member contributions picked up by the city pursuant to this division (f) shall
be treated for all other purposes of this and other laws of the city in the
same manner and to the same extent as member contributions made prior to the
effective date of this division (f).
      (2)   Member contributions to the retirement system shall be paid by the
city on behalf of all members. Payment of the member's contribution picked up
by the city shall be made by reducing the amount of the compensation payable to
those members and making payment of the amount directly to the retirement
system. Contributions, although designated as member contributions, are being
paid by the city in lieu of contributions by the members. Members do not have
the option of choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of
having them paid by the city to the retirement system.
      (3)   The effective date of this division (f) shall be the first day of
the first pay period after the city has received notification of approval from
the Internal Revenue Service that, pursuant to § 414(h) of the United States
Internal Revenue Code, the member contributions so picked up shall not be
included in gross income for tax purposes until that time as they are
distributed by refund or benefit payment, but the effective date shall not be
prior to December 15, 2003.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.531; 1992 Code, § 35-43) (Ord. 12-74, passed 4-8-1974;
Ord. 123-78, passed 12-26-1978; Ord. 112-80, passed 11-24-1980; Ord. 125-81,
passed 12-28-1981; Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 58-86, passed 6-9-1986;
Ord. 64-86, passed 6-30-1986; Ord. 18-89, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed
12-3-1990; Ord. 88-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 66-94, passed 7-25-1994; Ord.
22-98, passed 2-17-1998; Ord. 54-02, passed 7-8-2002; Ord. 05-04, passed 1-12-
2004; Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.249 RETIREMENT SYSTEM PAYMENTS.
   The retirement system shall be the fund from which shall be paid all
annuities, pensions, retirement allowances, and administrative expenses payable
as provided in this subchapter. Upon the return of a disability retirant to the
employ of the city, his or her accumulated contributions, computed as of the
date of his or her return, shall be credited to his or her individual
accumulated contributions account.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.532; 1992 Code, § 35-44; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.250 RETIREMENT SYSTEM CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   The retirement system shall be the fund to which shall be
credited contributions made by the city to the retirement system, for the
general division and the police division. Upon the basis of the mortality and
other tables of experience, and regular interest, as the board shall from time
to time adopt, the actuary shall annually compute the amounts due for:
         A.   Pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries; and
         B.   Pensions to be paid on account of service rendered and to be
rendered by members.
      (2)   The city's annual contributions required to finance the retirement
system shall be appropriated by the council and shall be subject to §
39.252. The contributions shall be determined, for the general division and the
police division, according to the following.
         A.   The city's appropriation for members' current service shall be a
percent of their annual compensation which will produce amounts which if paid
annually by the city during their future service will be sufficient to
accumulate the assets at the time of their retirements for the pensions to be
paid them based upon their future service.
         B.   The city's appropriation for members' accrued service shall be an
amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be
determined by the council, will amortize at regular interest the amounts for
the accrued portions of the pensions to be paid them.
         C.   The city's appropriations for retirement allowances being paid
retirants and beneficiaries shall be an amount which if paid annually by the
city over a period of years, to be determined by the council, will amortize at
regular interest the amounts for the accrued portions of the pensions to be
paid them.
   (b)   (1)   All contributions made by the city under this retirement system
shall be deposited in the retirement system fund. However, contributions made
by the city are expressly conditioned upon the initial qualification of the
retirement system under the Internal Revenue Code. Upon the city's request, a
contribution which was made by mistake of fact or conditioned upon initial
qualification shall be returned to the city within one year after the payment
of the contribution or the denial of the qualification.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided, all assets of the retirement system,
including investment
income, shall be retained for the exclusive benefit of members and their
beneficiaries, shall be used to pay benefits to those persons or to pay
administrative expenses to the extent not paid by the city, and shall not
revert to or inure to the benefit of the city.
      (3)   In no event shall the city receive any amounts from the retirement
system fund upon termination of the retirement system, except that, and
notwithstanding any other provision of the retirement system, the city shall
receive those amounts, if any, as may remain after the satisfaction of all
liabilities of the retirement system and arising out of any variations between
actual requirements and expected actuarial requirements.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.533; 1992 Code, § 35-45) (Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.251 ESTABLISHMENT OF GENERAL DIVISION, POLICE DIVISION.
   There is hereby established a general division to cover the participation of
the general members in the retirement system, and a police division to cover
the participation of the police officer members. Separate accounting controls
shall be maintained in the accumulated contributions accounts, for the general
division and for the police division. The maintaining of separate accounting
controls for the general division and the police division shall not cause the
assets of the retirement system to be segregated in the divisions.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.534; 1992 Code, § 35-46; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.252 LIMIT OF CITY’S CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Total contributions in each year to a retirement system subject to §§
39.220 through
39.268 shall be sufficient to fund the following:
   (a)   The administrative cost of the plan during the year;
   (b)   The actuarially determined cost of future benefits accruing to members
during the year; and
   (c)   An amount sufficient to amortize any unfunded liability of the
retirement system over a period not to exceed 40 years on the basis of
reasonable and generally accepted actuarial assumptions.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.535; 1992 Code, § 35-47) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 119-84, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16,
passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.253 PENSIONS ALLOWED PRIOR TO 1951.
   All pensions being paid by the city prior to January 1, 1951, except to
retired firefighters and their beneficiaries, shall become obligations of the
retirement system and shall be paid from the retirement system, subject to §
39.252.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.536; 1992 Code, § 35-48; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.254 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
   The administrative expenses of the retirement system as reasonably incurred
shall be paid from the retirement system fund.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.537; 1992 Code, § 35-49; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.255 INVESTMENT OF ASSETS.
   (a)   The board of trustees shall be the trustees of the assets of the
retirement system. The board shall have full and independent power to invest
and reinvest the monies and assets of the retirement system and to hold,
purchase, sell, assign, transfer and dispose of any securities and investments
of the retirement system.
   (b)   The board shall establish a written investment policy, with the advice
and counsel of the advisors as the board deems necessary, and the investment
policy shall set forth the types of investments into which shall be placed the
assets of the retirement system. The policy shall further set forth appropriate
provisions with respect to investments, including, but not limited to, the
anticipated rate of return, quality of investment, class of investment,
maturity and liquidity, cash reserves and acceptable risk. The investment
policy shall be reviewed by the board periodically.
   (c)   The board shall have the authority to invest and reinvest the assets
of the retirement system in securities, investment vehicles or property,
wherever situated and of whatever kinds, as shall be approved by the board and
in accordance with the investment policy adopted by the board. The board may
engage an investment advisor or investment counsel in contract for investment
advice when they deem it necessary.
   (d)   The board may select one or more funding agents or investment counsel
for the management of the assets of the retirement system. The selection and
appointment of funding agents or investment counsel shall be made by the board,
and the board shall have the right to determine the form and substance of each
and every agreement under which the funds are to be held and managed by the
funding agent or investment counsel, provided that the agreement shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (1)   The board shall require that any funding agent or investment
counsel who has custody or control of any property of the plan to keep accurate
and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and other
transactions pertaining to the trust property, and shall further require that
all accounts, books and records pertaining thereto be open for inspection and
audit at all reasonable times by the board or its designees and the city
finance department or its designees. The board shall also be authorized to have
conducted an independent audit at the expense of the retirement system.
      (2)   The board may retain the services of a qualified independent
investment consultant who shall, at least on a semiannual basis, report on the
relative performance of the retirement system's funding agents or investment
counsel and recommend to the board the retention or replacement of the
managers. A qualified independent investment consultant shall have the
qualifications and experience as determined by the board from time to time.
   (e)   (1)   The board shall, in selecting a funding agent or investment
counsel or advisor, exercise all judgment and care in the circumstances then
prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs. Any funding agent, investment counsel or
advisor shall have a minimum of five years of experience.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         FUNDING AGENT. A corporate or individual trustee or trustees,
insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state, or
combination thereof.
         INVESTMENT ADVISOR. A corporation or individual who has registered
with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment
advisor and is authorized to do business in the state.
         INVESTMENT COUNSEL. A corporation or individual authorized to do
business under the Federal Investment Advisors Act of 1940, being 15 U.S.C. §§
80b1 through 80-b-21, as amended from time to time, and authorized to do
business in the state.
   (f)   The board of trustees may, unless restricted by law, transfer all or
any portion of the assets of the retirement system to a collective or common
group trust, as permitted under Revenue Ruling 81-100, Revenue Ruling 2011-1,
Notice 2012-6, and Revenue Ruling 2014-24 (or subsequent guidance), that is
operated or maintained exclusively for the commingling and collective
investment of monies, provided that the funds in the group trust consist
exclusively of trust assets held under plans qualified under § 401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, individual retirement accounts that are exempt under §
408(e) of the Internal Revenue Code, eligible governmental plans that meet the
requirements of § 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, and governmental plans
under § 401(a)(24) of the Internal Revenue Code. For this purpose, a trust
includes a custodial account or separate tax-favored account maintained by an
insurance company that is treated as a trust under § 401(f) or under § 457(g)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (g)   Any collective or common group trust to which assets of the retirement
system are transferred pursuant to the above shall be adopted by the board of
trustees as part of the plan by executing appropriate participation, adoption
agreements, and/or trust agreements with the group trust's trustee.
   (h)   The separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan
pursuant shall not be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the
exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries of the plan.
   (i)   For purposes of valuation, the value of the separate account
maintained by the group trust for the plan shall be the fair market value of
the portion of the group trust held for the plan, determined in accordance with
generally recognized valuation procedures.
   (j)   The description of the various funds of the retirement system shall be
interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the retirement system and not
to the segregation of its assets in the funds of the retirement system. All
assets of the retirement system shall be held for the sole purpose of meeting
disbursements for annuities, pensions and other payments authorized by this
subchapter and shall be used for no other purpose.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.538; 1992 Code, § 35-50) (Ord. 2491, passed 8-7-1967;
Ord. 2650, passed 11-17-1969; Ord. 106-09, passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 118-16,
passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.256 METHOD OF MAKING PAYMENTS.
   All payments from monies of the retirement system shall be made according to
ordinance and charter provisions governing the disbursement of monies.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.539; 1992 Code, § 35-51; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.257 RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUND; ALLOWANCE OF REGULAR INTEREST.
   (a)   The retirement system fund shall be the fund to which shall be
credited all interest, dividends and other income from investments of the
retirement system; all transfers from the accumulated contributions account by
reason of lack of claimant; and all other monies received by the retirement
system, the disposition of which is not specifically provided by this
subchapter. The board may accept gifts and bequests and such shall be credited
to the retirement system. Whenever the board determines that the balance in the
retirement system is more than sufficient to cover the charges to the fund the
board may provide for contingency reserves.
   (b)   Provided, however, that no interest be credited a member after he or
she leaves city employment except as is otherwise specifically provided in this
subchapter, at the end of each fiscal year the board shall allow and credit
regular interest on the balance standing to each member's credit in the
accumulated contributions account at the beginning of each quarter of the
fiscal year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.540; 1992 Code, § 35-52) (Ord. 2757, passed 6-8-1971;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.258 GROUP INSURANCE DEDUCTION.
   (a)   As permitted by law, in addition to retirement allowances payable
under this subchapter, the retirement system shall pay from the retirement
system one-half of the premium for the retirant's and beneficiary's group
health insurance plan participated in by the city. Effective after final
termination and distribution of the 401(h) group health insurance fund, this
premium will instead be paid from the OPEB 115 Trust Fund Agreement.
   (b)   As permitted by law, if a retirant or beneficiary is covered by a
group insurance plan participated in by the city, and is permitted to and
elects to continue coverage as a retirant, the retirant or beneficiary may
authorize the board to have deducted from all retirement allowances the
payments required to continue coverage under the group insurance plan.
   (c)   The benefits described in this section shall apply to any retired
employee or officer who retires prior to January 1, 2014, is entitled to a
retirement allowance and who shall have participated at least five years,
immediately preceding separation from city employment in the group health
insurance plan participated in by the city.
   (d)   All contributions from the retirement allowances for purposes of the
retirant's and/or beneficiary's group insurance fund shall be reasonable and
ascertainable.
   (e)   Contributions to fund the retirant's and beneficiary's 401(h) group
health insurance plan must be subordinate to the contributions to the
retirement system for retirement benefits. At no time shall the aggregate
actual contributions to the 401(h) group health insurance fund (when added to
actual contributions for life insurance protection under the plan, if any) be
in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total aggregate actual
contributions made to the retirement system (not including contributions to
fund past service credit, if applicable). The board shall annually determine
whether the twenty-five percent (25%) test has been met. If at any time the 401
(h) group health insurance fund (plus any life insurance contribution) would
exceed the twenty-five percent (25%) test, the excess amount of contributions
shall be transferred to the retirement system for retirement benefits.
   (f)   Forfeitures from the group health insurance fund shall not be
allocated to individual accounts, but shall be used for account expenses.
   (g)   At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the 401
(h) group health insurance fund or termination of the retirement system shall
any assets for purposes of group health insurance be used for, or diverted to,
any purpose other than the providing of payment of the retirement system
portion of the monthly retiree health insurance premium benefit in this
section, and the payment of administrative expenses.
   (h)   The provisions of § 401(h)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code shall apply
upon the satisfaction of all liabilities under law.
   (i)   Effective December 31, 2016, the 401(h) group health insurance fund
shall be terminated. After satisfaction of all liabilities under the 401(h)
group health insurance fund to provide certain retiree medical benefits, any
amounts remaining in this fund must be returned to the city, pursuant to § 401
(h)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (j)   Effective January 1, 2017, the OPEB Trust shall be created and
effective pursuant to §
39.006. The OPEB 115 Trust Fund Agreement will be used to make the payments
described in (a) of this section as soon thereafter as is administratively
reasonable in the board's judgment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.541; 1992 Code, § 35-53) (Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987;
Ord. 26-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed
12-20-2016)
§ 39.258.1 STIPEND.
   (a)   Any officer or employee who retires from city employment with an
immediate annuitized pension benefit after December 31, 2013, shall upon
retirement receive a monthly stipend. The stipend shall be paid at the rate of
$40 per month per year of service until such retirant is Medicare eligible or
upon death, whichever is sooner. Such stipend shall be adjusted for inflation
at an annual rate of 3% beginning in January, 2015.
   (b)   Credited service for purposes of calculation of the monthly stipend
will be determined in the same manner as identified in §
39.224 for members that retire with a regular, early reduced, duty-incurred
disability or non-duty-incurred disability retirement benefit.
(Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.259 ASSIGNMENTS PROHIBITED.
   All annuities, pensions, retirement allowances, the accumulated
contributions of any member, or any other benefit whatsoever accrued or
accruing to any member or beneficiary shall be unassignable and shall not be
subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any other process of law
whatsoever, except as is specifically provided by this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.542; 1992 Code, § 35-54)
§ 39.260 CORRECTION OF ERRORS.
   Should any change or error in the records result in any person receiving
from the retirement system more or less than he or she would have been entitled
to receive had the records been correct, the board shall correct the error and
as far as practicable shall adjust the payment of benefit in a manner that the
actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the person was correctly entitled
shall be paid.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.543; 1992 Code, § 35-55)
§ 39.261 REDETERMINATION OF RETIREMENT ALLOWANCES.
   (a)   The board of trustees shall provide annual post-retirement
redetermination of retirement allowances. The redetermined amount shall not be
less than the amount of retirement allowances otherwise payable. Any provision
of this subchapter which limits the amount of retirement allowances shall not
apply to the operation of this section in redetermining the amount of
retirement allowances. The application of any provision redetermining
retirement allowance amounts may be restricted to retirement allowances having
an effective date of payment either prior to or subsequent to a specified date.
Any post-retirement redetermination of one or more retirement allowances within
a retirement system shall be prefunded and may not bring the retirement system
into noncompliance with the provisions of §
39.252(c).
   (b)   Pursuant to division (a) above, the retirement allowance upon which
redeterminations of retirement allowances are made shall be increased once on
January 1, 1986, by 0.5% for each year of retirement based on the current
retirement allowance for each person retiring on or before December 31, 1974,
and 0.5% for each year of retirement based on the original retirement allowance
for each person retiring after December 31, 1974.
   (c)   (1)    Starting January 1, 1991, on the first of the month following
the thirty-sixth full month of retirement, the board shall redetermine the
retirement allowances of those retirants and beneficiaries whose retirement
allowances were effective 36 full months prior to the date of redetermination,
and the retirement allowances shall be increased as provided in this section
effective on the first of the month following the thirty-sixth full month of
retirement. On January 1, 1991, and thereafter on each January 1, the board
shall redetermine the retirement allowances of all retirants and beneficiaries,
and the retirement allowances shall be increased as provided in this section.
The retirement allowance and forecast base shall be increased by an amount
equal to the current base times the pension increase percentage. The pension
increase percentage shall be equal to the percentage increase, to a maximum of
3%, in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, as computed by the
United States Department of Labor, for the year ending in the month of June
preceding the January 1 redetermination date.
      (2)   Any calculation of benefits required in this section shall be made
effective as of the dates mentioned in this section, and the calculation of
benefits may be made on a later date. Changes in amounts paid to retirants and
beneficiaries shall be paid as soon as practicable after the end of the
calendar year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.546; 1992 Code, § 35-56) (Ord. 2695, passed 7-27-1970;
Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987; Ord. 110-89,
passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 83-93, passed 11-22-
1993; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.262 APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES.
   No other provisions of ordinance which provide wholly or partly at the
expense of the city for pensions or retirement benefits, except federal social
security benefits, for employees of the city, their widows/widowers, children
or other dependents, shall apply to members, retirants and beneficiaries of the
retirement system, except as is specifically provided in this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.544; 1992 Code, § 35-57)
§ 39.263 ADOPTION OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT EMPLOYEE’S PENSION
PLAN AND TRUST FOR EMPLOYEES THEREOF.
   (a)   As of December 21, 1983, the city shall adopt, for the benefit of and
on behalf of the current employees of the department of community development,
an agency of the city, the employee's pension plan and trust previously
established by the agency on January 13, 1970, as amended.
   (b)   (1)   Effective on January 10, 1984, continued participation in the
department of community development employee's pension plan and trust will be
limited to those employees who have attained 55 years of age on that date and
are currently employed by the department of community development. The plan
shall be funded with contributions to be made by the city in the same net
percentage as that made on behalf of the general members under the city
Employee's Retirement System together with employee contributions to be
deducted from community development employee's compensation in the same
percentage as that contributed by other general members of the city Employee's
Retirement System, not to exceed 5% of the compensation paid to the employees
by the city, unless increased by a two-thirds majority vote of the members of
the retirement board.
      (2)   The remaining members, except those mentioned in this section,
along with any other current employees and any future employees, will start
their years of service effective on January 10, 1984, and participate in the
city Employee's Retirement System in the same manner and upon the same
conditions as other general members of the city's Employee's Retirement System.
   (c)   All future employees of the department of community development shall
be ineligible to participate under the department of community development
employee's pension plan and trust.
   (d)   The department of community development employee's pension plan and
trust shall continue to provide benefits to its participants upon death,
retirement or termination of employment from the agency, until a time as all
funds have been distributed from the trust or until an earlier time as
authorized by the council.
   (e)   A copy of the employee pension plan of the department of community
development is on file in the city clerk of records' office.
(1992 Code, § 35-58) (Ord. 102-83, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 78-84, passed 5-3-
1984; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.264 CHANGES IN EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTION LEVELS.
   No change may be made in employee contribution levels of this retirement
system or present or future benefits of this retirement system, by ordinance or
otherwise, without an affirmative vote by both the council and the membership
of this retirement system.
(1992 Code, § 35-59) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-
1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.265 CHANGE OR MODIFICATION OF BENEFITS; ACTUARIAL STATEMENT.
   No benefits, present or future, may be changed or modified in any manner
unless the retirement system's actuaries have prepared an actuarial statement
showing the effect of those changes on the retirement system. No benefits,
present or future, may be changed or modified if the change or modification
will bring the retirement system into noncompliance with the provisions of §
39.252.
(1992 Code, § 35-60) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.266 CITY TO MAINTAIN RECORDS; INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED TO
ADMINISTRATOR.
   The city shall maintain records with respect to each employee sufficient to
determine benefits due or which may become due to the employee. The city shall
furnish to the retirement system administrator any information necessary for
the administrator to make reports required under the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 35-61) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.267 REMARRIAGE OF SURVIVING SPOUSE.
   Surviving spouses whose pension benefits have terminated or whose future
pension benefits are subject to termination because of remarriage will have
their surviving spousal pension benefits reinstated as of the effective date of
the ordinance from which this section derives. The reinstatement of surviving
spousal benefits will not be retroactive and will not include post-retirement
redetermination benefit increases granted since termination of benefits, but
pension benefits will begin again based on their last calculated benefit. They
will be eligible under the same regulations as other retirants for future post-
retirement redetermination increases.
(1992 Code, § 35-62) (Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989)
§ 39.268 TERMINATION OF PLAN.
   In the event of termination of this plan, the rights of all affected
participants to benefits then accrued shall thereupon become 100% vested
andnonforfeitable to the extent then funded or the amounts credited to the
employees’ accounts are nonforfeitable.
(1992 Code, § 35-62.1) (Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005)
EMPLOYEE’S RETIREMENT SYSTEM;
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 39.280 ADMINISTRATION OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (a)   The authority and responsibility for the administration, management
and proper operation of the retirement system and for construing and making
effective the provisions of this subchapter shall be vested in the board of
trustees.
   (b)   The retirement system is established as a qualified defined benefit
plan known as the "city of Sioux Falls Employee's Retirement System" as amended
from time to time, pursuant to §§ 401(a) and 414(d) of the Internal Revenue
Code and such other provision of the Internal Revenue Code as applicable and
applicable Treasury Regulations and other guidance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.503; 1992 Code, § 35-63; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.281 COMPOSITION.
   The board of trustees of the Employee's Retirement System shall be composed
of seven trustees as follows:
   (a)   The mayor, or that person as the mayor shall designate to act on the
mayor's behalf; and two members who may or may not be members of the council
appointed by the mayor with advice and consent of the council, to represent the
council;
   (b)   Three members of the retirement and pension system selected by the
membership, two of whom shall be general members elected by the general
division members and one of whom shall be a police member elected by the police
division members. Elections shall be in accordance with §
39.282; and
   (c)   One resident of the city who is not an official or employee of the
city and whose membership on the board of trustees creates no conflict of
interest. The member shall be nominated and approved by an affirmative majority
vote of the trustees selected pursuant to divisions (a) and (b) above.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.503; 1992 Code, § 35-64) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.282 ELECTION OF TRUSTEES.
   The election of the trustees provided in §
39.281(b) and (c) shall be held under the rules and regulations as the board
shall from time to time adopt.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.504; 1992 Code, § 35-65)
§ 39.283 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (a)   The regular term of office for trustee members appointed by the mayor
shall be four years to expire on December 31 in the year of the mayoral
election. The regular term of office for the trustees provided in §
39.281(b) and (c) shall be four years, one term to expire each year.
   (b)   No trustee selected under s §
39.281(a) or (c), except the mayor or their designee, shall serve more than two
consecutive full terms of office.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.505; 1992 Code, § 35-66) (Ord. 67-94, passed 7-25-1994;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.284 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Each trustee shall, within ten days after his or her appointment or
election, take an oath of office before the city finance director for the
faithful performance of his or her duties.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.505; 1992 Code, § 35-67)
§ 39.285 FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   (a)   If a member trustee shall cease to be an officer or employee of the
city, or should any appointed trustee not serving as the mayor, or the citizen
trustee fail to attend scheduled meetings of the board for three consecutive
meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the remaining trustees
attending the meeting, the trustee shall be considered to have resigned from
board membership and the board shall by resolution declare the office vacated
as of the date of adoption of the resolution. Any vacancy occurring in the
office of trustee shall be filled within 90 days from and after the date the
vacancy occurs, for the unexpired term, in the same manner as the office was
previously filled.
   (b)   Except for the mayor, if a trustee is unable to attend two consecutive
meetings because of a leave of absence from duties, the remaining trustee
members by unanimous vote may appoint a temporary replacement eligible in
accordance with §
39.281. The appointment is effective until the term expires or the board member
returns.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.506; 1992 Code, § 35-68) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.286 COMPENSATION.
   The trustees shall serve without additional compensation for their services
as such.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.507; 1992 Code, § 35-69)
§ 39.287 MEETINGS.
   The board of trustees shall hold meetings regularly, at least quarterly, and
shall designate the time and place thereof. All meetings of the board shall be
public.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.507; 1992 Code, § 35-70)
§ 39.288 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The board of trustees shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct
of its business.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.507; 1992 Code, § 35-71)
§ 39.289 MANNER OF ACTION.
   Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on each question coming before
the board. At least four concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision by
the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.507; 1992 Code, § 35-72)
§ 39.290 RECORDS OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Records shall be kept of all proceedings before the board of trustees.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.507; 1992 Code, § 35-73)
§ 39.291 RECORD OF MEMBERS.
   The administrative officer shall keep data regarding members, retirants and
beneficiaries as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets
and liabilities of the retirement system.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.509; 1992 Code, § 35-74) (Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.292 ANNUAL REPORT.
   (a)   The city human resources director or their designee shall present a
report to the board of trustees at the time of the annual actuarial valuation
report each year showing the fiscal transactions of the retirement system for
the year ended the preceding December 31, and the last balance sheet showing
the financial condition of the retirement system by means of an actuarial
valuation basis.
   (b)   The board of trustees shall publish an annual report containing
financial statements and an actuarial valuation of the retirement system. The
report shall be filed with the retirement laws committee created by SDCL 2-6-
8 and shall be available to each member of the retirement system. The financial
statements contained in the report shall be audited by an independent certified
public accountant. The actuarial valuation required in the report shall include
the information required under the provisions of SDCL 3-12-47(6) and shall be
performed by an approved actuary as defined by SDCL 3-12-47(9).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.509; 1992 Code, § 35-75) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.293 ADOPTION OF EXPERIENCE TABLES.
   The board of trustees from time to time shall adopt the mortality and other
tables of experience, and a rate of regular interest, as are necessary in the
operation of the retirement system on an actuarial basis.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.509; 1992 Code, § 35-76)
§ 39.294 RESPONSIBILITY OF FIDUCIARY.
   Every fiduciary shall discharge his or her duties solely in the interest of
the participants and beneficiaries of this retirement system, for the exclusive
purpose of providing benefits to participants and their beneficiaries and with
the skill, care, prudence and diligence, under the circumstances then
prevailing, of a prudent person familiar with the matters and acting in a
similar capacity. For purposes of this section, the word FIDUCIARY means any
person or entity who exercises any discretionary authority control over the
management of this retirement system or its assets, any person or entity who
renders investment advice to this retirement system for a fee or other
compensation, or any person or entity who has any discretionary authority or
discretionary responsibility in the administration of this retirement system.
(1992 Code, § 35-77) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION FUND;
GENERALLY
§ 39.305 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS. The sum of all amounts deducted from the
compensations of a member and credited to his or her individual accumulated
contributions account in the pension fund, together with regular interest
thereon.
   BENEFICIARY. Any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of a pension
or other benefit payable from the pension fund.
   BOARD. The retirement board provided for in this subchapter.
   CHILD. An eligible child who is an unmarried child under age 18, born to or
legally adopted by the member.
   COMPENSATION. The annual rate of salary paid a firefighter by the city for
service rendered by him or her as a firefighter in the employ of the city. The
word COMPENSATION shall include longevity pay increases, if any, granted him or
her.
   CREDITED SERVICE.  Service credited a member to the extent provided in this
subchapter.
   ELIGIBLE HANDICAPPED CHILD.
      (1)   An unmarried, dependent child born to or legally adopted by the
member, irrespective of age, for which the board is provided medical proof that
the child is permanently unable to hold fully self- supporting gainful
employment because of mental or physical disability. Whether the child is
dependent shall be determined in the discretion of the board on an individual
basis. Factors which may be considered in determining dependency include, but
are not limited to:
         A.   Whether the child is claimed as a dependent on another person's
federal income tax return; and
         B.   Whether, and the extent to which, the child receives economic,
social or other living assistance.
      (2)   The board shall decide in each individual case how often to require
confirming medical proof of handicapped for continuation of benefits.
   EMPLOYER. The city of Sioux Falls.
   FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION.
      (1)   The average of the annual compensations received by a member for a
period of three consecutive years of credited service immediately preceding
retirement. If a member has less than three years of credited service, FINAL
AVERAGE COMPENSATION shall be the average of the annual compensations received
for the member's total years of credited service. For any year chosen, that
year's annual compensation shall include sick leave payments and vacation
payments, if received in that year, but shall not include payments for mileage
reimbursement, car allowance, clothing allowance and other incidental payments.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the annual
compensation of each member taken into account in determining the final average
pay used to determine benefit accruals in any calendar year beginning after
December 31, 2003, shall not exceed $205,000. The $205,000 limit on annual
compensation shall be adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with
§ 401(a)(17)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in
effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination
period that begins with or within the calendar year.
   FINAL COMPENSATION. A member's regular annual rate of compensation at the
time employment is last terminated with the city as a firefighter. In
determining regular, annual rate of compensation, persons receiving workers'
compensation or payments in lieu of sick leave shall be treated as if they had
not received workers' compensation payments or payments in lieu of sick leave
but had been paid their regular salary or wages during the period of time under
consideration.
   FIREFIGHTER. A full-time officer or employee of the fire department of the
city. The word FIREFIGHTER shall not include any civilian employee of the fire
department, nor any person temporarily employed as a firefighter for an
emergency, nor any person who is privately employed as a firefighter.
   FIREFIGHTER'S SALARY. The annual rate of compensation of a firefighter at
step 9 or equivalent step in the pay schedule.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.
      (1)   All references to the Internal Revenue Code mean the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
      (2)   The plan year is the fiscal year commencing January 1 and ending
December 31.
      (3)   For 415 testing purposes, the limitation year is the calendar year.
   MEDICAL COMMITTEE. A committee of two physicians, one of whom is designated
by the board, and one by or on behalf of a member, retirant or beneficiary who
is claiming benefits under this subchapter. If the two physicians do not
concur, the MEDICAL COMMITTEE means a committee of the two physicians and one
additional member selected by them.
   MEMBER. Any person included in the membership of the pension fund.
   PENSION. An annual amount payable, from the pension fund, in equal monthly
installments for life.
   PENSION FUND. Consists of:
      (1)   All sums of money or property that are contributed by gifts,
devises and bequests;
      (2)   All money received by the city from the state division of insurance
as its proportionate share of the insurance fund collected from the various
insurance companies;
      (3)   All income derived from the investments of monies in the pension
fund;
      (4)   An amount as may be annually designated by the council pursuant to
law;
      (5)   All contributions by members of the pension fund; and
      (6)   All contributions by the city.
   REGULAR INTEREST. Interest at the rate or rate per annum as the board shall
from time to time determine.
   RETIRANT. A member who retires with a pension payable from the pension fund.
   SERVICE. Service rendered to the city by a person in the employ of the city
as a firefighter.
   VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE.
      (1)   Age 55 years for a member with 20 or more years of credited
service. For a member with less than 20 years of credited service at age 55
years, VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE means the age at the time 20 years of credited
service are acquired; or
      (2)   A member whose age and years of service, when added, equal 80 as
calculated in §
39.312(a)(2).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1102; 1992 Code, § 35-87) (Ord. 2196, passed 6-10-1963;
Ord. 47-77, passed 6-20-1977; Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 96-87, passed
11-16-1987; Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord.
83-93, passed 11-22-1993; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 127-99, passed 12-
13-1999; Ord. 53-02, passed 7-8-2002; Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005; Ord. 118-16,
passed 12-20-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 39.306 OFFICERS OF PENSION FUND.
   The officers of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be as follows.
   (a)   The board shall elect from its members a chairperson and a chairperson
pro tem.
   (b)   The director of human resources shall serve as the administrative
officer to the board of trustees and shall transact all business of the pension
fund except for the accounting and investment activities which shall be
delegated to the city finance director.
   (c)   The city finance director shall be treasurer of the pension fund and
shall administer the accounting and investment activities of the pension fund
as well as be custodian of all the assets except those placed with a funding
agent or investment counsel as provided in §
39.332.
   (d)   The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board.
   (e)   The board shall appoint an actuary who shall be the technical advisor
to the board on matters regarding the operation of the pension fund who shall
perform those other duties as are required in connection therewith.
   (f)   The board shall have power to select and employ a funding agent or
engage in contract for investment counsel and advice as provided in §
39.332.
   (g)   The board of trustees, by resolution, may appoint an administrator and
may hire additional employees as may be required to transact the business of
the pension fund. The board of trustees shall require bonding of the
administrator in an amount set by the board of trustees, which may be included
under any city employee's blanket bond. The bond premium may be paid by the
pension fund.
   (h)   The administrator shall make available to any member of the pension
fund and to any beneficiary of the pension fund a summary pension fund
description. The summary pension fund description shall be written in a manner
to be understood by the average member of the pension fund and shall be
sufficiently accurate and comprehensive to apprise participants and
beneficiaries of their rights and obligations under the pension fund. The
summary pension fund description shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the administrator;
      (2)   Names, titles and addresses of any trustees;
      (3)   A description of the relevant provisions of any applicable
collective bargaining agreement;
      (4)   The pension fund's requirements respecting eligibility for
participation and benefits;
      (5)   A description of provisions providing for nonforfeitable pension
benefits;
      (6)   Circumstances which may result in disqualification, ineligibility
or denial or loss of benefits;
      (7)   The source of financing of the pension fund and the identity of any
organization through which benefits are provided;
      (8)   The date of the end of the pension fund year and whether the
records of the pension fund are kept on a calendar, policy or fiscal year
basis; and
      (9)   The procedures to be followed in presenting claims for benefits
under the pension fund and the remedies available under the pension fund for
the redress of claims which are denied in whole or in part.
   (i)   The administrator shall, upon written request of any participant or
beneficiary, furnish a copy of the latest updated summary pension fund
description, the latest annual report and any bargaining agreement, trust
agreement, contract or other instrument under which the pension fund is
established or operated. The administrator may make a reasonable charge to
cover the cost of furnishing complete copies.
   (j)   The administrator shall annually furnish to each pension fund member
or beneficiary a statement showing, on the basis of the latest available
information, the member's or beneficiary's accumulated contributions, if any;
total benefits accrued and nonforfeitable benefits, if any, which have accrued;
or the earliest date on which his or her benefits will become nonforfeitable.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1106; 1992 Code, § 35-88) (Ord. 2002, passed 10-19-1959;
Ord. 2649, passed 11-17-1969; Ord. 2696, passed 7-27-1970; Ord. 108-85, passed
12-2-1985; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.307 COMPOSITION OF MEMBERSHIP.
   The membership of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall include all
firefighters hired by the city prior to July 1, 2013. In all cases of doubt,
the human resources director shall decide who is a member of the Firefighters'
Pension Fund within the meaning of the provisions of this subchapter and
applicable federal law. All firefighters hired or appointed on or after July 1,
2013, shall participate in the South Dakota Retirement System and will not be
eligible for any benefits within this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1109; 1992 Code, § 35-89) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed
12-20-2016)
§ 39.308 TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, if any member leaves the
employ of the city for any reason except death and retirement, membership in
the pension fund shall cease and credited service at that time shall be
forfeited. If the member is reemployed by the city prior to July 1, 2013, as a
firefighter, membership in the pension fund shall be restored. If the member is
reemployed in any other position in the city, credited service shall not be
restored. If the reemployment occurs within a period of six years after the
date of leaving the employ of the city, the member's credited service last
forfeited shall be restored to the member's credit, provided the member returns
to the accumulated contributions account any amount withdrawn, together with
regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. A
reemployed member must notify the pension fund of the member's intention to
claim or reject forfeited credited service time within 30 days after
reemployment by the city or the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section derives, whichever is later. Upon death or retirement, membership in
the pension fund shall cease and credited service shall be used in the
calculation of final benefits.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1110; 1992 Code, § 35-90) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985;
Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.309 CREDITED SERVICE.
   Under this subchapter, the board shall fix and determine, by appropriate
rules and regulations, how much service in any calendar year is equivalent to a
year of service, provided, that in no case shall less than ten days of service
rendered by a member in any calendar month be credited as a month of service,
other than as provided in §
39.310, nor shall less than 12 months of service rendered in any calendar year
be credited as a year of service, nor shall more than one year of service be
credited any member for all service rendered by the member in any calendar
year, nor shall any service rendered to the city by a member outside the
classification of firefighter be credited the member except as provided in §
39.310.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1111; 1992 Code, § 35-91) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.310 MILITARY SERVICE CREDIT.
   (a)   Except as provided otherwise in (b) through (e), should a firefighter,
who while employed by the city, be called or enlisted in the armed service of
the United States and should the person be reemployed by the city as a
firefighter within one year after the date of termination of armed service, the
armed service shall be credited as city service, provided the firefighter
returns to the pension fund all amounts withdrawn therefrom at the time of
entering, or while in, the armed service, together with regular interest
thereon from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In case of doubt
as to the period to be so credited any member, the board shall have final power
to determine that period. During the period of the armed service rendered to
the federal government and until reemployment by the city as a firefighter, the
firefighter's contributions to the accumulated contributions account shall be
suspended and the balance standing to the firefighter's credit in the fund
shall be accumulated at regular interest.
   (b)   Effective with respect to deaths occurring on or after January 1,
2007, while a member is performing qualified military service (as defined in
chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code), to the extent required by § 401(a)
(37) of the Internal Revenue Code, survivors of a member are entitled to any
additional benefits that the pension fund would provide if the member had
resumed employment and then died, such as accelerated vesting or survivor
benefits that are contingent on the member's death while employed. In any
event, a deceased member's period of qualified military service must be counted
for vesting purposes.
   (c)   Effective with respect to deaths and/or disabilities occurring on or
after January 1, 2007, while a member is performing qualified military service
(as defined in chapter 43 of title 38, United States Code), to the extent
permitted by § 414(u)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, for benefit accrual
purposes and in the case of death, for vesting purposes, the member shall be
treated as having earned years of service for the period of qualified military
service, having returned to employment on the day before the death and/or
disability, and then having terminated on the date of death or disability. This
provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a
reasonably equivalent manner.
   (d)   Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by § 414(u)(12) of
the Internal Revenue Code, an individual receiving differential wage payments
(as defined under § 3401(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code) from an employer
shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage
payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on
annual additions under § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. This provision
shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably
equivalent manner.
   (e)   Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of
the pension fund law, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect
to qualified military service are governed by § 414(u) of the Internal Revenue
Code and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1112; 1992 Code, § 35-92) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.311 MEMBERS’ SERVICE ACCOUNTS.
   Under this subchapter the board shall credit each member’s service account
with the number of years and months of prior service and membership service to
which he or she may be entitled.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1113; 1992 Code, § 35-93)
§ 39.312 VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT.
   (a)   Any member may retire upon written application filed with the board
setting forth at what time, not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days
subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, the member desires to be
retired, provided that one of the following requirements for applicable age and
service has been satisfied:
      (1)   The member has attained age 55 years and has 20 or more years of
credited service; or
      (2)   The member has age and years of service which, when added, equal 80
or more. Minimum age of retirement is 50 years of age. For purposes of this
division (a), AGE AT TIME OF HIRE shall mean age in years and months, rounded
to the nearest whole month, subtracted from the beginning service date, rounded
to the nearest whole month. When calculating eligibility, subtract from 80 the
age of the member at hire date. Divide this number in half. This results in the
number of years and months of service required in order to be eligible to
retire. Add the required years and months of service for eligibility to the
beginning service date. The beginning service date is the member's hire date
plus service forfeited and repaid according to §§
39.308 and
39.325(e).
   (b)   Upon retirement, the member shall receive the superannuation pension
provided in §
39.315.
   (c)   A member shall be 100 percent vested in his or her service retirement
benefit upon attaining normal retirement age as defined in paragraph (a) of
this Ordinance §
39.312.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1114; 1992 Code, § 35-94) (Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-
1989; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.313 EARLY RETIREMENT; REDUCTION OF BENEFIT.
   Any member or former member of the Firefighters' Pension Fund on deferred
status as defined in §
39.316 may retire prior to voluntary retirement as described in §
39.312 with an actuarially reduced benefit provided that the member has
completed 20 or more years of credited service. The actuarial reduction shall
be based on the interest and mortality assumptions used to calculate optional
forms of benefits and shall be computed so that the actuarial present value of
the reduced benefit is equivalent to the actuarial present value had the member
terminated employment and elected to receive a deferred benefit commencing at
his or her earliest voluntary retirement age. For the purposes of this section,
EARLIEST VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT age shall mean the earliest age at which the
member could have retired with unreduced benefits had the member remained in
service.
(1992 Code, § 35-94.1) (Ord. 88-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-
20-2016)
§ 39.314 NORMAL RETIREMENT.
   Any member of the Firefighters' Pension Fund who has attained or attains age
60 years shall be retired by the board on the first day of the calendar month
next following the month in which the member attains age 60 years, provided
that, upon the written request of the member, approved by the department head,
the board may continue the member in service for periods not to extend beyond
age 70 years. Upon retirement, the member shall receive a superannuation
pension provided for in §
39.315, if the member has 15 or more years of credited service.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1115; 1992 Code, § 35-95) (Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-
1989; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.315 SUPERANNUATION PENSION GENERALLY AND BENEFIT LIMITS.
   (a)   Members of the Firefighters' Pension Fund who retire at or after the
voluntary retirement age shall receive a superannuation pension equal to 2.5%
of their final average compensation multiplied by the first 25 years of
credited service, plus 1.5% of the member's final average compensation
multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of the credited
service in excess of 25 years. Upon retirement the member shall have the right
to elect an option provided for in §
39.317.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the pension fund to the
contrary, the member contributions paid to and retirement benefits paid from
the plan shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the
requirements of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code for a qualified pension
plan.
   (c)   After-tax member contributions or other annual additions with respect
to a member may not exceed the lesser of $40,000 (as adjusted pursuant to § 415
(d) of the Internal Revenue Code) or 100% of the member's compensation.
      (1)   Annual additions are defined to mean the sum (for any year) of
employer and member contributions to a defined contribution plan, post-tax
member contributions to a defined benefit plan (except for purposes of service
purchases, if tested under the modified limit of § 415(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code), and forfeitures credited to a member's individual account.
Member contributions are determined without regard to rollover contributions
and to picked-up employee contributions that are paid to a defined benefit
plan.
      (2)   For purposes of applying § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and
for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable shall be
compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except
as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulation § 1.415(c)-2, or
successor regulation; provided, however, that member contributions picked up
under § 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code shall not be treated as
compensation.
      (3)   Compensation shall be defined as wages within the meaning of § 3401
(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and all other payments of compensation to an
employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the
employee a written statement under §§ 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 of the
Internal Revenue Code and shall be determined without regard to any rules under
§ 3401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that limit the remuneration included in
wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services
performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in § 3401(a)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code).
         A.   However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997,
compensation shall also include amounts that would otherwise be included in
compensation but for an election under §§ 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402
(k), or 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. For limitation years beginning
after December 31, 2000, compensation shall also include any elective amounts
that are not includible in the gross income of the member by reason of § 132(f)
(4) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2009,
compensation for the limitation year shall also include compensation paid by
the later of 2½ months after a member's severance from employment or the end of
the limitation year that includes the date of the member's severance from
employment if:
            1.   The payment is regular compensation for services during the
member's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the
member's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential),
commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from
employment, the payments would have been paid to the member while the member
continued in employment with the employer; or
            2.   The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation, or
other leave that the member would have been able to use if employment had
continued; or
            3.   The payment is pursuant to a nonqualified unfunded deferred
compensation plan, but only if the payment would have been paid to the member
at the same time if the member had continued employment with the employer and
only to the extent that the payment is includible in the member's gross income.
Any payments not described in paragraph B. above are not considered
compensation if paid after severance from employment, even if they are paid
within 2½ months following severance from employment, except for payments to
the individual who does not currently perform services for the employer by
reason of qualified military service (within the meaning of § 414(u)(1) of the
Internal Revenue Code) to the extent these payments do not exceed the amounts
the individual would have received if the individual had continued to perform
services for the employer rather than entering qualified military service or
deemed compensation to the individual if permanently and totally disabled (as
defined in § 22(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code).
An employee who is in qualified military service (within the meaning of § 414
(u)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code) shall be treated as receiving compensation
from the employer during such period of qualified military service equal to (i)
the compensation the employee would have received during such period if the
employee were not in qualified military service, determined based on the rate
of pay the employee would have received from the employer but for the absence
during the period of qualified military service, or (ii) if the compensation
the employee would have received during such period was not reasonably certain,
the employee's average compensation from the employer during the twelve (12)
month period immediately preceding the qualified military service (or, if
shorter, the period of employment immediately preceding the qualified military
service).
         C.   Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulation § 1.415(c)-2
(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the
back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation
that would otherwise be included under this definition.
      (4)   If the annual additions for any member for a plan year exceed the
limitation under § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, the excess annual
addition shall be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance
Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program).
      (5)   A member's compensation for purposes of applying these limits shall
not exceed the annual limit under section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue
Code which applies for that year.
   (d)   Participation in Other Qualified Plans: Aggregation of Limits.
      (1)   The 415(b) limit with respect to any member who at any time has
been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in § 414(j) of the
Internal Revenue Code maintained by the member's employer in this plan shall
apply as if the total benefits payable under all such defined benefit plans in
which the member has been a member were payable from one (1) plan.
      (2)   The 415(c) limit with respect to any member who at any time has
been a member in any other defined contribution plan as defined in § 414(i) of
the Internal Revenue Code maintained by the member's employer in this plan
shall apply as if the total annual additions under all such defined
contribution plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one
(1) plan.
   (e)   Basic 415(b) Limitation.
      (1)   Before January 1, 1995, a member may not receive an annual benefit
that exceeds the limits specified in § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code,
subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1,
1995, a member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount
specified in § 415(b)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, subject to the
applicable adjustments in § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and subject to
any additional limits that may be specified in the pension fund. In no event
shall a member's annual benefit payable under the plan in any limitation year
be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased
in subsequent years pursuant to § 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and the
regulations thereunder.
      (2)   For purposes of § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, the "annual
benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life
annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable
to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to § 415(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code) and to rollover contributions (as defined in § 415(b)(2)
(A) of the Internal Revenue Code). The "benefit attributable" shall be
determined in accordance with Treasury Regulations.
   (f)   Adjustments to Basic 415(b) Limitation for Form of Benefit. If the
benefit under the plan is other than the form specified in subsection (e)(2),
then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual
benefit, using factors prescribed in Treasury Regulations.
      (1)   If the form of benefit without regard to the automatic benefit
increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and
survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the
§ 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code limit applicable at the annuity starting
date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount
[determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation § 1.415(b)-1
(c)(2)(ii)] that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of
benefit in subsections (f)(2) and (f)(3).
      (2)   For a benefit paid in a form to which § 417(e)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of:
         A.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable
to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as
the form of benefit to the member; or
         B.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a 5% interest assumption
(or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to
January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury
Regulation § 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue
Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii)
for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in
§ 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent
Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal
Revenue Code); or
      (3)   For a benefit paid in a form to which § 417(e)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of:
         A.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and
mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial
experience;
         B.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
particular form of benefit payable, computed using a 5.5 percent interest
assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years
prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution
under Treasury Regulation § 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in
Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the
applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after
December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in § 417(e)(3)(B)
of the Internal Revenue Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue
Service guidance implementing § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code); or
         C.   The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the
annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the
particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate
for the distribution under Treasury Regulation § 1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (using the
rate in effect for the first day of the limitation year with a one-year
stabilization period) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the
applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation §
1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or
any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue
Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable
mortality tables described in § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code
(Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance
implementing § 417(e)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code), divided by 1.05.
      (4)   The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting
date in accordance with the above subsections (2) and (3).
   (g)   Benefits For Which No Adjustment of the 415(b) Limit is Required. For
purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into
account in adjusting these limits:
      (1)   Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement
income benefits;
      (2)   That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a
qualified joint and survivor annuity;
      (3)   Any other benefit not required under § 415(b)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code and Treasury Regulations thereunder to be taken into account for
purposes of the limitation of § 415(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (h)   Other Adjustments in 415(b) Limitation.
      (1)   In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before
age sixty-two (62), the limit prescribed by this section for the member's
annuity starting date shall be equal to the lesser of (i) the annual amount of
a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the
member's annuity starting date that is the actuarial equivalent of the one
hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000) annual limit (as adjusted under § 415
(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and, if required, under subsection (g) for
years of participation less than ten (10)), with actuarial equivalence computed
using a five percent (5%) interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality
table for the annuity starting date as defined in the plan (expressing the
member's age based on completed calendar months as of the annuity starting
date), and (ii) the one hundred sixty thousand dollar ($160,000) annual limit
(as adjusted under § 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and, if required,
under subsection (i) for years of participation less than ten (10)) multiplied
by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life
annuity under the plan at the member's annuity starting date to the annual
amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the plan at
age sixty-two (62), both determined without applying the limitations of this
section.
      (2)   In the event the member's benefit is based on at least fifteen (15)
years of service as a full-time employee of any police or fire department or on
fifteen (15) years of military service, the adjustments provided for in (1)
above shall not apply.
      (3)   The reductions provided for in (1) above shall not be applicable to
pre-retirement disability benefits or pre-retirement death benefits.
   (i)   Less than Ten (10) Years of Participation or Service Adjustment for
415(b) Limitations. The maximum retirement benefits payable to any member who
has completed less than ten (10) years of participation shall be the amount
determined under subsection (e), as adjusted under subsection (f) and/or (g),
multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's
years of participation and the denominator of which is ten (10). The limit
under subsection (j) (concerning the $10,000 limit) shall be similarly reduced
for any member who has accrued less than ten (10) years of service, except the
fraction shall be determined with respect to years of service instead of years
of participation. The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the
maximum benefit below 10% of the limit determined without regard to this
subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be
applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits or pre-retirement death
benefits.
   (j)   Ten Thousand Dollar ($10,000) Limit. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to
exceed the 415 limit if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under
this plan and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which
the member's employer contributes, do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
for the applicable limitation year and for any prior limitation year and the
employer has not at any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan
in which the member participated.
   (k)   Effect of COLA on 415(b) Testing. For purposes of applying the limits
under § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code (the "Limit") to a member with no
lump sum benefit, the following shall apply:
      (1)   A member's applicable limit shall be applied to the member's annual
benefit in the member's first limitation year without regard to any cost of
living adjustments;
      (2)   To the extent that the member's annual benefit equals or exceeds
the Limit, the member shall no longer be eligible for cost of living increases
until such time as the benefit plus the accumulated increases are less than the
limit; and
      (3)   Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual
benefit, including any cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then
applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the § 415(b)(1)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code dollar limit under § 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code,
and the regulations thereunder.
   (l)   Effect of a Lump Sum Component on 415(b) Testing. With respect to a
member who receives a portion of the member's annual benefit in a lump sum, a
member's applicable Limit shall be applied taking into consideration both the
portion of the member's benefit subject to § 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code and the portion not subject to § 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
as required by § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and applicable Treasury
Regulations.
   (m)   Service Purchases under § 415(n). Effective for permissive service
credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31,
1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive
service credit under the plan, then the requirements of § 415(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code shall be treated as met only if:
      (1)   The requirements of § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code are met,
determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions
as an annual benefit for purposes of § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code; or
      (2)   The requirements of § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code are met,
determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes
of § 415(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   For purposes of applying this section, the pension fund shall not
fail to meet the reduced limit under § 415(b)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue
Code solely by reason of this subsection and shall not fail to meet the
percentage limitation under § 415(c)(1)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code solely
by reason of this subsection.
      (4)   For purposes of this section the term "permissive service credit"
means service credit:
         A.   Recognized by the pension fund for purposes of calculating a
member's benefit under the pension fund;
         B.   Which such member has not received under the pension fund; and
         C.   Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary
additional contribution, in an amount determined under the pension fund, which
does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such
service credit.
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years
beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may include service credit for
periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding
clause B., may include service credited in order to provide an increased
benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the pension fund.
      (5)   The pension fund shall fail to meet the requirements of this
section if:
         A.   More than five years of nonqualified service credit are taken
into account for purposes of this subparagraph; or
         B.   Any nonqualified service credit is taken into account under this
paragraph before the member has at least five years of participation under the
pension fund.
      (6)   For purposes of paragraph (5), effective for permissive service
credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31,
1997, the term "nonqualified service credit" means permissive service credit
other than that allowed with respect to:
         A.   Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical, and similar
leave) as an employee of the government of the United States, any state or
political subdivision thereof, or any agency or instrumentality of any of the
foregoing (other than military service or service for credit which was obtained
as a result of a repayment described in § 415(k)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code);
         B.   Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical, and similar
leave) as an employee (other than as an employee described in clause A.) of an
education organization described in § 170(b)(1)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue
Code which is a public, private, or sectarian school which provides elementary
or secondary education (through grade 12), or a comparable level of education,
as determined under the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the service
was performed;
         C.   Service as an employee of an association of employees who are
described in clause A.; or
         D.   Military service (other than qualified military service under §
414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code) recognized by the pension fund. In the
case of service described in clause A., B., or C., such service shall be
nonqualified service if recognition of such service would cause a member to
receive a retirement benefit for the same service under more than one plan.
      (7)   In the case of a trustee-to-trustee transfer after December 31,
2001, to which § 403(b)(13)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code or § 457(e)(17)(A)
of the Internal Revenue Code applies (without regard to whether the transfer is
made between plans maintained by the same employer);
         A.   The limitations of paragraph (5) shall not apply in determining
whether the transfer is for the purchase of permissive service credit; and
         B.   The distribution rules applicable under federal law to the
pension fund shall apply to such amounts and any benefits attributable to such
amounts.
      (8)   For an eligible member, the limitation of § 415(c)(1) of the
Internal Revenue Code shall not be applied to reduce the amount of permissive
service credit which may be purchased to an amount less than the amount which
was allowed to be purchased under the terms of a plan as in effect on August 5,
1997. For purposes of this paragraph an eligible member is an individual who
first became a member in the pension fund before January 1, 1998.
   (n)   Modification of Contributions for 415(c) and 415(n) Purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the pension fund
may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the pension fund if
the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in § 415 of the
Internal Revenue Code by using the following methods:
      (1)   If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service
credit, the pension fund may establish a periodic payment plan for the member
to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under §§ 415(c) or 415(n) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   If payment pursuant to subparagraph (1) shall not avoid a
contribution in excess of the limits imposed by § 415(c) or 415(n) of the
Internal Revenue Code, the pension fund may either reduce the member's
contribution to an amount within the limits of those sections or refuse the
member's contribution.
   (o)   Repayments of Cashouts. Any repayment of contributions (including
interest thereon) to the plan with respect to an amount previously refunded
upon a forfeiture of service credit under the plan or another governmental plan
maintained by the pension fund shall not be taken into account for purposes of
§ 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, in accordance with applicable Treasury
Regulations.
   (p)   Effect of Direct Rollover on 415(b) Limit. If the plan accepts a
direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined
contribution plan qualified under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code which
is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount
that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under §
417(e) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be included in the annual benefit for
purposes of the limit under § 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (q)   Reduction of Benefits Priority. Reduction of benefits and/or
contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first
reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which the
member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan
in which the member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such
priority as shall be determined by the plan and the plan administrator of such
other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined
contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made
first with respect to the plan in which the member most recently accrued
benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the plan
and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that
necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to
the agreement of the plan and the plan administrator of all other plans
covering such member.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1116; 1992 Code, § 35-96) (Ord. 2792, passed 12-6-1971;
Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 88-91,
passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.316 DEFERRED SUPERANNUATION RETIREMENT PENSION.
   Should any member of the Firefighters' Pension Fund who has 15 or more years
of credited service cease to be employed by the city as a firefighter prior to
becoming eligible for voluntary retirement benefits, for any reason except to
become a retirant or death, that person shall remain a member during the period
of absence from city service for the exclusive purpose only of receiving a
superannuation retirement pension provided for in §
39.315. The pension shall begin on the first day of the calendar month next
following the month in which the member files an application for pension with
the board on or after attainment of age 60 years. If the member withdraws all
or part of his or her accumulated contributions, that person shall thereupon
cease to be a member and shall forfeit all rights in and to a deferred pension
provided for in this section.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1117; 1992 Code, § 35-97) (Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-
1989; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.317 RETIREMENT PENSION OPTIONS.
   (a)   Prior to the effective date of retirement, but not thereafter, a
member may elect to receive a firefighter's pension as an option 1 pension
payable for life or may elect to receive the actuarial equivalent of option 1
pension in a reduced pension and nominate a beneficiary, in accordance with the
provisions of option 2, 3, 4 or 5 as set forth in this section. If a member
does not elect an option, the pension shall be paid under option 1.
      (1)   Option 1. Under option 1, if a retirant dies before receiving in
pension payments an aggregate amount equal to the retiree's accumulated
contributions account at the time of retirement, the difference between the
accumulated contributions account and the aggregate amount of pension payments
received shall be paid from the pension fund to that person as shall have been
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If
there is no designated person surviving the retirant, the difference, if any,
shall be paid to the retirant's legal representative.
      (2)   Option 2. Under option 2, upon the death of a retirant, the reduced
pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the person,
having an insurable interest in the retirant's life, as shall have been
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior
to the effective date of retirement.
      (3)   Option 3. Under option 3, upon the death of a retirant, one-half of
the reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the
person, having an insurable interest in the retirant's life, as shall have been
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior
to the effective date of retirement.
      (4)   Option 4. Under option 4, upon the death of a retirant, the reduced
pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the person,
having an insurable interest in the retirant's life, as shall have been
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior
to the effective date of retirement. If the nominated beneficiary dies first,
the retirant shall, upon the death of the nominated beneficiary, begin to
receive a pension equal to the option 1 pension which would have been payable
had no option been elected.
      (5)   Option 5. Under option 5, upon the death of a retirant, one-half of
the reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the
person, having an insurable interest in the retirant's life, as shall have been
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior
to the effective date of retirement. If the nominated beneficiary dies first,
the retirant shall, upon the death of the nominated beneficiary, begin to
receive a pension equal to the option 1 pension which would have been payable
had no option been elected.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the pension fund shall
pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the
requirements of § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations in
effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the
meaning of § 414(d) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1118; 1992 Code, § 35-98) (Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987;
Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.318 DISABILITY INCURRED.
   Upon the application of a member, or by the department head of the fire
department on behalf of a member who becomes totally and permanently
incapacitated for duty as a firefighter in the service of the city, a
firefighter, by reason of a personal injury or disease, may be retired by the
board of trustees, provided, that after a medical examination of the member
made by or under the direction of the medical committee, the medical committee
certifies to the board of trustees, by majority opinion in writing, that:
   (a)   The member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated to perform
the duties of the member’s fire department classification;
   (b)   The incapacity will probably be permanent; and
   (c)   The member should be retired.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1119; 1992 Code, § 35-99) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.319 DISABILITY PENSIONS.
   (a)   A member who retires on account of disability, as provided in §
39.318, with ten or more years of credited service in the Firefighters' Pension
Fund, when the disability is found to be caused by reasons of a personal injury
or disease having occurred as the result of causes arising other than in the
course of his or her actual performance of duty as a firefighter, shall receive
a primary disability pension computed the same as in §
39.315. In no case shall the primary disability pension be less than 20% of a
firefighter's salary. The primary disability pension shall be subject to §
39.320. Upon application for retirement, the member applicant shall have the
right to elect an option provided for in §
39.317.
   (b)   A member who retires on account of disability, as provided in §
39.318, regardless of credited years of service with the Firefighters' Pension
Fund, when the disability is found to be caused by reasons having occurred as
the natural and proximate result of causes arising in whole or in part out of
and in the course of his or her employment with the city, shall receive a
primary disability pension as calculated in §
39.315 with no less than ten years of credited service. In no case shall the
primary disability pension be less than 50% of a firefighter's salary. Unless
the board determines that the retirement, including any retirement for which
application is currently pending, is the result of an injury described in SDCL
9-16-45, the recipient must be receiving workers' compensation on account of
this injury. The primary disability pension shall be subject to §§
39.320 and
39.321. Upon application for retirement, the member shall have the right to
elect an option provided for in §
39.317 applicable to the member's primary disability pension, provided that if
any benefits become payable under §
39.322 on account of the death of a disability retirant the pension payable or
to be paid to the survivor beneficiary under either option 2 or 3 shall
terminate.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1120; 1992 Code, § 35-100) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-
1985; Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 88-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 126-
99, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.320 CONDITIONS AFFECTING DISABILITY RETIRANTS.
   (a)   At least once each year during the first five years following the
retirement of a member of the Firefighters' Pension Fund with a disability
pension, and at least once in each three-year period thereafter, the board
shall have the retirant, who has not attained age 55 years, undergo a medical
examination to be made by or under the direction of a physician designated by
the board. If the retirant refuses to submit to a medical examination in any
period, the board may suspend that retirant's pension until the refusal is
withdrawn. Should the refusal continue for one year, the board may discontinue
the pension. If upon a medical examination of a retirant, the physician reports
to the board that the retirant is physically able and capable of resuming
employment with the city as a firefighter, and the report is concurred in by
the board, the retirant shall be restored to active service with the city at
the same or equivalent rank held at the time of the disability retirement, and
the disability pension shall be discontinued.
   (b)   A disability retirant restored to active service in the employ of the
city shall again become a member of the pension fund. Credited service at the
time of the retirement shall be restored to full force and effect and service
credit shall be given for any period the retirant was in receipt of workers'
compensation on account of the disability arising out of city service.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1121; 1992 Code, § 35-101) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-
1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.321 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION OFFSET.
   Any amounts which may be paid or payable under the provisions of any
workers’ compensation orsimilar law to a member retirant, beneficiary or to
dependents of any member, retirant or beneficiary, on account of a disability
or death of a member or retirant, shall be offset against and payable in lieu
of any pension payable as provided in this subchapter. If any member, retirant,
beneficiary or the dependents of any member, retirant or beneficiary become
entitled to a pension, payable from the pension fund, as the result of an
accident or injury caused by the act of a third party, the city shall be
subrogated to the rights of the member, retirant, beneficiary and the
dependents of the member, retirant or beneficiary against the third party to
the extent of benefits which the city or the pension fund pays or becomes
liable to pay on account of the accident or injury.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1122; 1992 Code, § 35-102)
§ 39.322 DEATH IN LINE OF DUTY.
   (a)   In either case (division (a)(1) or (a)(2) below), the death, injury,
or disease resulting in death is found by the board to have been the result of
his or her actual performance of duty in the service of the city, the
applicable benefits provided in divisions (b)(1) through (b)(5) below shall be
paid, provided that the pensions provided for (in divisions (b)(2) through (b)
(5) below) shall be subject to the conditions that workers' compensation is
paid on account of the death of the member; and provided further that the
pensions shall be subject to division (b)(6) below and to §
39.321:
      (1)   If a member dies as the result of a personal injury or disease
arising solely and exclusively out of and in the course of employment with the
city as a firefighter; or
      (2)   If a disability retirant dies, within a period of five years from
and after the effective date of retirement and prior to his or her voluntary
retirement age, as the result of the same injury or disease for which he or she
was retired.
   (b)   (1)   If the person dies prior to retirement, his or her accumulated
contributions account at the time of his or her death shall be paid to the
person as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed
and filed with the board. If there is no designated person surviving the
member, his or her accumulated contributions shall be paid to his or her legal
representative.
      (2)   If the deceased person leaves a spouse, the spouse shall receive a
pension of one-third of a firefighter's salary. Upon the spouse's death, the
pension shall terminate.
      (3)   If, in addition to a spouse who is entitled to a pension payable
from the pension fund, the deceased person leaves an eligible child or an
eligible handicapped child, each child shall receive a pension of an equal
share of one-fourth of a firefighter's salary. A child's pension shall
terminate upon the attainment of age 18 years, or adoption or marriage or
death. A handicapped child's pension shall terminate upon adoption, marriage,
full recovery from handicap or death. Upon termination of a child's or
handicapped child's pension, the board shall redistribute the one-fourth of a
firefighter's salary to the remaining eligible children, provided, however, the
minimum benefit for this division (b)(3) shall be $200 per month for each
eligible child.
      (4)   If the deceased person does not leave a spouse, or if the spouse
dies and an eligible child or eligible handicapped child survives, the child
shall each receive a pension of one-fourth of a firefighter's salary, provided
that, if there are more than two surviving children under age 18 years, each
child shall receive a pension of an equal share of one-half of a firefighter's
salary. Upon termination of a child's or handicapped child's pension as
provided in division (b)(3) above, the board shall redistribute the one-half of
a firefighter's salary to the remaining eligible children, provided that, in no
case shall any child's pension be more than one-fourth of a firefighter's
salary, provided, however, the minimum benefit for this division (b)(4) shall
be $200 per month for each eligible child.
      (5)   If the deceased person leaves neither a spouse nor children
eligible to receive pensions under this section, there shall be paid to each
his or her father and mother, or either of them, a pension of one-sixth of a
firefighter's salary, provided, the board finds that either or both his or her
father and mother were dependent upon the person, at the time of death, for at
least 50% of his or her support through absence of earning power due to
physical or mental incapacity. Upon the remarriage or death of a parent, his or
her pension shall terminate.
      (6)   Wherever the word SPOUSE is used in this section, it shall mean the
person to whom the person was married at the time his or her employment with
the city as a firefighter last terminated.
      (7)   Notwithstanding any provision in the pension fund to the contrary,
distributions upon the death of a member shall be made in accordance with the
following requirements and shall otherwise comply with Internal Revenue Code §
401(a)(9) and the rulings pertaining thereto. If it is determined that the
distribution of a member's interest has begun and the member dies before the
entire interest has been distributed to the member, the remaining portion of
the interest shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of
distribution selected by the member at retirement. If a member dies before
beginning to receive any distributions of the interest under the pension fund,
then any death benefits shall be distributed to the beneficiaries by December
31 of the calendar year in which the fifth anniversary of the date of death
occurs. However, the five-year distribution requirement shall not apply to any
portion of the deceased member's interest which is payable to or for a
designated beneficiary. In that event, the portion may be distributed over the
life of the designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the
life expectancy of the beneficiary), provided the distributions begin not later
than December 1 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the member died.
      (8)   Any death benefit payable under this section shall be compared with
the death benefits payable under §
39.323, and the higher death benefit shall be paid.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1123; 1992 Code, § 35-103) (Ord. 49-80, passed 6-9-1980;
Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 104-92,
passed 12-7-1992; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.323 NATURAL DEATH BENEFITS.
   (a)   A member who continues in city service as a firefighter on or after
the date the member acquires ten years of credited service and dies while in
the service of the city, and leaves a spouse, the spouse shall receive a
pension computed in the same manner in all respects as if the member had
retired effective the day preceding the date of the death, notwithstanding that
the member may not have attained the voluntary retirement age, elected option 2
provided for in §
39.317 and nominated the spouse as beneficiary. The spouse’s pensions shall be
subject to §
39.321, and shall terminate upon death. No pension shall be paid under this
section on account of the death of a member if any benefits are paid under §
39.322 on account of the member’s death. Any benefits paid under this section
shall comply with the distribution rules in §
39.322(b)(7).
   (b)   In addition to the pension benefit, if any, payable to the deceased
member’s spouse, their eligible child or children or eligible handicapped child
shall each receive a pension of $200 per month, and shall be subject to §
39.321. A child’s pension shall terminate upon attainment of age 18, adoption,
marriage or death. A handicapped child’s pension shall terminate upon adoption,
marriage, full recovery from handicap or death. No benefits shall be paid under
this division (b) on account of the death of a member if any benefits are or
will become payable under §
39.322 on account of the member’s death.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.114; 1992 Code, § 35-104) (Ord. 49-80, passed 6-9-1980;
Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 104-92,
passed 12-7-1992)
§ 39.324 REFUND OF ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, should any member
cease to be in the employ of the city for any reason except to become a
retirant or his or her death, he or she shall be paid all or part of his or her
accumulated contributions account as he or she shall demand in writing on forms
furnished by the board.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, upon the death of a
member his or her accumulated contributions account shall be paid to the person
as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and
filed with the board. If there be no designated person surviving the member,
his or her accumulated contributions account shall be paid to his or her legal
representative.
   (c)   If any member dies intestate, without heirs and without having
nominated a beneficiary, as provided in division (b) above, his or her
accumulated contributions account at the time of his or her death may be used
to pay his or her burial expenses, not to exceed a reasonable sum to be
determined by the board, provided the member leaves no other estate sufficient
for that purpose.
   (d)   Payment of refunds of a member's accumulated contributions account, as
provided for in this section, may be made in monthly installments according to
the rules and regulations as the board shall from time to time adopt.
   (e)   (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this rule, a distributee
may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator,
to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply throughout this rule.
         DIRECT ROLLOVER.  A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement
plan specified by the distributee.
         DISTRIBUTEE. Includes an employee or former employee. Effective
January 1, 2007, a DISTRIBUTEE further includes a nonspouse beneficiary who is
a designated beneficiary as defined by § 401(a)(9)(E) of the Internal Revenue
Code. However, a nonspouse beneficiary may only make a direct rollover to an
individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for
the purpose of receiving the distribution, and the account or annuity shall be
treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity.
         ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN.
            1.   The following that accepts a distributee's eligible rollover
distribution:
               a.   An individual retirement account described in § 408(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   An individual retirement annuity described in § 408(b) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   An annuity plan described in § 403(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
               d.   A qualified trust described in § 401(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
               e.   On or after January 1, 2008, to a Roth IRA described in §
408A of the Internal Revenue Code; or
               f.   With respect to any distribution made after December 31,
2001, an annuity contract described in § 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code or
an eligible plan described under § 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, which
is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees
to separately account for amounts transferred into the plan from this plan.
An eligible rollover distribution does not include any other distribution which
the Internal Revenue Service does not consider eligible for rollover treatment,
such as certain corrective distributions necessary to comply with the
provisions of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   The definition of ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN shall also apply in
the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse.
         ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION.
            1.   Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION does
not include the following:
               a.   Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life
(or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life
expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of ten years or more; and
               b.   Any distribution to the extent the distribution is required
under § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   With respect to any distribution made prior to January 1,
2002, the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income
(determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation
with respect to employer securities). With respect to any distribution made
after December 31, 2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax
employee contributions that are not included in gross income. However, the
portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement account or annuity
described in § 408(a) or (b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or to a qualified
defined contribution plan described in § 401(a) or § 403(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred,
including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution which is
includable in gross income and the portion of the distribution which is not so
includable.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1125; 1992 Code, § 35-105) (Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.325 ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTION ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The accumulated contribution accounts are hereby created. It shall be
the accounts in which shall be accumulated at regular interest the
contributions deducted from the compensation of members to finance their share
of the costs of providing pensions, and from which refunds and transfers of
accumulated contributions shall be made as provided in this subchapter.
   (b)   The contribution of members to the pension fund shall be 8% of the
compensation paid by the city for services rendered to the city as a
firefighter. Effective January 6, 2014, the contribution of a firefighter
member shall be 9% of the employee's compensation; effective January 5, 2015,
the contribution of a firefighter member shall be 10% of the employee's
compensation.
   (c)   The officer responsible for making up the payroll shall cause the
contributions provided for in division (b) above to be deducted from the
compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every
payroll period, so long as he or she remains a member in the employ of the
city. The contributions provided for in this section shall be made
notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member
shall be changed thereby. Each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to
the deductions made and provided for in this section, and payment of his or her
compensation less the deduction shall be a full and complete discharge and
acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services rendered by
the member during the period covered by the payment except as to benefits
provided by this subchapter. The officer responsible for making up the payroll
shall certify to the city finance director the contribution to be deducted from
the compensation of each member for each and every payroll. Each of the amounts
shall be deducted by the city finance director and when deducted shall be paid
into the pension fund and credited to the individual accumulated contributions
account of the member from whose compensation the deduction was made.
   (d)   At the expiration of a period of four years following the date a
member's membership terminates any balance of accumulated contributions in his
or her accumulated contributions account, unclaimed by the member or his or her
legal representative, shall remain with the pension fund.
   (e)   In addition to the contributions deducted from the compensation of a
member, as provided in this section, the member shall pay into the accumulated
contributions account, by a single contribution within six months after the
date of reemployment, the amount required to be repaid by §
39.308. In no case shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior
to the date the member withdrew the accumulated contributions until the member
repays to the accumulated contributions account all amounts due the accumulated
contributions account by the member.
   (f)   (1)   The city shall pick up the member contribution required by
division (b) above for all compensation earned after the effective date of this
division (f). The contributions so picked up shall be treated as employer
contributions in determining tax treatment under the United States Internal
Revenue Code. The city shall pick up the member contributions from funds
established and available in the salaries account, which funds would otherwise
have been designated as member contributions and paid to the pension fund.
Member contributions picked up by the city pursuant to this division (f)(1)
shall be treated for all other purposes of this and other laws of the city in
the same manner and to the same extent as member contributions made prior to
the effective date of this division (f)(1).
      (2)   Member contributions to the pension fund shall be paid by the city
on behalf of all members. Payment of the member's contribution picked up by the
city shall be made by reducing the amount of the compensation payable to those
members and making payment of the amount directly to the pension fund.
Contributions, although designated as member contributions, are being paid by
the city in lieu of contributions by the members. Members do not have the
option of choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of
having them paid by the city to the pension fund.
      (3)   The effective date of this division (f)(3) shall be the first day
of the first pay period after the city has received notification of approval
from the Internal Revenue Service that, pursuant to § 414(h) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code, the member contributions so picked up shall not
be included in gross income for tax purposes until a time as they are
distributed by refund or benefit payment, but the effective date shall not be
prior to December 15, 2003.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1126; 1992 Code, § 35-106) (Ord. 4-82, passed 1-14-1982;
Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 59-86, passed 6-9-1986; Ord. 110-90, passed
12-3-1990; Ord. 88-91, passed 11-25-1991; Ord. 5-01, passed 1-16-2001; Ord. 55-
02, passed 7-8-2002; Ord. 06-04, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.326 PENSION FUND CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   The pension fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in
which shall be accumulated reserves for the payment of pensions payable from
funds provided by the city.
      (2)   Upon the basis of the mortality and other tables of experience, and
regular interest, as the board shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall
annually compute the reserves for:
         A.   Pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries; and
         B.   Pensions likely to be paid on account of service rendered and to
be rendered by members.
      (3)   The fund shall be financed by annual appropriations, to be made by
the council, determined according to this division (a) and divisions (b), (c)
and (d) below.
   (b)   The appropriations for members' current service shall be a percent of
their annual compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually
by the city during their future service will be sufficient to provide the
reserves at the time of their retirements, for the portions of the pensions to
be paid them based upon their future service.
   (c)   The appropriation for members' accrued service shall be a percent of
their annual compensations which will produce an amount which if paid annually
by the city over a period of years, to be determined by the council, will
amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded pension funds for the accrued
service portions of the pensions to which they might be entitled.
   (d)   The appropriation for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries
shall be a percent of the annual compensations of members which will produce an
amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be
determined by the council, will amortize, at regular interest, the unfunded
amounts for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries.
   (e)   Until the reserves accumulated in the pension fund equal or exceed the
present value of all pensions payable from the fund, the city's contributions
to the pension fund, in any fiscal year, shall not be less than 12% of the
aggregate compensations paid members during the preceding fiscal year.
   (f)   To cover all or part of the city's contributions to the pension fund,
as provided in this section, the city may levy an annual tax upon the assessed
valuation of the city for the current year, which levy shall be in addition to
the amount authorized to be levied for general purposes. The levy shall be
determined by the council as required in this section.
   (g)   All contributions made by the city under this pension fund shall be
deposited in the pension fund. However, contributions made by the city are
expressly conditioned upon the initial qualification of the pension fund under
the Internal Revenue Code. Upon the city's request, a contribution which was
made by mistake of fact or conditioned upon initial qualification shall be
returned to the city within one year after the payment of the contribution or
the denial of the qualification.
   (h)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all assets of the
pension fund, including investment income, shall be retained for the exclusive
benefit of members and their beneficiaries, shall be used to pay benefits to
those persons or to pay administrative expenses to the extent not paid by the
city and shall not revert to or inure to the benefit of the city.
   (i)   In no event shall the city receive any amounts from the fund upon
termination of the pension fund, except that, and notwithstanding any other
provision of the pension fund, the city shall receive those amounts, if any, as
may remain after the satisfaction of all liabilities of the pension fund and
arising out of any variations between actual requirements and expected
actuarial requirements.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1127; 1992 Code, § 35-107) (Ord. 2696, passed 7-27-1970;
Ord. 119-84, passed 8-27-1984; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 36-95,
passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.327 PENSION FUND PAYMENTS.
   The pension fund shall be the fund from which shall be paid pensions as
provided in this subchapter in addition to the administrative expenses.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1128; 1992 Code, § 35-108; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.328 CREDITING OF STATE CONTRIBUTIONS, GIFTS AND THE LIKE.
   All monies received by the city from the insurance department of the state,
as the city's proportionate share of the insurance fund collected from the
various insurance companies, shall be credited to the pension fund. All gifts,
devises and bequests to the pension fund shall be credited to the pension fund.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1129; 1992 Code, § 35-109; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.329 PRORATE OF PENSIONS.
   (a)   Any provision in this subchapter to the contrary notwithstanding, if
in any year, the aggregate amount of pensions payable to retirants and
beneficiaries is more than the total monies in the pension fund arising from:
      (1)   City and state contributions; and
      (2)   Contributions made by members on whose account pensions are being
paid.
   (b)   Then the pensions being so paid shall be reduced pro rata so that the
aggregate amount of the reduced pensions does not exceed the total of the
monies in the pension fund arising from:
      (1)   City and state contributions; and
      (2)   Contributions made by members on whose account pensions are being
paid.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1130; 1992 Code, § 35-110)
§ 39.330 PENSIONS PREVIOUSLY ALLOWED.
   Any pensions being paid, at the effective date of the ordinance from which
this subchapter derives, from funds of the predecessor Firefighters' Pension
Fund shall become, as of the effective date, an obligation of the pension fund.
The pensions shall be continued without change as to amount, subject to §
39.329. All property, assets and records of every description held in the name
of the predecessor Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be transferred to the
pension fund established by this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1131; 1992 Code, § 35-111; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.331 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
   The administrative expenses of the Firefighters' Pension Fund as reasonably
incurred shall be paid from the pension fund.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1132; 1992 Code, § 35-112; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.332 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   (a)   The retirement board shall be the trustees of the assets of the
Firefighters' Pension Fund. The board shall have full and independent power to
invest and reinvest the monies and assets of the fund and to hold, purchase,
sell, assign, transfer and dispose of any securities and investments of the
fund.
   (b)   The board shall establish a written investment policy, with the advice
and counsel of the advisors as the board deems necessary, and the investment
policy shall set forth the types of investments into which shall be placed the
assets of the pension fund. The policy shall further set forth appropriate
provisions with respect to those investments, including, but not limited to,
the anticipated rate of return, quality of investment, class of investment,
maturity and liquidity, cash reserves and acceptable risk. The investment
policy shall be reviewed by the board periodically.
   (c)   The board shall have the authority to invest and reinvest the assets
of the pension fund in the securities, investment vehicles or property,
wherever situated and of whatever kinds, as shall be approved by the board and
in accordance with the investment policy adopted by the board. The board may
engage investment counsel or investment advisors in contract for investment
advice when they deem it necessary.
   (d)   The board may select one or more funding agents or investment counsel
for the management of the assets of the fund. The selection and the appointment
of the funding agent or investment counsel shall be made by the board, and the
board shall have the right to determine the form and substance of each and
every agreement under which the funds are to be held and managed by the funding
agents or investment counsel, provided that the agreement shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (1)   The board shall require that any funding agent or investment
counsel who has custody or control of any property of the plan to keep accurate
and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and other
transactions pertaining to trust property, and shall further require that all
accounts, books and records pertaining thereto be open for inspection and audit
at all reasonable times by the board or its designees and the city finance
department or its designees. The board shall also be authorized to have
conducted an independent audit at the expense of the fund.
      (2)   The board may retain the services of a qualified independent
investment consultant who shall, at least on a semiannual basis, report on the
relative performance of the fund's funding agent or investment counsel and
recommend to the board the retention or replacement of the managers. A
qualified independent investment consultant shall have the qualifications and
experience as determined by the board from time to time.
   (e)   (1)   The board shall, in selecting a funding agent or other
investment counsel or advisor, exercise all judgment and care in the
circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. Any funding agent
or other investment counsel or advisor shall have a minimum of five years of
experience.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
         FUNDING AGENT. A corporate or individual trustee or trustees,
insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state, or
combination thereof.
         INVESTMENT ADVISOR. A corporation or individual who has registered
with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment
advisor and is authorized to do business in the state.
         INVESTMENT COUNSEL. A corporation or individual authorized to do
business under the Federal Investment Advisors Act of 1940, being 15 U.S.C. §§
80b1 through 80-b-21, as amended from time to time, and authorized to do
business in the state.
   (f)   The board of trustees may, unless restricted by law, transfer all or
any portion of the assets of the pension fund to a collective or common group
trust, as permitted under Revenue Ruling 81-100, Revenue Ruling 2011-1, Notice
2012-6, and Revenue Ruling 2014-24 (or subsequent guidance), that is operated
or maintained exclusively for the commingling and collective investment of
monies, provided that the funds in the group trust consist exclusively of trust
assets held under plans qualified under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,
individual retirement accounts that are exempt under § 408(e) of the Internal
Revenue Code, eligible governmental plans that meet the requirements of § 457
(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, and governmental plans under § 401(a)(24) of
the Internal Revenue Code. For this purpose, a trust includes a custodial
account or separate tax-favored account maintained by an insurance company that
is treated as a trust under § 401(f) or under § 457(g)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
   (g)   Any collective or common group trust to which assets of the pension
fund are transferred pursuant to the above shall be adopted by the board of
trustees as part of the plan by executing appropriate participation, adoption
agreements, and/or trust agreements with the group trust's trustee.
   (h)   The separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan shall
not be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive
benefit of the members and beneficiaries of the plan.
   (i)   For purposes of valuation, the value of the separate account
maintained by the group trust for the plan shall be the fair market value of
the portion of the group trust held for the plan, determined in accordance with
generally recognized valuation procedures.
   (j)   All assets of the pension fund shall be held for the sole purpose of
meeting disbursements for annuities, pensions and other payments authorized by
this subchapter and shall be used for no other purpose.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1133; 1992 Code, § 35-113) (Ord. 2649, passed 11-17-1969;
Ord. 105-09, passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.333 METHOD OF MAKING PAYMENTS.
   All payments from monies of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be made
according to charter and ordinance provisions governing the disbursements of
monies.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1134; 1992 Code, § 35-114; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.334 ALLOWANCE OF REGULAR INTEREST.
   At the end of each fiscal year the board of the Firefighters' Pension Fund
shall allow and credit regular interest on the balance standing to each
member's credit in the accumulated contributions account at the beginning of
each quarter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1135; 1992 Code, § 35-115) (Ord. 2758, passed 6-8-1971;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.335 ASSIGNMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The right of a person to a pension, to the return of accumulated
contributions, the pension itself, any optional benefit, any other right
accrued or accruing under the provisions of this subchapter to any member,
retirant or beneficiary and all monies belonging to the pension fund shall be
unassignable and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment,
the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law, or any other process of law
whatsoever except as is specifically provided in this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1136; 1992 Code, § 35-116; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.336 ERRORS.
   Should any change or error in the records result in any member, retirant or
beneficiary receiving from the Firefighters' Pension Fund more or less than he
or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the
board shall correct the error and as far as is practicable shall adjust the
payment of the benefit in a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit
to which the member, retirant or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be
paid.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1137; 1992 Code, § 35-117; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.337 REDETERMINATION OF PENSIONS.
   (a)   The board of trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall provide
annual post-retirement redetermination of pensions. The redetermined amount
shall not be less than the amount of pension otherwise payable. Any provision
of this subchapter which limits the amount of pension shall not apply to the
operation of this section in redetermining the amount of pension. The
application of any provision redetermining pension amounts may be restricted to
pensions having an effective date of payment either prior to or subsequent to a
specified date. Any post-retirement redetermination of one or more pensions
within a pension fund shall be prefunded and may not bring the pension fund
into noncompliance with the provisions of §
39.339(c).
   (b)   Pursuant to division (a) above, the pension upon which
redeterminations of pension are made shall be increased once on January 1,
1986, by 0.5% for each year of retirement based on the current pension for each
person retiring on or before December 31, 1974, and 0.5% for each year of
retirement based on the original pension for each person retiring after
December 31, 1974.
   (c)   (1)    Starting January 1, 1991, on the first of the month following
the thirty- sixth full month of retirement, the board shall redetermine the
pensions of those retirants and beneficiaries whose pensions were effective 36
full months prior to the date of redetermination, and the pensions shall be
increased as provided in this section effective on the first of the month
following the thirty- sixth full month of retirement. On January 1, 1991, and
thereafter on each January 1, the board shall redetermine the pensions of all
retirants and beneficiaries and the pensions shall be increased as provided in
this section. The pension shall be increased by an amount equal to the current
forecast base times the pension increase percentage. The pension increase
percentage shall be equal to the percentage increase, to a maximum of 3%, in
the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, as computed by the United
States Department of Labor, for the year ending in the month of June preceding
the January 1 redetermination date.
      (2)   Any transfer of funds and calculation of benefits required in this
section shall be made effective as of the dates mentioned in this section, and
the actual transfers and calculation of benefits may be made on a later date.
Changes in amounts paid to retirants and beneficiaries shall be paid as soon as
practicable after the end of the calendar year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1141; 1992 Code, § 35-119) (Ord. 2696, passed 7-27-1970;
Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987; Ord. 110-89,
passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 110-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 83-93, passed 11-22-
1993; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.338 CHANGE IN EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTION LEVELS.
   No change may be made in employee contribution levels of this Firefighters'
Pension Fund or present or future benefits of this pension fund, by ordinance
or otherwise, without an affirmative vote by both the council and the
membership of the pension fund.
(1992 Code, § 35-120) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-
1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.339 LIMITS OF CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Total contributions in each year to the Firefighters' Pension Fund subject
to §§
39.305 through
39.344 shall be sufficient to fund the following:
   (a)   The administrative cost of the plan during the year;
   (b)   The actuarially determined cost of future benefits accruing to members
during the year; and
   (c)   An amount sufficient to amortize any unfunded liability of the pension
fund over a period not to exceed 40 years on the basis of reasonable and
generally accepted actuarial assumptions.
(1992 Code, § 35-121) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-
20-2016)
§ 39.340 CHANGES OR MODIFICATIONS OF BENEFITS; ACTUARIAL STATEMENT.
   No benefits, present or future, may be changed or modified in any manner
unless the pension fund's actuaries have prepared an actuarial statement
showing the effect of those changes on the pension fund. No benefits, present
or future, may be changed or modified if the change or modifications will bring
the pension fund into noncompliance with the provisions of §
39.338.
(1992 Code, § 35-122) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-
20-2016)
§ 39.341 RECORDS; INFORMATION FURNISHED TO ADMINISTRATOR.
   The city shall maintain records with respect to each employee sufficient to
determine benefits due under this subchapter or which may become due to the
employee. The city shall furnish to the pension fund administrator any
information necessary for the administrator to make reports required under the
provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 35-123) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-
20-2016)
§ 39.342 GROUP INSURANCE DEDUCTION.
   (a)   As permitted by law, in addition to pension payments payable under
this subchapter, the pension fund shall pay from the pension fund one-half of
the premium for the retirant's and beneficiary's group health insurance plan
participated in by the city. Effective after final termination and distribution
of the 401(h) group health insurance fund, this premium will instead be paid
from the OPEB 115 Trust Fund Agreement.
   (b)   As permitted by law, if a retirant or beneficiary is covered by a
group insurance plan participated in by the city and is permitted to and elects
to continue the coverage as a retirant, the retirant or beneficiary may
authorize the board to have deducted from all retirement allowances the
payments required to continue coverage under the group insurance plan.
   (c)   The benefits described in this section shall apply to any retired
employee or officer who retires prior to January 1, 2014, and is entitled to a
retirement allowance and who shall have participated at least five years,
immediately preceding separation from city employment in the group health
insurance plan participated in by the city.
   (d)   All contributions from the retirement allowances for purposes of the
retirant's and/or beneficiary's group insurance fund shall be reasonable and
ascertainable.
   (e)   Contributions to fund the retirant's and beneficiary's 401(h) group
health insurance plan must be subordinate to the contributions to the city's
Firefighters' Pension Fund for retirement benefits. At no time shall the
aggregate actual contributions to the 401(h) group health insurance fund (when
added to actual contributions for life insurance protection under the plan, if
any) be in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total aggregate actual
contributions made to the Firefighters' Pension Fund (not including
contributions to fund past service credit, if applicable). The Board shall
annually determine whether the twenty-five percent (25%) test has been met. If
at any time the 401(h) group health insurance fund (plus any life insurance
contribution) would exceed the twenty-five percent (25%) test, the excess
amount of contributions shall be transferred to the firefighters' Pension Fund
for retirement benefits.
   (f)   Forfeitures from the group health insurance fund shall not be
allocated to individual accounts, but shall be used for account expenses.
   (g)   At no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the 401
(h) group health insurance fund or termination of the Firefighters' Pension
Fund shall any assets for purposes of group health insurance be used for, or
diverted to, any purpose other than the providing of payment of the
Firefighters' Pension Fund portion of the monthly retiree health insurance
premium benefit in this section, and the payment of administrative expenses.
   (h)   The provisions of § 401(h)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code shall apply
upon the satisfaction of all liabilities under law.
   (i)   Effective December 31, 2016, the 401(h) group health insurance fund
shall be terminated. After satisfaction of all liabilities under the 401(h)
group health insurance fund to provide certain retiree medical benefits, any
amounts remaining in this fund must be returned to the city, pursuant to § 401
(h)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (j)   Effective January 1, 2017, the OPEB Trust shall be created and
effective pursuant to §
39.006. The OPEB 115 Trust Fund Agreement will be used to make the payments
described in (a) of this section as soon thereafter as is administratively
reasonable in the Board's judgment.
(1992 Code, § 35-124) (Ord. 96-87, passed 11-16-1987; Ord. 26-98, passed 3-2-
1998; Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.343 REMARRIAGE OF SURVIVING SPOUSE.
   Surviving spouses whose pension benefits under this subchapter have
terminated or whose future pension benefits are subject to termination because
of remarriage will have their surviving spousal pension benefits reinstated as
of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. The
reinstatement of surviving spousal benefits will not be retroactive and will
not include post-retirement redetermination benefit increases granted since
termination of benefits, but pension benefits will begin again based on their
last calculated benefit. They will be eligible under the same regulations as
other retirants for future post-retirement redetermination increases.
(1992 Code, § 35-124.1) (Ord. 110-89, passed 10-16-1989)
§ 39.344 TERMINATION OF PLAN.
   In the event of termination of this plan, the rights of all affected
participants to benefits then accrued shall thereupon become 100% vested and
nonforfeitable to the extent then funded or the amounts credited to the
employees’ accounts are nonforfeitable.
(1992 Code, § 35-124.2) (Ord. 5-05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 39.345 STIPEND.
   (a)   Any officer or employee who retires from city employment with an
immediate annuitized pension benefit after December 31, 2013, shall upon
retirement receive a monthly stipend. The stipend shall be paid at the rate of
$40 per month per year of service until such retirant is Medicare eligible or
upon death, whichever is sooner. Such stipend shall be adjusted for inflation
at an annual rate of 3% beginning in January, 2015.
   (b)   Credited service for purposes of calculation of the monthly stipend
will be determined in the same manner as identified in §
39.309 for members that retire with a regular, early reduced, duty-incurred
disability or non-duty-incurred disability retirement benefit.
(Ord. 24-13, passed 5-7-2013; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION FUND;
RETIREMENT BOARD
§ 39.355 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   There is hereby created a retirement board whose duties shall be to
administer, manage and operate the Firefighter's Pension Fund and to construe
and carry into effect the provisions of this subchapter, subject to those
powers as are retained by the council.
   (b)   The pension fund is established as a qualified defined benefit plan
known as the "city of Sioux Falls Firefighters' Pension Fund" as amended from
time to time, pursuant to §§ 401(a) and 414(d) of the Internal Revenue Code and
such other provision of the Internal Revenue Code as applicable and applicable
Treasury Regulations and other guidance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1103; 1992 Code, § 35-125) (Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.356 COMPOSITION, TERMS.
   (a)   The board of trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall be
composed of five trustees as follows:
      (1)   The mayor, or the person as the mayor shall designate to act on the
mayor's behalf; and one member who may or may not be a member of the council
appointed by the mayor with advice and consent of the council, to represent the
council;
      (2)   Two members of the pension fund selected by the membership; and
      (3)   One resident of the city who is not an official or employee of the
city and whose membership on the board of trustees creates no conflict of
interest. The member shall be nominated and approved by an affirmative majority
vote of the trustees selected pursuant to divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) above.
   (b)   The regular term of office for the trustees selected under divisions
(a)(2) and (a)(3) above shall be three years, to expire on a staggered basis.
The regular term of office for the trustee member appointed by the mayor shall
be four years to expire on December 31 in the year of the mayoral election.
   (c)   No trustee selected under divisions (a)(1) or (a)(3) above, except the
mayor or their designee, shall serve more than two consecutive full terms of
office.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1103; 1992 Code, § 35-126) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-
1985; Ord. 67-94, passed 7-25-1994; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16,
passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.357 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Each member of the retirement board shall, within ten days after his or her
appointment or election, as the case may be, take an oath of office before the
city finance director for the faithful performance of his or her duties.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1103; 1992 Code, § 35-127)
§ 39.358 FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   (a)   If a member of the retirement board shall cease to be a firefighter in
the employ of the city, or should any appointed trustee, not serving as the
mayor, or the citizen trustee fail to attend scheduled meetings of the board
for three consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the
remaining trustees attending the meeting, the trustee shall be considered to
have resigned from board membership and the board shall by resolution declare
the office vacated as of the date of adoption of the resolution. Any vacancy
occurring in the office of trustee shall be filled within 90 days from and
after the date the vacancy occurs, for the unexpired term, in the same manner
as the office was previously filled.
   (b)   Except for the mayor, if a member of the retirement board is unable to
attend two consecutive meetings because of a leave of absence from duties, the
remaining board members by unanimous vote may appoint a temporary replacement
eligible in accordance with §
39.356. The appointment is effective until the term expires or the board member
returns.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1104; 1992 Code, § 35-128) (Ord. 34-91, passed 4-8-1991;
Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 39.359 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the retirement board shall serve without compensation for
their services.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1105; 1992 Code, § 35-129)
§ 39.360 MEETINGS.
   The retirement board shall hold meetings regularly, at least one in each
quarter year, and shall designate the time and place thereof. All meetings of
the board shall be public.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1105; 1992 Code, § 35-130)
§ 39.361 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The retirement board shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct
of its business.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1105; 1992 Code, § 35-131)
§ 39.362 MANNER OF ACTION.
   Each member of the retirement board shall be entitled to one vote on each
question coming before the board. At least three concurring votes shall be
necessary for a decision by the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1105; 1992 Code, § 35-132)
§ 39.363 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Records shall be kept of all proceedings before the retirement board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1105; 1992 Code, § 35-133)
§ 39.364 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORDS.
   The administrative officer of the retirement board shall keep, or cause to
be kept, the data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the
assets and liabilities of the Firefighters' Pension Fund.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1107; 1992 Code, § 35-134) (Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995;
Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.365 ANNUAL REPORTS.
   (a)   The city human resources director or their designee shall present a
report to the board of trustees at the time of the annual actuarial valuation
report each year showing the fiscal transactions of the Firefighters' Pension
Fund for the year ended the preceding December 31, and the last balance sheet
showing the financial condition of the pension fund by means of an actuarial
valuation of its assets and liabilities.
   (b)   The board of trustees shall publish an annual report containing
financial statements and an actuarial valuation of the pension fund. The report
shall be filed with the retirement laws committee created by SDCL 2-6-8 and
shall be available to each member of the pension fund. The financial statements
contained in the report shall be audited by an independent certified public
accountant. The actuarial valuation required in the report shall include the
information required under the provisions of SDCL 3-12-47(5) and shall be
performed by an approved actuary as defined by SDCL 3-12-47(7).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1107; 1992 Code, § 35-135) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-
1985; Ord. 36-95, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 39.366 MORTALITY AND OTHER TABLES.
   The retirement board shall adopt the mortality and other tables of
experience, and regular interest, as are required in the operation of the
Firefighters' Pension Fund on an actuarial basis.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1108; 1992 Code, § 35-136; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-20-
2016)
§ 39.367 RESPONSIBILITIES OF FIDUCIARY.
   Every fiduciary shall discharge his or her duties solely in the interest of
the participants and beneficiaries of the pension fund, for the exclusive
purpose of providing benefits to participants and their beneficiaries and with
the skill, care, prudence and diligence, under the circumstances then
prevailing, of a prudent person familiar with these matters and acting in a
similar capacity. For purposes of this section, the word FIDUCIARY means any
person or entity who exercises any discretionary authority control over the
management of this pension fund or its assets, any person or entity who renders
investment advice to this pension fund for a fee or other compensation, or any
person or entity who has any discretionary authority or discretionary
responsibility in the administration of this pension fund.
(1992 Code, § 35-137) (Ord. 108-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 118-16, passed 12-
20-2016)
CHAPTER 40: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
40.001   Statement of purpose and intent
   
40.002   Definitions
   
40.003   General enforcement authority
   
40.004   Authority to inspect
   
40.005   Administrative citations
   
40.006   Administrative citation procedures
   
40.007   Appeal
   
40.008   Administrative citation penalties assessed
   
40.009   Failure to appeal or pay administrative citation penalties
   
40.010   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
40.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General code penalty, see §
10.999
§ 40.001 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The city has determined that the enforcement of the city’s Code is an
important public service and is vital to the protection of the public’s health,
safety and welfare.
   (b)   The city has determined that there is a need for alternative methods
of comprehensive code enforcement using both administrative and judicial
remedies.
   (c)   The city has also determined that because life-safety issues may be
regulated through an administrative enforcement process, penalties for
violation should be enhanced.
(1992 Code, § 2-110) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES. Administrative citations and civil
penalties as contained in this article.
   CIVIL PENALTY. The administrative civil penalty assessed and all costs
incurred by the city from the first discovery of the violations until
compliance is achieved. It includes, but is not limited to, staff time and
expense in inspecting the property, sending notices, preparing reports and
files.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any city employee or agent of the city with the
authority to enforce any provision of this Code and issue notice of violations
or administrative citations.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any person or persons in charge of the premises or
location, or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident, and
includes any of the following:
      (1)   The person or persons who own the property where the violation
exists;
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the premises where the violation
exists;
      (3)   The person or persons using the premises when the violation exists;
      (4)   If any of the above is a minor, a parent or guardian of the minor
shall be the responsible party; and
      (5)   If any of the above is a business entity, the manager or on-site
supervisor where the violation exists.
   ROLLING 12-MONTH PERIOD. Any 12 consecutive months following a violation.
(1992 Code, § 2-111) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.003 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, any code enforcement officer may issue
notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private
property, and enforce any available administrative and judicial remedies.
(1992 Code, § 2-112) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.004 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   Code enforcement officers may enter upon any property and make any
examination and surveys necessary to perform their enforcement duties.
Inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical
evidence. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission to enter to
inspect, the code enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection
warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in South Dakota Codified Laws.
(1992 Code, § 2-113) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.005 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this Code for which a civil
penalty may be assessed may be issued an administrative citation by a code
enforcement officer as provided for in this article.
   (b)   A continuing violation of this Code constitutes a separate and
distinct violation each day that the violation exists.
   (c)   A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative
citation issued by the code enforcement officer and shall be payable directly
to the city.
   (d)   Penalties assessed by an administrative citation shall be collected in
accordance with the schedule of civil penalties.
(1992 Code, § 2-114) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.006 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   A code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to a
responsible party as described in this chapter. The citation shall be on forms
approved by the city.
   (b)   If the responsible party is not an individual, the code enforcement
officer shall attempt to issue the owner an administrative citation. If the
owner cannot be located, the administrative citation may be issued in the name
of the entity and given to a manager or on-site supervisor. A copy of the
administrative citation shall also be mailed to the owner.
   (c)   The responsible party shall sign the administrative citation. If the
responsible party refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the
failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation.
   (d)   If the code enforcement officer cannot locate a responsible party, the
administrative citation may be mailed to the responsible party as prescribed in
division (b) above.
   (e)   If no one can be located at the property, the administrative citation
may be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy
subsequently mailed to the responsible party as provided in division (b) above.
   (f)   The failure of any responsible party to receive notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 2-115) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002; Ord. 28-04, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 40.007 APPEAL.
   Any administrative citation issued pursuant to this article may be appealed
pursuant to §§
30.040 through
30.046.
(1992 Code, § 2-116) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.008 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PENALTIES ASSESSED.
   (a)   Any civil penalties assessed shall be payable to the city within ten
days from the date of the administrative citation.
   (b)   Payment of the civil penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
   (c)   If the responsible party fails to correct the violation, subsequent
administrative citations may be issued for the same violations. The amount of
the civil penalty shall increase at a rate specified in ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 2-117) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.009 FAILURE TO APPEAL OR PAY ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PENALTIES.
   The failure of any person to file a timely appeal or pay the civil penalties
within the time specified on the citation shall constitute an irrebuttable
presumption that a violation has occurred. It may result in the city attorney
filing legal proceedings in magistrate or circuit court. Alternatively, the
city may pursue any other legal remedy available to collect the civil penalty
or correct the violation of city ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 2-118) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.010 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to other legal
remedies established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this
Code. The use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(1992 Code, § 2-121) (Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002)
§ 40.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   The following schedule lists the code provisions for which civil
penalties may be cited under this chapter.
Code Provisions Applicable
Chapter/Section No. Title
Code Provisions Applicable
Chapter/Section No. Title
50.001—           Utilities
53.025
55                  Electrical Code
57                  Garbage and Recycling
76.082              Vehicles on Parkways or Sidewalks
77.009              Parking of commercial vehicles or materials prohibited
90                  Animals and Fowl
91                  Fire Protection and Prevention
92                  Health and Sanitation
93.001—           Noise Control
93.011
93.025—           Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Motor
93.035              Vehicles
94                  Forestry
96                  Streets and Sidewalks
96.238              Right-of-Way Permits
110                 Licenses
112                 Food and Food Handlers
117                 Peddlers and Vendors
118                 Escort Services
120                 Pest Control
121                 Medical Cannabis Regulations
122                 Tattooing
124                 Vehicles for Hire
150                 Building
                    Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings
                    Building Code
                    Mechanical and Fuel Gas Code
                    Building Security
                    Property Maintenance Code
                    Manufactured Housing
                    Residential Building Contractors
                    Vacant Buildings
                    Rental Housing
151                 Historic Preservation
152                 Manufactured Homes
155                 Signs and Outdoor Advertising
156                 Floodplain Management
157                 Subdivisions
160                 Zoning
 
(1992 Code, § 2-119)
   (b)   Not withstanding the provisions of section §
10.999 of this Code, the civil penalties within any rolling 12-month period
shall be as follows:
 
First violation               $100
Second violation              $200
Third or subsequent violation $300
 
(1992 Code, § 2-120)
(Ord. 26-02, passed 4-8-2002; Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 112-03,
passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 28-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 56-15, passed 6-9-2015;
Ord. 106-21, passed 9-7-2021)
CHAPTER 41: FEES
Section
   
41.001   In general
   
41.002   Fees charged by the police, fire and metro communications
   
41.003   Fees for production of records
   
41.004   Fees for returned checks
   
41.005   Fees for parking
   
41.006   Temporary loading permits
   
41.007   Exemption from permit and inspection fees
   
41.008   Public facility ticket fees
   
41.009   Siouxland Libraries nonresident user fee
   
41.010   Sign permit fees
   
41.011   Floodplain development variance requests
§ 41.001 IN GENERAL.
   This chapter establishes fees for services provided by the city.
(1992 Code, § 15.5-1) (Ord. 29-95, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 41.002 FEES CHARGED BY THE POLICE, FIRE AND METRO COMMUNICATIONS.
   The following fees shall be charged for services provided by the police
department:
 
Service                                      Fee
Photos or audio on CD or USB or links        $30
Paper copies of photos (8X11)                $15
Copies of police department video recordings $30
Other video                                  $30
Copy of accident report                      $6
 
(1992 Code, § 15.5-2) (Ord. 29-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 89-95, passed 6-19-
1995; Ord. 103-00, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 6-24, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 41.003 FEES FOR PRODUCTION OF RECORDS.
   (a)   The following fees shall be paid for record searches and production of
documents for the public:
 
Service                  Fee
Photocopies, per page    $0.20
Records search, per hour $20
 
   (b)   Any city department may require a deposit before performing any work
if the total cost is estimated to exceed $40.
(1992 Code, § 15.5-3) (Ord. 29-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 126-01, passed 12-17-
2001; Ord. 6-24, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 41.004 FEES FOR RETURNED CHECKS.
   The following fee shall be paid for checks returned as insufficient funds or
no account.
 
Service         Fee
Returned checks $20
 
(1992 Code, § 15.5-4) (Ord. 29-95, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 41.005 FEES FOR PARKING.
   (a)   The fee for all lots and ramps shall be determined by public parking,
not to exceed a maximum of $87 per month. Reserved or enclosed spaces are set
1.5 times the established rate.
   (b)   Monthly permits for daily parking shall be valid Monday through
Friday, beginning at 6:00 a.m. and not to exceed beyond 6:00 p.m.
   (c)   The following additional fees shall be paid for parking:
      (1)   Meters. The fee for meters will range from $0.60 to $1.50 per hour
to be determined by public parking.
      (2)   Public parking may establish on-street parking zones where permits
are available. The fee for parking in these zones may not exceed $87 per month.
Reserved spaces are up to 1.5 times the established rate.
      (3)   A $50 one-time fee per stall per sign will be charged for reserved
spaces.
      (4)   The fee for event parking shall be determined by public parking,
not to exceed a maximum of $8 per space per day.
      (5)   All fees that have been established by existing agreements.
      (6)   Imposed convenience and/or processing fees to wholly or partially
offset the amount charged by any city-authorized parking application vendor to
reimburse costs.
   (d)   The daily rate for all lots and ramps is capped at $8 per space per
day.
   (e)   The hourly rate for all lots and ramps shall be determined by public
parking, not to exceed a maximum of $1.50 per hour.
   (f)   The lost entrance ticket fee in lots and ramps will not exceed $30.
   (g)   The meter bag rental fee is as follows:
 
Meter Bag Rental Fee
Daily, per bag   $7
Monthly, per bag $100
 
(1992 Code, § 15.5-5) (Ord. 146-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 58-97, passed 8-4-
1997; Ord. 60-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 133-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 70-00,
passed 8-14-2000; Ord. 99-00, passed 11-13-2000; Ord. 44-01, passed 5-14-2001;
Ord. 16-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 51-02, passed 7-1-2002; Ord. 6-03, passed 1-
13-2003; Ord. 11-04, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 64-05, passed 7-7-2005; Ord. 23-06,
passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 88-06, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 176-07, passed 11-13-2007;
Ord. 113-08, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 77-12, passed 10-2-2012; Ord. 121-15,
passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 10-25, passed 2-18-2025)
§ 41.006 TEMPORARY LOADING PERMITS.
   Public parking facilities shall issue annual temporary loading permits upon
receipt of a fee of $80. No person shall hold more than two temporary loading
permits, unless approved by public parking.
(1992 Code, § 15.5-5.1) (Ord. 105-05, passed 10-17-2005; Ord. 121-15, passed
12-15-2015)
§ 41.007 EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.
   Habitat For Humanity of Greater Sioux Falls, Incorporated; Make-A-Wish
Foundation; Repair Affair Projects of the Home Builders Association of Sioux
Falls; and the Home Modification Wheelchair Ramp Program of Independent Living
Choices; South Eastern Development Foundation; Veterans Community Project,
Inc.; City buildings and Community Development Department Neighborhood
Revitalization Program projects are exempt from payment of fees for plat and/or
plan reviews, permits and inspections from the following major organization
units:
   (a)   Planning and building services;
   (b)   Public works;
   (c)   Fire prevention division; and
   (d)   Police.
   Special districts, county government, and school districts shall obtain
building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, zoning, and sign permits. Fees
charged shall be in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.
   When federal or state agencies obtain a building, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, zoning, or sign permit, fees charged shall be in accordance with
the adopted fee schedules. No inspections shall be performed on federal or
state projects when permits are not obtained.
(1992 Code, § 15.5-6) (Ord. 52-96, passed 4-15-1996; Ord. 27-04, passed 3-1-
2004; Ord. 33-10, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 67-15, passed 7-14-2015; Ord. 10-17,
passed 1-10-2017; Ord. 18-22, passed 1-31-2022)
§ 41.008 PUBLIC FACILITY TICKET FEES.
   The following public facility ticket fees shall be charged for tickets on
all paid admissions to events at city-owned sports, convention, or
entertainment facilities where ticket sales from events are not treated as
revenues by the city or the city’s facility manager. Public Facility Ticket
Fees shall apply to: (1) the Events Center Complex, which includes the Denny
Sanford Premier Center, the Sioux Falls Convention Center, and the Sioux Falls
Arena, (2) the Sioux Falls Stadium, (3) the Orpheum Theater, and (4) the
Washington Pavilion.
   (a)   Public Facility Ticket Fees for all admissions shall be established by
the facility manager after consultation with the city finance director. The fee
shall not exceed $5.00.
   (b)   The Public Facility Ticket Fees shall be collected by the facility
managers and remitted to the city within 60 days of receipt and deposited in
the entertainment tax fund of the city unless directed otherwise in the
facility management agreement or lease.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subparagraph (b) above, Public Facility Ticket Fees in
excess of $3.00 per ticket, up to $200,000 annually, shall be remitted by the
facility manager of the Events Center Complex to the Sioux Falls Sports
Authority, a Sioux Falls-based nonprofit corporation that promotes and attracts
major sporting events to Sioux Falls including booking major events at the
Events Center Complex. All Public Facility Ticket Fees remitted by the facility
manager of the Events Center Complex to the Sioux Falls Sports Authority may be
recorded as a revenue and expense for the Events Center Complex. Funding
provided through this section shall be subject to review by the city finance
director prior to December 31 annually. This subsection (c) shall be effective
on the effective date of this ordinance through 11:59 p.m. on December 31,
2027, unless extended or terminated.
(1992 Code, § 15.5-7) (Ord. 30-99, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 90-99, passed 9-7-
1999; Ord. 118-04, passed 12-13-2004; Ord. 66-15, passed 7-14-2015; Ord. 127-
22, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 41.009 SIOUXLAND LIBRARIES NONRESIDENT USER FEE.
   The following fees shall be paid by nonresident users of the Siouxland
Libraries:
 
Annual fee    $63
Quarterly fee $17
Six-month fee $33
 
(1992 Code, § 15.5-8) (Ord. 133-99, passed 12-20-1999)
§ 41.010 SIGN PERMIT FEES.
   Before any sign permit shall be issued under the provisions of § 155.030,
the applicant shall pay a fee as follows:
 
Sign                                                               Fee
Any sign less than 100 square feet                                 $35
Any sign 100 square feet or greater, but less than 200 square feet $50
Any sign 200 square feet or greater                                $75
Portable sign permit fees                                          $25
 
(1992 Code, § 15.5-9) (Ord. 34-09, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 54-14, passed 8-5-
2014)
§ 41.011 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT VARIANCE REQUESTS.
   A fee of $500 shall be made for filing an application for variance request
to the floodplain development ordinance §
156.054.
(Ord. 54-14, passed 8-5-2014)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
   
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
   
51.   UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES
   
52.   REGULATION OF NONESSENTIAL USES OF WATER
   
53.   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS
   
54.   WATER-COOLED AIR CONDITIONERS
   
55.   PRIVATELY OWNED BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
   
56.   OVERHEAD UTILITY WIRING IN URBAN RENEWAL AREA
   
57.   GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
   
58.   EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
   
59.   WATER DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
50.001   Definitions
   
50.002   Ordinances saved from repeal
   
50.003   Scope
   
50.004   Service to comply with technical regulations
   
50.005   Violation of rules, regulations
   
50.006   Inspections outside city
   
50.007   Termination of service authorized
   
50.008   Liability of city
   
50.009   Utility service; application required
   
50.010   Utility service; availability to debtors
   
50.011   Utility service; use assumed
   
50.012   Right of entry
   50.013   Unauthorized access, bypass, or tampering
   50.014   Reserved
   
50.015   Interruption of service
   
50.016   Transfer of service by customer
   
50.017   Connections to service
   
50.018   Meters
   
50.019   Restricting use
   
50.020   Permit to raze or remove building required
   
50.021   Disconnection
   
50.022   Extension of lines
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
   City council, see
ch. 30
   City organizations, see
ch. 32
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
   Examples of nuisances, see §
92.071
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
   Garbage and recycling, see
ch. 57
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Impure drinking water, see §
92.005
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Permit for well, see §
92.010
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Sewer and water connections and construction in streets, §
96.026
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivision ordinance, see
ch. 157
   Waste disposal in mobile home parks, see §
152.066
   Water source protection overlay district, see §§
159.255 through
159.259
   Water supply in mobile home parks, see §
152.066
Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Municipal utilities in general, see SDCL ch. 9-39
§ 50.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of
chapters 50 through
56 and
59, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
   CCF. A measurement of liquid equaling one hundred cubic feet.
   CITY ENGINEER. The city engineer or the city engineer's authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
   CONTRACTOR. A person who for compensation undertakes or offers to undertake
any excavation for the enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement,
conversion, or new construction of any commercial or residential building or
structure for which a building permit is required.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who is allowed to connect to and receives any utility
service furnished by the city pursuant to a written agreement with the city.
   JOINT POWERS AGREEMENT. An agreement between two or more public agencies for
joint or cooperative action as set forth in Chapter 1-24 of South Dakota
Codified Laws.
   KWh. A kWh (kilowatt-hour) is a unit of measure equal to one kilowatt of
power consumed in one hour.
   MANAGER. The director of public works appointed by the mayor or the mayor's
duly authorized representative.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, limited
liability company, government or governmental subdivision, agency or
instrumentality, or any other organization or entity.
   PREMISES. A lot, parcel, tract, or plot of land together with all buildings
and structures thereon.
   REGIONAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE or REGIONAL SDC. A charge to be paid by
regional wastewater users to the city which is designed to recover past capital
costs of the regional wastewater system and to help cover actual or anticipated
capital costs of expanding the regional wastewater system, all as determined by
the city in its sole discretion, and as further outlined in Chapter 51 of the
Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD, as amended from time to time or as set
forth in SDCL 9-48.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, STRUCTURES include buildings, walls, fences, and signs.
   UTILITY. Includes the water, sewer, storm sewer, city-owned electric, or any
other utility services furnished by the city to consumers thereof.
   UTILITY EMPLOYEE. Duly authorized representative of the city to initiate,
control, operate, inspect, maintain, or discontinue utility service or utility
availability from the public utility distribution system.
   WATER SUPPLIED BY THE CITY. All water that passes through the city's water
distribution system.
   WATER SYSTEM. The water supply extending from the city municipal water
system to the premises served including, but not limited to, water supply
piping, control valves, hydrants and other appurtenances, shutoff valve, water
meter, and backflow preventer.
(1992 Code, § 41-1) (Ord. 82-83, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 125-84, passed 9-10-
1984; Ord. 48-89, passed 5-30-1989; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 43-05,
passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 59-08, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 23-13, passed 4-16-2013;
Ord. 35-13, passed 6-18-2013; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021; Ord. 38-23, passed
6-20-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 50.002 ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   Nothing contained in this Code nor in the ordinance adopting this Code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any manner any ordinance
prescribing the charge to be paid for taps and connections to the various
utility services and utilities furnished by the city, or the rates and charges
to be paid for the utilities rendered by the city, or the amount of the
deposits required by the city to ensure the payment of the rates and charges,
or rules, regulations and specifications governing the installation, use,
enjoyment and consumption of utility services, and all ordinances are hereby
saved from repeal and recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
(1992 Code, § 41-2)
§ 50.003 SCOPE.
   All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms
and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any
person; or whereby the city shall make any utility connection or perform any
work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service.
(1992 Code, § 41-3)
§ 50.004 SERVICE TO COMPLY WITH TECHNICAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   All utility system installations shall be completed by an insured and
bonded contractor and/or licensed plumber. All utility system installations or
alterations shall be designed by a professional engineer (P.E.) licensed to
work in the state of South Dakota.
   (b)   Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this title shall
be in accordance with and compliance with all applicable technical provisions
of this Code, state law, and city ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.102, Rules 32, 34; 1992 Code, § 41-4) (Ord. 2314, passed
1-11-1965; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
§ 50.005 VIOLATION OF RULES, REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful to violate any promulgated rule or regulation for utility
service supplied by the city. The manager is authorized to adopt any rules or
regulations as may be necessary to ensure its oversight and supply function of
city utility services. A copy of the rules or regulations shall be filed with
the city clerk, with public notice thereof to be provided by the clerk by
publishing the notice of rules change in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city’s jurisdiction. The proposed rules or regulations shall be
posted on the city’s website. This public notice and posting shall occur at
least 30 days before the effective date of the rules or regulations.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.102; 1992 Code, § 41-5) (Ord. 151-07, passed 9-10-2007)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.006 INSPECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY.
   In order to protect the city’s utility systems, the city shall not make any
taps or connection to the city utility systems outside the city limits until
the proposed customer’s facilities and premises have been inspected and
approved by an authorized utility employee, which inspection shall be made only
after deposit of the stipulated fee for the inspection.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 12.104, 14.102, Rule 9; 1992 Code, § 41-6) (Ord. 22-21,
passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.007 TERMINATION OF SERVICE AUTHORIZED.
   The city shall have the right to disconnect and discontinue or refuse to
connect or reconnect any utility service furnished by the city to any customer
if the customer:
   (a)   Fails to abide by all applicable provisions of city ordinances;
   (b)   Violates the rules or regulations pertaining to utility service;
   (c)   Fails to pay any utility bill when due;
   (d)   Willfully or negligently wastes any utility service due to improper or
imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances, or otherwise;
   (e)   Tampers with any meter, seal, or other equipment controlling or
regulating the supply of utility service;
   (f)   Obtains, takes, uses, or diverts utility service without payment
therefor;
   (g)   Vacates a premises connected to utility service;
   (h)   Fails to provide authorized utility employee access to premises for
the purpose of reading any meter, installing a new utility meter and/or Meter
Transmitting Unit (MTU), or repairing or replacing an existing utility meter
and/or MTU; or
   (i)   Fails to provide access to the premises to authorized utility
employees for the purpose of containment backflow prevention verifications.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 4.601, 14.102, 14.501; 1992 Code, § 41-7) (Ord. 82-83,
passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 41-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.008 LIABILITY OF CITY.
   The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any customer
of any utility service furnished by the city due to any cause outside the
direct control of the city, including without limitation: interruption of
service, backflow of the wastewater system, or a failure of utility supply. The
city may make exceptions to this if city construction-related activities cause
the service line to leak.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 4.604, 14.102, Rule 21; 1992 Code, § 41-8) (Ord. 22-21,
passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.009 UTILITY SERVICE; APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring any city utility service shall make application for the
service to the appropriate utility department. The application shall contain
the applicant’s name, address and the uses for which the service is desired. A
separate application shall be made for each premises to be served. The
applicant shall abide by the rules and regulations established by the city
relative to utility service in effect at the time of his or her application and
as they may be revised from time to time.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 12.102, 14.102, Rules 1, 33; 1992 Code, § 41-9) (Ord. 22-
21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.010 UTILITY SERVICE; AVAILABILITY TO DEBTORS.
   The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any
person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except ad valorem taxes
and special assessments.
(1992 Code, § 41-10)
§ 50.011 UTILITY SERVICE; USE ASSUMED.
   All premises connected to any city utility service shall be assumed to be
using the utility service and either the property owner or customer shall be
charged therefor as long as the premises shall remain connected with the
utility service.
(1992 Code, § 41-11) (Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.012 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any authorized utility employee shall have free access at any reasonable
time to all premises supplied with any city utility service for the purpose of
examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use, read any
meter, install a new water meter and/or Meter Transmitting Unit (MTU), repair
or replace an existing water meter and/or MTU, or for containment backflow
prevention verifications.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.102, Rule 22; 1992 Code, § 41-12) (Ord. 22-21, passed 2-
16-2021)
§ 50.013 UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS, BYPASS, OR TAMPERING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Connect to, turn on, turn off, or disconnect any utility service
offered by the city;
      (2)   Remove, replace, or repair any utility equipment belonging to the
city connected to any utility service offered by the city;
      (3)   Access, open, or tamper with any meter, water hydrant, backflow
preventer, or other utility equipment belonging to the city connected to any
utility service offered by the city;
      (4)   Bypass or otherwise engage in unauthorized metering; or
      (5)   Tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers.
   (b)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   TAMPER shall mean damage, alter, adjust, or in any manner interfere
with or obstruct the action or operation of any meter provided for measuring or
registering the amount of utility service passing through the meter, or any
valve provided by the utility service offered by the city for preventing
backflow of water into the supply lines, or any other devices owned and
maintained by the utility service offered by the city.
      (2)   BYPASS shall mean the act of attaching, connecting, or in any
manner affixing any pipe, wire, cord, socket, motor, or other instrument,
device, or contrivance to the utility service offered by the city or any part
thereof in a manner as to transmit, supply, or use any utility service without
passing through an authorized meter for measuring or registering the amount of
utility service.
   (c)   No person shall be guilty of violating this section if such person is
an authorized utility employee or has been otherwise granted authority by the
city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 4.405, 4.416, 4.602, 14.102, 14.502, Rules 17, 20, 23;
1992 Code, § 41-13) (Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.014 [RESERVED.]
§ 50.015 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   Customers are hereby notified that utility service may be temporarily shut
off at any time due to accidents and emergency or for necessary maintenance.
The city is not required to give advance notice of any shutoff. Customers who
are dependent upon utility service for any purpose are advised that it is the
customer's duty to take prompt precautions to prevent damages in the event of a
shutoff.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.102, Rule 28; 1992 Code, § 41-15) (Ord. 2314, passed 1-
11-1965; Ord. 22- 21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.016 TRANSFER OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or customer to resell or transfer any
utility service or capacity obtained from the city to others without prior
written agreement from the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.102, Rules 7, 8, 10; 1992 Code, § 41-16) (Ord. 35-13,
passed 6-18-2013; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 50.017 CONNECTIONS TO SERVICE.
   Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall only be made
by an authorized utility employee or contractor approved by the city. All
connection costs shall be paid by the customer.
(1992 Code, § 41-17) (Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.018 METERS.
   Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall
be approved and installed by the city and shall remain the property of the
city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 6.208, 14.102, Rules 13—16;1992 Code, § 41-18) (Ord. 2170,
passed 12-3-1962; Ord. 2426, passed 6-20-1966; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.019 RESTRICTING USE.
   The city hereby reserves the right to restrict or prevent the use of any
utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or
circumstances demanding the restriction or prevention of use.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 4.403, 14.102, Rule 24; 1992 Code, § 41-19) (Ord. 22-21,
passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.020 PERMIT TO RAZE OR REMOVE BUILDING REQUIRED.
   No person shall raze or remove any building or structure which is connected
to any utility furnished by the city without first properly disconnecting and
capping such utility service. A sewer service and water service capping permit
must be obtained from the city prior to capping the sewer service and water
service. Disconnection of electrical service for any building or structure
served by city electric service must be arranged with city light and power
prior to such disconnection.
(1992 Code, § 41-20) (Ord. 56-87, passed 7-20-1987; Ord. 25-14, passed 5-13-
2014; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
§ 50.021 DISCONNECTION.
   When a disconnection from the city utility service is made, such utility
disconnection shall be done to the satisfaction of the city. Closure for sewer
service shall be at the property line. Closure for water service shall be at
the water main or at the curb stop as directed by the city engineer. The sewer
or water service closure shall be completed within 30 days of the removal or
razing of the building. Closures shall not be covered until they have been
inspected by the city. Disconnection from city electric service may only be
performed by authorized utility employees.
(1992 Code, § 41-21) (Ord. 56-87, passed 7-20-1987; Ord. 96-03, passed 10-14-
2003; Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 50.022 EXTENSION OF LINES.
   The city may, in its sole discretion, elect to serve customers residing
outside the city limits. In the event the city elects to serve water and sewer
customers residing outside the city limits, the water and sewer lines shall be
constructed and maintained by the customer, with all parties connecting onto
the lines being regulated and charged connection and other fees as set forth by
the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-22) (Ord. 22-21, passed 2-16-2021)
CHAPTER 51: UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Deposits required
   
51.002   Refund of deposit
   
51.003   Effect of transfer, moving
   
51.004   Determination of charges
   
51.005   When payment due
   
51.006   Monthly billing
   
51.007   Reconnection after disconnection
   
51.008   Voluntary discontinuance of service
   
51.009   Late fees
   
51.010   Establishing fees
   
51.011   Collection
Electricity
   
51.025   Schedule
   
51.026   Residential service rate
   
51.027   Commercial/industrial primary service rate
   
51.028   Large commercial/industrial service rate
   
51.029   Small commercial service rate
   
51.030   City-served streetlighting rate
   
51.031   [Repealed]
   
51.032   Night watch flood service rate
   
51.033   Review of rates
Water
   
51.045   Schedule
   
51.046   Residential; inside city limits
   
51.047   Residential; outside city limits
   
51.048   Commercial; inside city limits
   
51.049   Commercial; outside city limits
   
51.050   Large industrial rates
   
51.051   [Reserved]
   
51.052   Fixed charge defined
   
51.053   Wholesale water rates
   
51.054   Rates outside city limits
   
51.055   Interim rates outside city limits
Water Distribution Platting Fee
   
51.065   Water distribution platting fee
Sewer
   
51.080   Definitions
   
51.081   Wastewater charges for Sioux Falls local wastewater customers
   
51.081.01      Wastewater charges for regional wastewater customers
   
51.081.02      Regional system development charges (regional SDCs)
   51.081.03    System capacity charge for wastewater customers
   
51.082   Funds established
   
51.083   Review of rates
   
51.084   Notice of rate review
   
51.085   Toxic pollutants
   
51.086   Water meter requirements
   
51.087   Contracts for private, industrial and other connections
   
51.088   Failure to comply
   
51.089   Assessment and recovery of costs for proportionate share of sewer
planned or previously constructed
Storm Drainage
   
51.100   Storm drainage fee
   
51.101   Collection
   
51.102   Fund established
   
51.103   Annual review
Storm Water Drainage System Improvement Cost Recovery
   
51.115   Storm water drainage system improvement costs
   
51.116   Definition
   
51.117   Drainage basin boundaries
   
51.118   Recovery of cost of storm water drainage system
Water Conservation Reimbursement
   
51.130   Water conservation toilet reimbursement
   
51.132   Rain sensor reimbursement
   
51.133   Programmable timer reimbursement
Cross-reference:
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
   Taxation, see
ch. 37
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
   Along with the application for utility service, an applicant who does not
own the property where service is being requested shall be required to pay to
the city a deposit as set by ordinance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 4.502, 14.203; 1992 Code, § 41-33) (Ord. 1488, passed 7-6-
1959; Ord. 2150, passed 9-4-1962; Ord. 95-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 102-96,
passed 9-3-1996)
§ 51.002 REFUND OF DEPOSIT.
   (a)   Upon application of the depositor, refunds of deposits made for
utility service may be made after two years or upon the termination of utility
service after payment of all indebtedness to the city for utility service.
   (b)   Upon request of the depositor, the city may refund the deposit under
the following conditions:
      (1)   The depositor has not been assessed more than three late fees
within the past 24 months;
      (2)   The depositor has not been issued a final notice before termination
within the past 24 months;
      (3)   The depositor has not had the utility service terminated within the
past 36 months; and
      (4)   The depositor has not issued a dishonored check within the past 36
months.
(1992 Code, § 41-34) (Ord. 42-77, passed 5-31-1977; Ord. 132-98, passed 12-7-
1998)
§ 51.003 EFFECT OF TRANSFER, MOVING.
   There shall be no transfer, or so-called transfer, from one location to
another of deposits made for utility service and in each case the transfer
shall be considered a new application for service and shall be treated as such.
When premises are vacated, any amounts due for water service shall be paid in
full and utility service shall not be commenced at another place until this is
done. The removal from one place to another shall be considered as a new
request for utility service and applicants shall be required to make the
current deposit that shall be in effect at the time the request is made.
(1992 Code, § 41-35)
§ 51.004 DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.
   The rates and charges for the consumption of utility services furnished by
the city, as well as the charges and fees for connection thereto, shall be as
determined by the manager as set by an ordinance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 4.502, 6.102, 12.403, 12.404, 14.201, 14.202, 14.602; 1992
Code, § 41-36) (Ord. 1912, passed 4-29-1957; Ord. 1988, passed 7-6-1959; Ord.
2150, passed 9-4-1962; Ord. 2170, passed 12-3-1962; Ord. 2184, passed 2-18-
1963; Ord. 2495, passed 8-21-1967; Ord. 2523, passed 1-22-1968; Ord. 2580,
passed 2-3-1969; Ord. 95-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 51.005 WHEN PAYMENT DUE.
   All bills for utility services furnished by the city shall be due and
payable prior to 12:00 midnight of the twentieth day following the date of the
bill, provided, however, that if the due date shall fall on a Sunday or a legal
holiday observed by the city, the bill shall be due and payable by 12:00
midnight of the following business day.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 12.405, 14.203; 1992 Code, § 41-37) (Ord. 1988, passed 7-
6-1959; Ord. 2495, passed 8-21-1967; Ord. 2727, passed 12-14-1970)
§ 51.006 MONTHLY BILLING.
   With the installation of an automatic meter reading system, all residential
and commercial customers will be billed monthly based on monthly actual meter
readings. If an actual meter reading cannot be obtained, a computer generated
estimate will be used. Fixed and volume charges shall be those set forth in §§
51.046 through
51.049. Bills are due within 20 days following the date of the bill.
Termination of service and reconnection shall be according to the department’s
policy.
(1992 Code, § 41-38) (Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 40-23, passed 6-20-
2023)
§ 51.007 RECONNECTION AFTER DISCONNECTION.
   If utility service is disconnected for nonpayment of a bill or for failure
to provide access to the premises for the purpose of a reading, the consumer
thereof may have the service reconnected only upon the payment of the amount
due, if any, plus a reconnection fee. The fee shall be set by ordinance.
Payments will be accepted at the water billing office during business hours.
(1992 Code, § 41-39) (Ord. 38-78, passed 4-17-1978; Ord. 82-83, passed 11-7-
1983; Ord. 95-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 51.008 VOLUNTARY DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   A consumer wishing to discontinue the use of any utility service shall give
written notice thereof to the water billing office. Failure to do so shall
render him or her liable for the payment of all bills until notice has been
given.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.102, Rule 25; 1992 Code, § 41-40)
§ 51.009 LATE FEES.
   (a)   Late fees will be assessed against all customers when payment is not
received at the utility billing office by the due date of the bill plus one day
grace. A late payment charge will be assessed against the total outstanding
account balance older than 22 days. January 1, 2023, late payment charges will
be assessed at a rate of 1.0% of the past due balance but not less than $1 and
added to the next bill. As of January 1, 2024, late payment charges will be
assessed at a rate of 2.0% of the past due balance but not less than $1 and
added to the next bill for all nonresidential customers. As of January 1, 2024,
late payment charges will be assessed at a rate of 1.0% of the past due balance
but not less than $1 and added to the next bill for all residential customers.
The late payment fee will be allocated to the appropriate utility fund based on
the percentage of the total charges due. Late payment charges will not be
assessed against accounts with a total outstanding balance of less than $10.
The city is not responsible for late payments caused by a delay in mail
service.
   (b)   In addition to the late fees discussed in subsection (a), late fees
will be assessed against regional wastewater customers when regional SDCs are
not received at the utility billing office by the due date of the bill plus one
day grace. A late payment charge will be assessed against the total outstanding
account balance older than 22 days. January 1, 2023, late payment charges will
be assessed at a rate of 1.0% of the past due balance but not less than $1. As
of January 1, 2024, late payment charges will be assessed at a rate of 2.0% of
the past due balance but not less than $1 and added to the next bill for all
nonresidential customers. As of January 1, 2024, late payment charges will be
assessed at a rate of 1.0% of the past due balance but not less than $1 and
added to the next bill for all residential customers. The late payment fee will
be allocated to the appropriate utility fund based on the percentage of the
total charges due. Late payment charges will not be assessed against accounts
with a total outstanding balance of less than $10. The city is not responsible
for late payments caused by a delay in mail service.
(1992 Code, § 41-41) (Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 35-13, passed 6-18-
2013; Ord. 39-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.010 ESTABLISHING FEES.
   The following fees are hereby established to recover direct expenses of the
utility department.
      (1)   Water department charges for smith taps.
     Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
     January 1, January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
     2014
Size Price      Fee             Fee             Fee             Fee
        Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective
        January 1, January 1, January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
        2014       2024
Size    Price      Fee        Fee             Fee             Fee
4 × 4  $1,504.87  $2,127     $2,212          $2,301          $2,393
6 × 4  $1,550.79  $2,164     $2,251          $2,341          $2,435
6 × 6  $1,821.70  $2,677     $2,784          $2,896          $3,012
8 × 4  $1,592.53  $2,231     $2,321          $2,413          $2,510
8 × 6  $1,891.28  $2,719     $2,827          $2,940          $3,058
8 × 8  $2,429.90  $3,579     $3,722          $3,871          $4,026
10 × 4 $1,655.15  $2,281     $2,372          $2,467          $2,566
10 × 6 $1,926.07  $2,789     $2,900          $3,016          $3,137
10 × 8 $2,457.73  $3,629     $3,774          $3,925          $4,082
10 × 10$3,260.55  $5,076     $5,279          $5,490          $5,709
12 × 4 $1,531.31  $2,127     $2,212          $2,300          $2,392
12 × 6 $1,843.97  $2,601     $2,705          $2,814          $2,926
12 × 8 $2,378.42  $3,439     $3,577          $3,720          $3,868
12 × 10$3,061.57  $4,838     $5,031          $5,232          $5,442
12 × 12$4,274.83  $6,580     $6,843          $7,117          $7,401
16 x 4  $2,211*    $2,211     $2,299          $2,391          $2,487
16 × 6 $1,864.84  $2,689     $2,796          $2,908          $3,024
16 × 8 $2,382.59  $3,578     $3,721          $3,870          $4,025
16 × 10$3,160.36  $5,016     $5,216          $5,425          $5,642
16 × 12$4,113.14  $6,557     $6,820          $7,092          $7,376
20 × 6 $1,882.93  $2,609     $2,714          $2,822          $2,935
20 × 8 $2,445.21  $3,472     $3,611          $3,755          $3,906
20 × 10$3,243.85  $4,790     $4,982          $5,181          $5,388
20 × 12$4,420.93  $6,573     $6,836          $7,110          $7,394
24 × 6 $1,963.64  $2,644     $2,750          $2,860          $2,974
24 × 8 $2,514.79  $3,583     $3,726          $3,875          $4,030
24 × 10$3,327.34  $4,941     $5,139          $5,344          $5,558
24 × 12$4,564.26  $6,631     $6,896          $7,172          $7,459
*Effective as of 6-20-2023
      (2)   Water reclamation charges for sewer taps.
 
       Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective
       January 1, January 1, January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
       2016       2024
Size   Price      Fee        Fee             Fee             Fee
4 inch $420       $556       $578            $601            $625
6 inch $450       $612       $636            $662            $688
 
      (3)   Water department water service connection and meter charges.
                      Effective  Effective      Effective      Effective
              2023    January 1, January 1,     January 1,     January 1,
                      2024       2025           2026           2027
Service Size  Copper  Copper     Copper Service Copper Service Copper Service
(inches)      Service Service
                           Effective    Effective    Effective    Effective
              2023         January 1,   January 1,   January 1,   January 1,
                           2024         2025         2026         2027
Service Size  Copper       Copper       Copper       Copper       Copper
(inches)      Service      Service      Service      Service      Service
1             $702.94      $608         $632         $658         $684
Service Size  PEXa Service PEXa Service PEXa Service PEXa Service PEXa Service
(inches)
1             $536.65      $466         $485         $504         $524
1-1/4         $787.46      $717         $745         $775         $806
1-1/2         $888.78      $830         $863         $897         $933
2             $1,218.87    $1,109       $1,154       $1,200       $1,248
 
                 Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective
                 January 1, January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
                 2024
Meter Size  Cost Fee        Fee             Fee             Fee
(inches)
                      Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
                      January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
                      2024       2025
Meter Size  Cost      Fee        Fee        Fee             Fee
(inches)
5/8         $83.25    $185       $192       $200            $208
3/4         $113.75   $219       $227       $236            $246
1           $154.25   $285       $297       $309            $321
1-1/2       $308.50   $669       $695       $723            $752
2           $424.75   $876       $911       $947            $985
3           $1,635.00 $2,326     $2,419     $2,516          $2,616
4           $2,311.50 $2,991     $3,111     $3,235          $3,365
6           $4,226.25 $4,990     $5,189     $5,397          $5,613
 
 
                     Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective
             20323   January 1, January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
                     2024
Meter
Transmission Cost    Fee        Fee             Fee             Fee
Unit (MTU)
Single Port  $195.50 $101       $105            $109            $113
 
      (4)   Water department service charges.
 2023   Effective January Effective January Effective January Effective January
        1, 2024           1, 2025           1, 2026           1, 2027
 Charge Fee               Fee               Fee               Fee
                             Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective
               2023          January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2027
                             2024       2025       2026
               Charge        Fee        Fee        Fee        Fee
Delinquent
bill           $15           $15        $16        $16        $17
collection fee
Hydrant flow   $120          $170       $177       $184       $191
test
Hydrant meter  Equal to cost $1,500     $1,560     $1,622     $1,687
deposits       of new meter
Trip charge*   $28           $35        $40        $45        $50
Turn-on fee    $10           $25        $26        $27        $28
(new tenant)
*After hours/weekend/holiday trip charge will be increased 1.5 times the
normal trip charge.
 
      (5)   Water department account charges.
                             2023   2024 2025 2026 2027
                             Charge Fee  Fee  Fee  Fee
Account deposit
   Residential (nonowner) $80    $80  $83  $87  $90
   Commercial                    $200 $208 $216 $225
      Automatic car was$300
      Gas station w/car$200h
      General          $75
      Laundromats      $250
      Tavern or lounge $200
Bad check charge             $20
 
      (6)   Water and water reclamation charges for laboratory fees.
                     Effective  Effective      Effective      Effective
         2023       January 1, January 1,     January 1,     January 1,
                     2024       2025           2026           2027
          Analytical Analytical Analytical Fee Analytical Fee Analytical Fee
Parameter Fee (per   Fee (per   (per sample)   (per sample)   (per sample)
          sample)    sample)
                           Effective  Effective  Effective      Effective
               2023       January 1, January 1, January 1,     January 1,
                           2024       2025       2026           2027
                Analytical Analytical Analytical Analytical Fee Analytical Fee
Parameter       Fee (per   Fee (per   Fee (per   (per sample)   (per sample)
                sample)    sample)    sample)
Alkalinity      $15        $16        $17        $17            $18
Ammonia-        $25        $27        $28        $29            $30
nitrogen
Anions-ion
chromatography
(chloride,
nitrate, ortho- $20        $21        $22        $23            $24
phosphate,
sulfate,
bromide,
fluoride)
Biochemical
oxygen demand   $31        $33        $34        $36            $37
(BOD)
Chlorine        $25        $27        $28        $29            $30
residual
Color           $30        $32        $33        $35            $36
Conductivity    $15        $16        $17        $17            $18
Fecal coliform  $25        $27        $28        $29            $30
Fluoride        $17        $18        $19        $19            $20
electrode
Hardness,       $20        $21        $22        $23            $24
calcium
Hardness, total $20        $21        $22        $23            $24
Metals-AA
Flame analysis  $20        $40        $42        $43            $45
(ppm)
Furnace (ppb)   $30        $40        $42        $43            $45
Langlier index  $60        $63        $66        $68            $71
Magnesium       $17        $18        $19        $19            $20
(calculated)
Methane         $30        $32        $33        $35            $36
Nitrite         $25        $27        $28        $29            $30
Oil and grease, $50        $53        $55        $57            $60
total
Oxygen          $20        $21        $22        $23            $24
(dissolved)
Ph              $15        $16        $17        $17            $18
Phosphate,      $30        $32        $33        $35            $36
total
Residue, total  $25        $27        $28        $29            $30
Residue,        $25        $27        $28        $29            $30
volatile
Total dissolved $18        $19        $20        $21            $21
solids
Total Kjeldahl  $40        $42        $44        $45            $47
nitrogen, TKN
Total organic   $35        $37        $38        $40            $42
carbon
Total suspended $20        $21        $22        $23            $24
solids
Total           $125       $132       $137       $143           $148
trihalomethanes
Turbidity       $15        $16        $17        $17            $18
Volatile        $35        $37        $38        $40            $42
organic acids
Volatile
organics        $225       $237       $246       $256           $267
compounds
(524.2)
 
      (7)   Light department fees.
                                                                  Effective Effective Effective Effective
                                                        2023      January   January   January   January
                                                                  1, 2024   1, 2025   1, 2026   1, 2027
                                                        Charge    Fee       Fee       Fee       Fee
Account deposit
   Commercial                                        $100      $200      $208      $216      $225
                                                        60 days   60 days   60 days   60 days   60 days
   Industrial                                        estimated estimated estimated estimated estimated
                                                        charges   charges   charges   charges   charges
Residential
   Apartment                                         $80       $100      $104      $108      $112
   House/electric heat                               $300      $300      $312      $324      $337
   House/nonelectric heat                            $200      $200      $208      $216      $225
   Delinquent bill collection fee                    $15       $15       $16       $16       $17
New electric
   Polyphase service connection and meter charge     $200      $92       $96       $99       $103
   Single-phase service connection and meter charge  $75       $92       $96       $99       $103
Street light installation
   Arterial street light connection charge, non-city $50       $229      $239      $248      $258
installed
   Residential light connection charge, non-city     $35       $184      $191      $199      $206
installed
Turn-on (new tenant)                                    $10       $25       $26       $27       $28
Turn-on fee (after hours)                               $50       $75       $78       $81       $84
Turn-on fee (service off for non-pay)                   $28       $35       $40       $45       $50
Temporary Service-Cost based on actual time and materials.
Underground Secondary Service-installed and owned by the customer.
Primary Underground Service-customer to coordinate with utility and install raceway(s) as needed from
utility transformer to the designated power source.
 
(1992 Code, § 41-42) (Ord. 95-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 106-95, passed 8-7-
1995; Ord. 6-99, passed 1-4-1999; Ord. 27-99, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 43-01,
passed 5-14-2001; Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 98-07, passed 6-18-2007;
Ord. 99-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 47-11, passed
6-20-2011; Ord. 52-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 35-14, passed 6-17-2014; Ord. 31-
18, passed 4-17-2018; Ord. 59-19, passed 5-21-2019; Ord. 39-23, passed 6-20-
2023)
§ 51.011 COLLECTION.
   When the owner of property has been billed for sewer and water services and
the payments are delinquent more than 90 days, the delinquency may be assessed
on the real property and collected in the same manner as taxes are collected or
may be collected as otherwise permitted by law.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 2-16-2021)
ELECTRICITY
§ 51.025 SCHEDULE.
   The schedule of rates to be charged by the city light and power department
for furnishing electric current for light and power purposes shall be set out
in this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 41-46) (Ord. 73-77, passed 11-15-1977; Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-
1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991)
§ 51.026 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE RATE.
   The residential service rate for electrical service shall be as follows.
   (a)   Designation. RES.
   (b)   Applicable. Single-phase service for all domestic uses through one
meter. Water heating installations and space heating installations are to be
included under this classification.
   (c)   Multiple dwelling. Service for two or more apartments may be taken
through one meter under a single billing provided the kWh blocks shall be the
sum of the kWh blocks under a separate billing. Service for a commercial
business conducted in a residence and not occupying over 20% of the dwelling
area may be taken through the residential meter and shall be considered as an
additional dwelling unit for billing purposes.
   (d)   Rate.
      (1)   Energy charge (All kWh). $0.1145 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $0.1191 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $0.1227 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$0.1264 for service from January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021; $0.1301
for service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $0.1340 for
service beginning January 1, 2023.
      (2)   Fixed charge. $6.50 per month for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $6.76 per month from January 1, 2019, through
December 31, 2019; $6.96 per month for service from January 1, 2020, through
December 31, 2020; $7.17 per month for service from January 1, 2021, through
December 31, 2021; $7.39 per month for service from January 1, 2022, through
December 31, 2022; and $7.61 for service beginning January 1, 2023.
(1992 Code, § 41-47) (Ord. 73-77, passed 11-15-1977; Ord. 2-84, passed 1-3-
1984; Ord. 81-86, passed 9-15-1986; Ord. 94-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90,
passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993;
Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 94-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 75-08, passed
6-16-2008; Ord. 62-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 53-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 45-
11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 49-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 44-16, passed 5-3-
2016; Ord. 112-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 40-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.027 COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PRIMARY SERVICE RATE.
   The commercial/industrial primary service rate for electrical service shall
be as follows.
   (a)   Designation. C/IP.
   (b)   Applicable. To commercial and industrial customers for three-phase
service for all uses, where the monthly demand exceeds 750 kW, and the facility
is primary metered.
   (c)   Character of service. Three-phase, 60 hertz, at available primary
voltages.
   (d)   Rate.
      (1)   Demand charge (all kW). $14.77 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $15.36 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $15.82 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$16.30 for service from January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021; $16.78 for
service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $17.29 for service
beginning January 1, 2023.
      (2)   Energy charge (all kWh). $0.0378 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $0.0394 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $0.0406 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$0.0418 for service from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021; $0.0431 for
service January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $0.0443 for service
beginning January 1, 2023.
      (3)   Fixed charge. $14.77 per month for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $15.36 per month from January 1, 2019, through
December 31, 2019; $15.82 per month for service from January 1, 2020, through
December 31, 2020; $16.30 from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021;
$16.78 per month for service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022;
and $17.29 for service beginning January 1, 2023.
   (e)   Metered demand. The metered demand shall be the maximum kilowatt
demand established by the consumer for any period of 15 consecutive minutes
during the month as indicated or recorded by a demand meter.
   (f)   Power factor penalty. If the customer’s average monthly power factor
falls below 90%, the utility may adjust the metered demand by the ratio of 90%
to the measured average monthly power factor in percent.
   (g)   Adjusted demand. The adjusted demand consists of the metered demand
adjusted for power factor, if applicable.
   (h)   Billing demand. The demand to be billed shall be the adjusted demand
for the month but not less than 50% of the highest demand billing dollars
during the preceding 11 months.
(1992 Code, § 41-48) (Ord. 73-77, passed 11-15-1977; Ord. 2-84, passed 1-3-
1984; Ord. 81-86, passed 9-15-1986; Ord. 94-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90,
passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993;
Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 94-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 75-08, passed
6-16-2008; Ord. 62-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 53-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 45-
11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 49-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 44-16, passed 5-3-
2016; Ord. 112-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 40-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.028 LARGE COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL SERVICE RATE.
   The large commercial and industrial service rate for electrical service
shall be as follows:
   (a)   Designation. LCS.
   (b)   Applicable. To commercial or industrial customers for single- or
three-phase lighting, heating, cooking, refrigeration, power to motors, and
other approved uses where the monthly peak demand exceeds 25 kW or where
monthly metered energy exceeds 6000 kWh.
   (c)   Character of service. Single- or three-phase, 60 hertz, at available
secondary voltages.
   (d)   Rate.
      (1)   Fixed charge. $14.77 per month for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $15.36 per month from January 1, 2019, through
December 31, 2019; $15.82 per month for service from January 1, 2020, through
December 31, 2020; $16.30 per month for service from January 1, 2021, through
December 31, 2021; $16.78 per month for service from January 1, 2022, through
December 31, 2022; and $17.29 for service beginning January 1, 2023.
      (2)   Energy charge (all kWh). $0.0378 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $0.0394 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $0.0406 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$0.0418 for service from January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021; $0.0431
for service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $0.0443 for
service beginning January 1, 2023.
      (3)   Demand charge (all kW). $17.83 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $18.54 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $19.10 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$19.67 for service from January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021; $20.26 for
service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $20.87 for service
beginning January 1, 2023.
   (e)   Meter demand. The meter demand shall be the maximum kilowatt demand
established by the consumer for any period of 15 consecutive minutes during the
month as indicated or recorded by a demand meter.
   (f)   Power factor penalty. If the customer’s average monthly power factor
falls below 90%, the utility may adjust the meter demand by the ratio of 90% to
the measured average monthly power factor in percent.
   (g)   Adjusted demand. The adjusted demand consists of the meter demand
adjusted for power factor, if applicable.
   (h)   Billing demand. The demand to be billed shall be the adjusted demand
for the month but not less than 50% of the highest demand billing dollars
during the preceding 11 months.
   Commercial or industrial customers with large new or expanding loads of 1
megawatt or more may qualify for incentive pass-through energy rates if the
city’s wholesale electric supplier offers such incentive rates, the customer
meets the wholesale supplier’s requirements for such rates, and the director of
public works approves use of such rates. Existing customers are eligible for
this rate only for the portion of its load qualifying for such pass-through
rates. Any customer qualifying for such rate shall pay the city for
transmission of energy and for facilities costs related to the new or expanding
loads, including infrastructure costs, customer service charges of $1,000 per
month, and any other charges related to the new or expanding loads. The charges
listed in §
51.028(d) through (h) may be waived by the director of public works for a
period of up to five years if necessary for the customer to qualify for such
incentive rate from the city’s wholesale electric supplier, provided that such
waiver would not require an increase in the rates for other customers.
(1992 Code, § 41-49A) (Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 94-07, passed 6-18-
2007; Ord. 75-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 62-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 53-10,
passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 45-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 49-12, passed 7-10-2012;
Ord. 44-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 31-18, passed 4-17-2018; Ord. 112-18, passed
12-4-2018; Ord. 40-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.029 SMALL COMMERCIAL SERVICE RATE.
   The small commercial service rate for electrical service shall be as
follows:
   (a)   Designation. SCS.
   (b)   Applicable. To all commercial or industrial customers for single- or
three-phase lighting, heating, cooking, refrigeration, power to motors, and
other approved uses, where the monthly metered energy does not exceed 6000 kWh.
   (c)   Character of service. Single- or three-phase, 60 Hertz, at available
secondary voltages.
   (d)   Rate.
      (1)   Fixed charge. $9.75 per month for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $10.14 per month from January 1, 2019, through
December 31, 2019; $10.44 per month for service from January 1, 2020, through
December 31, 2020; $10.76 per month for service from January 1, 2021, through
December 31, 2021; $11.08 per month for service from January 1, 2022, through
December 31, 2022; and $11.41 for service beginning January 1, 2023.
      (2)   Energy charge (all kWh). $0.1323 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $0.1376 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $0.1417 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$0.1460 for service from January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021; $0.1504
for service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $0.1549 for
service beginning January 1, 2023.
(1992 Code, § 41-49B) (Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 94-07, passed 6-18-
2007; Ord. 75-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 62-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 53-10,
passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 45-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 49-12, passed 7-10-2012;
Ord. 44-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 112-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 40-23, passed
6-20-2023)
§ 51.030 CITY-SERVED STREETLIGHTING RATE.
   The city streetlighting rate is applicable to all streetlights served with
electricity by the light department including traffic signals and recreational
lighting.
   (a)   Designation. SL.
   (b)   Rate.
      (1)   Energy charge (all kWh). $0.0909 for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $0.0946 from January 1, 2019, through December 31,
2019; $0.0974 for service from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2020;
$0.1004 for service from January 1, 2021, through December 31, 2021; $0.1034
for service from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2022; and $0.1065 for
service beginning January 1, 2023.
      (2)   Fixed charge. $7.74 per month for service from January 1, 2018,
through December 31, 2018; $8.04 per month from January 1, 2019, through
December 31, 2019; $8.28 per month for service from January 1, 2020, through
December 31, 2020; $8.53 per month for service from January 1, 2021, through
December 31, 2021; $8.79 per month for service from January 1, 2022, through
December 31, 2022; and $9.05 for service beginning January 1, 2023.
(1992 Code, § 41-50) (Ord. 73-77, passed 11-15-1977; Ord. 2-84, passed 1-3-
1984; Ord. 81-86, passed 9-15-1986; Ord. 94-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90,
passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993;
Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 94-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 75-08, passed
6-16-2008; Ord. 62-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 53-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 45-
11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 49-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 44-16, passed 5-3-
2016; Ord. 112-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 40-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.031 [REPEALED.]
§ 51.032 NIGHT WATCH FLOOD SERVICE RATE.
   The night watch flood service rate for electrical service shall be as
follows.
   (a)   Designation. NWF.
   (b)   Applicable. For any customer for illumination of private property.
   (c)   Rate.
          Monthly Charge
Lamp Size 2023 Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
               January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
              Monthly Charge
                     Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective
Lamp Size     2023   January 1, January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
                     2024
High Pressure Sodium (HPS)
100 Watts     $9.83  $10        $11             $11             $11
250 Watts     $17.19 $18        $19             $19             $20
400 Watts     $29.47 $31        $32             $33             $34
Light-emitting diode (LED)
4,000 to      $13.05 $14        $14             $15             $15
16,000 Lumens
17,000 to     $19.94 $21        $22             $22             $23
26,000 Lumens
 
      (1)   The monthly charges are based on mounting the high pressure sodium
light on a suitable existing pole and the furnishing of up to 100 feet of
service wire.
      (2)   Where a new pole must be installed, the customer shall make
arrangements with the utilities department for payment of the additional
facilities and labor costs incurred in the installation.
(1992 Code, § 41-54) (Ord. 73-77, passed 11-15-1977; Ord. 102-78, passed 10-23-
1978; Ord. 2-84, passed 1-3-1984; Ord. 81-86, passed 9-15-1986; Ord. 94-89,
passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991;
Ord. 105-06, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 94-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 75-08, passed
6-16-2008; Ord. 62-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 49-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 44-
16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 41-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.033 REVIEW OF RATES.
   Electric utility rates shall be reviewed at least biennially and shall be
revised as necessary to keep revenues reasonably in balance with anticipated
expenditures. Excess funds may be carried forward from year to year in the
respective accounts. This rate review shall continue the fair and equitable
distribution of all costs to all of the system’s users.
(1992 Code, § 41-56) (Ord. 73-77, passed 11-15-1977; Ord. 102-78, passed 10-23-
1978; Ord. 2-84, passed 1-3-1984; Ord. 81-86, passed 9-15-1986)
WATER
§ 51.045 SCHEDULE.
   The schedule of rates to be charged by the city for water furnished by the
city to consumers thereof shall be as set out in this subchapter. For new non-
seasonal accounts, MONTHLY AVERAGE means the average monthly water usage over
12 consecutive months. For seasonal and irrigation accounts, MONTHLY AVERAGE
means the average water usage during two or more consecutive months of usage.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.201; 1992 Code, § 41-57) (Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-1985;
Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 39-03, passed 5-
12-2003)
§ 51.046 RESIDENTIAL; INSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (a)   The following rates are hereby established for consumers taking water
from the city water system within the city limits for residential purposes.
   (b)   Applicable. To single-family residences, multi-family, apartments,
mobile homes and the like.
   (c)   Charges as follows:
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)   January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
           2019       2024       2025
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)   January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
           2019       2024       2025
5/8        $3.29      $3.48      $3.66      $3.81           $3.96
3/4        $4.40      $4.67      $4.90      $5.10           $5.30
1          $8.09      $8.58      $9.01      $9.37           $9.74
1-1/2      $17.06     $18.08     $18.98     $19.74          $20.53
2          $23.63     $25.05     $26.30     $27.35          $28.45
3          $52.59     $55.74     $58.53     $60.87          $63.31
4          $85.46     $90.59     $95.12     $98.92          $102.88
6          $167.66    $177.72    $186.60    $194.07         $201.83
 
Monthly Volume Charge
              Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
Single-Family January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
              2019       2024       2025
Monthly Volume Charge
Single-      Effective  Effective     Effective     Effective     Effective
Family       January 1, January 1,    January 1,    January 1,    January 1,
             2019       2024          2025          2026          2027
0 CCF to 7   $3.75 per  $3.97 per CCF $4.17 per CCF $4.34 per CCF $4.51 per CCF
CCF          CCF
8 CCF to 50  $4.01 per  $4.25 per CCF $4.46 per CCF $4.64 per CCF $4.82 per CCF
CCF          CCF
51 CCF to    $7.48 per  $7.92 per CCF $8.32 per CCF $8.65 per CCF $9.00 per CCF
150 CCF      CCF
Over 150 CCF $11.22 per $11.90 per    $12.49 per    $12.99 per    $13.51 per
             CCF        CCF           CCF           CCF           CCF
Multi-Family (Single Meter)
Less than
2.5 times    $3.75 per  $3.97 per CCF $4.17 per CCF $4.34 per CCF $4.51 per CCF
monthly      CCF
average
Greater than
2.5 times    $7.48 per  $7.92 per CCF $8.32 per CCF $8.65 per CCF $9.00 per CCF
monthly      CCF
average
 
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.201; 1992 Code, § 41-58) (Ord. 1988, passed 7-6-1959;
Ord. 2170, passed 12-3-1962; Ord. 2523, passed 1-22-1968; Ord. 80-73, passed 9-
24-1973; Ord. 65-74, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 78-75, passed 11-24-1975; Ord. 98-
76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 89-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord. 94-79, passed 10-8-
1979; Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-30-1985; Ord. 88-87,
passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-1990;
Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 141-96, passed
12-16-1996; Ord. 132-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 39-03, passed 5-12-2003; Ord.
95-03, passed 10-14-2003; Ord. 18-06, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 162-06, passed 12-
18-2006; Ord. 92-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 78-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 61-
09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 47-11, passed 6-20-
2011; Ord. 52-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 46-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 42-23,
passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.047 RESIDENTIAL; OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (a)   The following rates are hereby established for consumers taking water
from the city water system outside the city limits for residential purposes.
   (b)   Charges as follows.
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)    January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
            2019       2024       2025
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)    January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
            2019       2024       2025
5/8         $7.03      $7.45      $7.82      $8.14           $8.46
3/4         $9.76      $10.35     $10.86     $11.30          $11.75
1           $16.43     $17.42     $18.29     $19.02          $19.78
1-1/2       $37.31     $39.55     $41.53     $43.19          $44.91
2           $53.76     $56.99     $59.83     $62.23          $64.72
3           $126.09    $133.66    $140.34    $145.95         $151.79
4           $208.22    $220.71    $231.75    $241.02         $250.66
6           $413.68    $438.50    $460.43    $478.84         $498.00
 
Monthly Volume Charge
              Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
Single-Family January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
              2019       2024       2025
Monthly Volume Charge
              Effective     Effective     Effective  Effective  Effective
Single-Family January 1,    January 1,    January 1, January 1, January 1,
              2019          2024          2025       2026       2027
0 CCF to 7    $9.04 per CCF $9.58 per CCF $10.06 per $10.46 per $10.88 per CCF
CCF                                       CCF        CCF
8 CCF to 50   $9.67 per CCF $10.25 per    $10.76 per $11.19 per $11.64 per CCF
CCF                         CCF           CCF        CCF
51 CCF to 150 $18.06 per    $19.14 per    $20.10 per $20.90 per $21.74 per CCF
CCF           CCF           CCF           CCF        CCF
Over 150 CCF  $27.10 per    $28.73 per    $30.16 per $31.37 per $32.62 per CCF
              CCF           CCF           CCF        CCF
Multi-Family (Single Meter)
Less than 2.5                             $10.06 per $10.46 per
times monthly $9.04 per CCF $9.58 per CCF CCF        CCF        $10.88 per CCF
average
Greater than
2.5 times     $9.67 per CCF $10.25 per    $10.76 per $11.19 per $11.64 per CCF
monthly                     CCF           CCF        CCF
average
 
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.202; 1992 Code, § 41-59) (Ord. 2170, passed 12-3-1962;
Ord. 80-73, passed 9-24-1973; Ord. 65-74, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 78-75, passed
11-24-1975; Ord. 98-76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 89-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord.
94-79, passed 10-8-1979; Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-
30-1985; Ord. 88-87, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-
90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993;
Ord. 132-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 39-03, passed 5-12-2003; Ord. 95-03, passed
10-14-2003; Ord. 18-06, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 162-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord.
92-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 78-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 61-09, passed 6-15-
2009; Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 47-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 52-12,
passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 46-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 42-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.048 COMMERCIAL; INSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (a)   The following rates are hereby established for consumers taking water
from the city water system within the city limits for commercial purposes in
any quantity not exceeding 6,500,000 cubic feet per month.
   (b)   Applicable. To any facility operating as a business, either profit or
nonprofit, and all publicly owned facilities, excepting consumers listed under
residential.
   (c)   Charges as follows.
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)    January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
            2019       2024       2025
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size   Effective  Effective     Effective     Effective     Effective
(inches)     January 1, January 1,    January 1,    January 1,    January 1,
             2019       2024          2025          2026          2027
5/8          $12.92     $13.70        $14.38        $14.96        $15.56
3/4          $14.07     $14.92        $15.66        $16.29        $16.94
1            $15.56     $16.50        $17.32        $18.02        $18.74
1-1/2        $20.10     $21.30        $22.37        $23.26        $24.19
2            $24.92     $26.41        $27.73        $28.84        $30.00
3            $55.43     $58.75        $61.69        $64.16        $66.72
4            $90.08     $95.48        $100.26       $104.27       $108.44
6            $176.70    $187.31       $196.67       $204.54       $212.72
Less than
2.5 times    $3.21 per  $3.41 per CCF $3.58 per CCF $3.72 per CCF $3.87 per CCF
monthly      CCF
average
Greater than
2.5 times    $6.42 per  $6.80 per CCF $7.14 per CCF $7.43 per CCF $7.72 per CCF
monthly      CCF
average
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.201; 1992 Code, § 41-60) (Ord. 1988, passed 7-6-1959;
Ord. 2170, passed 12-3-1962; Ord. 2523, passed 1-22-1968; Ord. 80-73, passed 9-
24-1973; Ord. 65-74, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 70-74, passed 12-16-1974; Ord. 78-
75, passed 11-24-1975; Ord. 98-76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 89-77, passed 12-27-
1977; Ord. 94-79, passed 10-8-1979; Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 111-85,
passed 12-30-1985; Ord. 88-87, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-89, passed 9-11-1989;
Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed
12-6-1993; Ord. 141-96, passed 12-16-1996; Ord. 132-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord.
39-03, passed 5-12-2003; Ord. 95-03, passed 10-14-2003; Ord. 18-06, passed 2-
13-2006; Ord. 162-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 92-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 78-
08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 61-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-
2010; Ord. 47-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 52-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 46-16,
passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 42-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.049 COMMERCIAL; OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (a)   The following rates are hereby established for consumers taking water
from the city water system outside the city limits for commercial purposes in
any quantity not exceeding 6,500,000 cubic feet per month.
   (b)   Charges as follows.
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)    January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
            2019       2024       2025
Monthly Fixed Charge
Meter Size  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective       Effective
(inches)    January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
            2019       2024       2025
5/8         $31.67     $33.57     $35.25     $36.66          $38.13
3/4         $34.57     $36.64     $38.48     $40.02          $41.62
1           $38.27     $40.57     $42.59     $44.30          $46.07
1-1/2       $49.60     $52.58     $55.20     $57.41          $59.71
2           $61.64     $65.34     $68.61     $71.35          $74.20
3           $137.93    $146.21    $153.52    $159.66         $166.04
4           $224.58    $238.05    $249.96    $259.96         $270.35
6           $441.16    $467.63    $491.01    $510.65         $531.08
 
 
Monthly      Effective  Effective     Effective     Effective     Effective
Volume       January 1, January 1,    January 1,    January 1,    January 1,
Charge       2019       2024          2025          2026          2027
Less than
2.5 times    $7.75 per  $8.22 per CCF $8.63 per CCF $8.98 per CCF $9.34 per CCF
monthly      CCF
average
Greater than
2.5 times    $15.48 per $16.41 per    $17.23 per    $17.92 per    $18.64 per
monthly      CCF        CCF           CCF           CCF           CCF
average
 
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.202; 1992 Code, § 41-61) (Ord. 2170, passed 12-3-1962;
Ord. 80-73, passed 9-24-1973; Ord. 65-74, passed 12-2-1974; Ord. 78-75, passed
11-24-1975; Ord. 98-76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord. 89-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord.
94-79, passed 10-8-1979; Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-
30-1985; Ord. 88-87, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-
90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993;
Ord. 132-98, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 39-03, passed 5-12-2003; Ord. 95-03, passed
10-14-2003; Ord. 18-06, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 162-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord.
92-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 78-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 61-09, passed 6-15-
2009; Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 47-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 52-12,
passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 46-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 42-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.050 LARGE INDUSTRIAL RATES.
   The following rates are hereby established for customers meeting the
following criteria:
   (a)   Located in the I-2 general industrial district;
   (b)   Monthly usage greater than 10,000 CCF on a 12-month rolling average;
and
   (c)   Does not exceed a monthly peak greater than 1.5 times the 12-month
rolling average.
 
         Effective     Effective     Effective     Effective     Effective
         January 1,    January 1,    January 1,    January 1,    January 1,
         2019          2024          2025          2026          2027
Monthly
Customer $1,419.35     $1,504.51     $1,579.74     $1,642.93     $1,708.64
Charge
Monthly
Volume   $1.91 per CCF $2.02 per CCF $2.13 per CCF $2.21 per CCF $2.30 per CCF
Charge
 
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.201; 1992 Code, § 41-62) (Ord. 1988, passed 7-6-1959;
Ord. 2170, passed 12-3-1962; Ord. 2523, passed 1-22-1968; Ord. 65-74, passed
12-2-1974; Ord. 78-75, passed 11-24-1975; Ord. 98-76, passed 11-29-1976; Ord.
89-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord. 94-79, passed 10-8-1979; Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-
1985; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-30-1985; Ord. 88-87, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-
89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991;
Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 61-94, passed 7-5-1994; Ord. 141-96, passed
12-16-1996; Ord. 18-06, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 162-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord.
92-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 78-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 61-09, passed 6-15-
2009; Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 47-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 52-12,
passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 46-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 20-21, passed 2-16-2021;
Ord. 42-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.051 [RESERVED].
§ 51.052 FIXED CHARGE DEFINED.
   The term FIXED CHARGE is hereby defined as the minimum fixed customer charge
required for cost of service and to provide adequate water and sewer for every
size of service connection.
(1992 Code, § 41-65) (Ord. 89-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord. 94-79, passed 10-8-
1979; Ord. 4-85, passed 1-14-1985; Ord. 42-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.053 WHOLESALE WATER RATES.
   The following wholesale water rates are hereby established.
   (a)   These rates shall be effective January 1, 2017.
 
Monthly      Effective  Effective     Effective     Effective     Effective
Volume       January 1, January 1,    January 1,    January 1,    January 1,
Charge       2019       2024          2025          2026          2027
Less than
2.5 times    $5.53 per  $5.86 per CCF $6.15 per CCF $6.40 per CCF $6.66 per CCF
monthly      CCF
average
Greater than
2.5 times    $11.06 per $11.72 per    $12.31 per    $12.80 per    $13.31 per
monthly      CCF        CCF           CCF           CCF           CCF
average
 
(1992 Code, § 41-66) (Ord. 93-00, passed 10-10-2000; Ord. 39-03, passed 5-12-
2003; Ord. 18-06, passed 2-13-2006; Ord. 162-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 92-07,
passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 78-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 61-09, passed 6-15-2009;
Ord. 56-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 47-11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 52-12, passed
7-10-2012; Ord. 46-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 42-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.054 RATES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   The city shall provide water at in-city rates to residential users outside
the city residing on the following legally described property:
   Krulls Tract 2 in SW1/4 NW1/4 of Section 32, T101N, R48W, Minnehaha County,
SD;
   SW1/4 SW1/4 of Section 32, Township 101 North, Range 48 West of the 5th
P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   Lots 1 and 2 in Section 9, Township 100 North, Range 49 West of the 5th
P.M., Lincoln County, SD;
   Lots 3 and 4 of Section 10, Township 100, Range 49, Lincoln County, SD;
   Tracts 1 and 3 of RMB Family Addition, an addition to the City of Sioux
Falls, Lincoln County, SD;
   Lots 9, 10, and 11 in Block 1, except Lots H-1, in Cherry Creek Addition in
the W1/2 SE1/4 of Section 15-T101N-R50W of the 5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   Tract 1 and the W1/2 of Tract 2, all in the NW1/4 of NW1/4 of Section 22-
T101N-R50W of the 5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   Mellegard Tract 1 in the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 22-T101N-R50W of the
5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   Tract 7 of Rocky Ridge Addition in Section 22-T101N-R50W, Minnehaha County,
SD;
   N393.8' of the E1320' of the S1/2 SE1/4 of Section 21-T101N-R50W of the 5th
P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   Daggett's Tract No. 1 in SE1/4 of SE1/4 of Section 21-T101N-R50W of the 5th
P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   S132' of the W301.04' of the E351.04' of the N670.5' of the S1/2 SE1/4 of
Section 21-T101N-R50W of the 5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   Tract 1 of TM Schultz Addition in the SE1/4 of Section 21-T101N-R50W of the
5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD;
   S120' of the N679' of the E379.5' of the N1/2 NE1/4, Section 28-T101N-R50W
of the 5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD; and
   S120' of the N799' of the E379.5' of the N1/2 NE1/4 of Section 28-T101N-R50W
of the 5th P.M., Minnehaha County, SD.
(1992 Code, § 41-67) (Ord. 41-01, passed 5-14-2001; Ord. 42-18, passed 5-8-
2018; Ord. 94-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 51.055 INTERIM RATES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   The city shall provide water at in-city rates for residential water service
on property shown in the 2020 Prairie Meadow Area Water Map approved and filed
with the City Clerk. Said rates shall be in effect for water use for a period
of 18 months beginning on the date the city assumes MCWC's obligations under
the Water Agreement, unless the rates are extended by resolution or ordinance
of this City Council for a longer period in conjunction with a future
annexation plan or agreement.
(Ord. 25-20, passed 3-10-2020)
WATER DISTRIBUTION PLATTING FEE
§ 51.065 WATER DISTRIBUTION PLATTING FEE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to impose a water distribution platting
fee on real property to recover the platted or replatted developed real
property’s proportionate share of the costs to expand and sustain the potable
water distribution system.
   The potable water distribution system is defined as water mains and
appurtenances necessary to construct and sustain a system of water mains 16
inches or greater in diameter in accordance with the city’s water distribution
system master plan and current design standards.
   (a)   It is the intent of this subchapter to charge platted or replatted
real property its proportional share of the cost to expand and sustain the
potable water distribution system necessitated by the development of the real
property.
   (b)   The city council finds the amount of the water distribution platting
fee based on rational nexus and rough proportionality standards has been
appropriately determined according to the analysis described in the Nexus Study
for Arterial Street and Water Distribution Platting Fees, prepared by Duncan
Associates (revised May 2015).
   (c)   This subchapter incorporates the Development Area Maps as set forth in
the city’s comprehensive plan.
   (d)   (1)   For platted or replatted real property located in Tier I or Tier
II of the city’s comprehensive plan, the water distribution platting fee shall
be paid prior to approval of any plat or replat.
      (2)   For platted or replatted real property located outside of Tier I
and Tier II but within the
joint jurisdiction area detailed in the Development Area Maps as described in
subsection (c), the owner may defer payment of water distribution platting
fees. Any deferred payment of water distribution platting fees shall be due and
payable for the platted or replatted real property at the earliest of:
         A.   Annexation of such platted or replatted real property or such
platted or replatted real property’s location within Tier I or Tier II; or
         B.   The owner’s application of request for rezoning or other required
city conditional use permit or license on such platted or replatted real
property; or
         C.   The city’s provision of the water distribution system to or
immediately adjacent or adjoining the platted or replatted real property.
   The amount of such platting fee shall be the fee amount in effect at the
time of the event triggering the platting or replatting fee. Unpaid and
deferred platting and replatting fees shall constitute an encumbrance and lien
running with the land upon the platted or replatted real property and the
obligation to pay shall be binding upon the owner, and the owner’s successors,
successors in title, and assigns.
      (3)   The city may increase, waive, reduce or defer the payments if:
         A.   the plat or replat is a minor plat or replat;
         B.   the plat or replat is a transfer of ownership;
         C.   as set forth in a Development Agreement; or
         D.   based on the city’s individualized determination as to the nature
and extent of the impact of the development.
      (4)   The city may condition approval of zoning or other city required
conditional use permits and licenses until all platting fees are paid in full
or arrangements for payment are made.
   (e)   The water distribution platting fee shall apply regardless of zoning
classification and is hereby established as follows:
 
Per acre fee paid on and after January 1, 2017 $1,970 per acre
Per acre fee paid on and after January 1, 2018 $2,019 per acre
Per acre fee paid on and after January 1, 2019 $2,070 per acre
Per acre fee paid on and after January 1, 2020 $2,121 per acre
Per acre fee paid on and after January 1, 2021 $2,175 per acre
 
   The amount to be paid shall be determined by multiplying the water
distribution platting fee per acre by the total number of acres contained
within the plat or replat, less the following:
      (1)   Land dedicated or to be dedicated to the city for right-of-way for
an arterial street; and
      (2)   Areas zoned REC recreation, AG agricultural or CN conservation.
   (f)   Replats shall be subject to the water distribution platting fee for
areas for which fees were deferred or for which the replatted real property may
receive new water system taps and water meter service.
   (g)   The value of contributions made by the fee payer toward the cost of
expanding and sustaining the potable water distribution system in order to
serve the real property to be platted or replatted may be subtracted from water
distribution platting fees otherwise due for the real property. The value of
the
contribution shall be determined by the city engineer, based on information
submitted by the fee payer and shall be in compliance with applicable law. No
credit will be given for contributions to the extent they exceed city
requirements. Credit for contributions not claimed prior to payment of the
water distribution platting fees shall be waived.
   (h)   Water distribution platting fee revenues shall be deposited into an
interest-bearing account and segregated from other funds of the city. The
revenues collected and interest earned shall be used solely for expanding and
sustaining the potable water distribution system. The location and size for
this potable water distribution system expansion to be funded with the water
distribution platting fee revenues shall be determined based upon the most
current water distribution system master plan as approved by the city engineer.
   (i)   Periodically, the Nexus Study for Arterial Street and Water
Distribution Platting Fees, prepared by Duncan Associates, will be updated. The
updates shall review fees and recommend adjustment based on then current costs
of construction. If an amendment is necessary, the information shall be
provided to the city council together with a proposed ordinance amendment.
Pending any such adjustments, the water distribution platting fee shown in the
table above shall increase by 2.5% per year for years after 2021.
   (j)   A person harmed by an administrative decision of the city under this
section may appeal the decision through the procedures provided in
Administrative Appeals subchapter, §§ 30.040 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances,
as that subchapter may be amended from time to time, except as modified below.
      (1)   The appeal shall be heard in a closed hearing by a hearing examiner
with substantial experience in land development, and the cost shall be divided
equally between the city and the appellant.
      (2)   The hearing examiner may amend, remand, or reverse the decision of
the city only if clear error is found in:
         A.   The determination of the number of acres subject to the water
distribution platting fee;
         B.   The determination of the applicable zoning classification for
determination of the water distribution platting fee;
         C.   The value of any credit;
         D.   Any mathematical computation; or
         E.   Determining or applying any other objective fact on which the
decision was based.
      (3)   If the hearing examiner finds an error and has adequate facts to
correct the error (such as correcting the number of acres used in the
computation or correcting a mathematical error), the hearing examiner shall
amend the decision accordingly and the decision shall be binding as amended.
Otherwise, the hearing examiner shall reverse the decision or remand it with
instructions for correcting the error(s) found.
      (4)   The provision for appeals under this division (j) is not intended
to serve as a provision for variances or waivers; issues of hardship or other
factors that might be considered in granting a zoning variance shall not be
considered by the hearing examiner in reaching a decision.
      (5)   Unless the hearing examiner finds clear error, the hearing officer
shall affirm the original administrative decision.
      (6)   The decision of the hearing examiner may be subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 41-68) (Ord. 114-08, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 11-13, passed 3-19-
2013; Ord. 30-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 62-24, passed 7-16-2024)
SEWER
§ 51.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the terms used in this subchapter are
defined in accordance with §
53.002.
(1992 Code, § 41-70) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 51.081 WASTEWATER CHARGES FOR SIOUX FALLS LOCAL WASTEWATER CUSTOMERS.
   Wastewater charges are hereby established for Sioux Falls local wastewater
customers of the wastewater facilities as follows:
   (a)   Residential rate. Per 100 cubic feet for service:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$5.29           $5.61           $5.94           $6.24           $6.55
 
In circumstances where there is no prior water usage for calculating a sewer
rate, the charge shall based on estimates prepared by the city.
      (1)   Actual water use for the most recent months of November, December,
January, and February.
      (2)   All other months shall be billed based on the average water usage
during the most recent months of November, December, January, and February.
      (3)   The city may adjust the months used for calculating wastewater
charges if unusual weather conditions promote outdoor water use.
      (4)   If no consumption history is available for the period of November
through February, 7.00 ccf will be used to determine the wastewater charges or
on estimates prepared by the city.
   (b)   Domestic only commercial rate. Domestic only commercial users shall be
billed based on the volume of water used and discharged to the POTW. The volume
charge shall be per 100 cubic feet for service.
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$6.07           $6.44           $6.82           $7.16           $7.52
 
   and shall be determined by:
      (1)   Separate water meter(s).
      (2)   Actual water use for the months of November, December, January, and
February.
      (3)   All other months shall be billed based on the average water usage
during the months of November, December, January, and February.
      (4)   Estimates prepared by the city.
      (5)   The city may adjust the months used for calculating wastewater
charges if unusual weather conditions promote outdoor water use.
   (c)   Commercial rate. Commercial users of the wastewater utility shall be
billed monthly. The monthly charge shall be based on the water consumption
during that month. The charge for each billing period shall be per 100 cubic
feet for service.
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$6.07           $6.44           $6.82           $7.16           $7.52
 
   (d)   Industrial rate.
      (1)   If the concentration of waste from any user exceeds 220 milligrams
per liter of BOD, 220 milligrams per liter of TSS, or 100 milligrams per liter
of grease, the industrial user shall be subject to the following rates:
 
Effective Dates
              January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
               2023       2024       2025
Flow, per      $2.09      $2.22      $2.35      $2.47           $2.59
1,000 gallons
BOD, per pound $0.2903    $0.3077    $0.3262    $0.3425         $0.3596
TSS, per pound $0.2790    $0.2958    $0.3135    $0.3292         $0.3456
TKN, per pound $1.0641    $1.1280    $1.1956    $1.2554         $1.3182
Grease, per    $1.0641    $1.1280    $1.1956    $1.2554         $1.3182
pound
 
      (2)   All industrial users shall be subject to a monthly fixed charge:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$20.53          $21.77          $23.07          $24.23          $25.44
 
      (3)   Industrial wastewater charges shall be based on waste discharged
during that month as monitored by the water reclamation department or by
estimates prepared by the city. For industries discharging only nonprocessed
domestic strength wastewater, the rate shall be per 1,000 gallons for service.
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$8.13           $8.61           $9.13           $9.59           $10.07
 
   (e)   Surcharges and rates for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loans 35 and
36. The following wastewater service surcharges shall be applicable to all
customers served by the Sioux Falls Wastewater System and shall be in
proportion to the volume of wastewater generated by the customers as follows:
      (1)   The surcharge for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 35 is $0.24
per 100 cubic feet of wastewater for the services listed in §
51.081(a) through (c) and $0.32 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater for services
listed in §
51.081(d). The surcharge for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 36 is $0.32
per 100 cubic feet of wastewater for the services listed in §
51.081(a) through (c) and $0.43 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater for services
listed in §
51.081(d).
      (2)   The volumetric rates for sanitary sewer service in §
51.081(a) through (d) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sioux Falls are
hereby reduced in an amount equivalent to the surcharge established above.
      (3)   The surcharges for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 35 shall
remain in effect until the bonds provided in Ordinance 44-15 are discharged or
defeased and all costs of the project approved in said ordinance have been
paid. The surcharges for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 36 shall remain
in effect until the bonds provided in Ordinance 113-15 are discharged or
defeased and all costs of the project approved in said ordinance have been
paid.
   (f)   Liquidated damages. If any user discharges waste that is in violation
of the provisions of §
53.040 including slug loads, the user may be subject to a charge equal to the
maximum of twice the industrial rates specified in subsection (d) above until
the violation ceases. The enforcement of liquidated damages shall be at the
discretion of the city and shall not be the city's sole remedy for such
violation(s).
   (g)   Fixed charge. Residential users shall be subject to a monthly charge
for service:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$5.62           $5.96           $6.32           $6.63           $6.96
 
All Commercial users shall be subject to a monthly charge for service:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$23.39          $24.80          $26.29          $27.60          $28.98
 
(1992 Code, § 41-71) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 8-82, passed 1-18-1982;
Ord. 24-82, passed 3-15-1982; Ord. 105-82, passed 10-4-1982; Ord. 4-85, passed
1-14-1985; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-30-1985; Ord. 82-86, passed 9-15-1986; Ord.
88-87, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-
1990; Ord. 102-90, passed 10-22-1990; Ord. 64-91, passed 8-5-1991; Ord. 84-93,
passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 132-98, passed 12-7-1998;
Ord. 131-99, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 42-01, passed 5-14-2001; Ord. 154-06,
passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 91-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 77-08, passed 6-16-2008;
Ord. 60-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 55-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 21-11, passed
4-8-2011; Ord. 22-11, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 50-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 35-
13, passed 6-18-2013; Ord. 35-14, passed 6-17-2014; Ord. 46-15, passed 5-12-
2015; Ord. 111-15, passed 11-17-2015; Ord. 47-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 114-18,
passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 109-19, passed 11-12-2019; Ord. 43-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.081.01 WASTEWATER CHARGES FOR REGIONAL WASTEWATER CUSTOMERS.
   Wastewater charges are hereby established for regional wastewater customers
of the regional wastewater system as follows. Regional wastewater customers
shall be billed monthly. The regional wastewater charge for each billing period
shall include the following:
   (a)   Fixed charge. Each regional wastewater customer shall be subject to a
monthly base charge:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$20.53          $21.77          $23.07          $24.23          $25.44
 
   (b)   In addition to the monthly fixed charge as set forth in subsection
(a), regional wastewater customer rates are hereby established for use of the
regional wastewater system as follows:
      (1)   Regional wastewater customer base rate per 1,000 gallons for
service:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$6.40           $6.78           $7.19           $7.55           $7.93
 
Credits for equalization and treatment shall apply as follows if all of the
following conditions are met for either criterion by the regional wastewater
customer:
Base Rate Credits
         A. Equalization. Equalization is defined as a regional wastewater
customer maintaining a 30-day continuous storage volume based on the regional
wastewater customer's average annual daily flow volume. The base rate credit
for maintaining the required equalization storage shall be per 1,000 gallons
for service:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$0.71           $0.75           $0.80           $0.84           $0.88
 
The city may inspect and request verification of the 30-day storage at any
time. If the 30-day storage is not continuously maintained, it will be at the
city's discretion to cease any further equalization credits until the 30-day
equalization storage is proven to exist to the satisfaction of the city unless
a prorated credit is granted pursuant to subsection C of this section. The
credit will not be applied thereafter until equalization storage has been
maintained continuously for a full billing cycle.
         B.   Treatment.
            1.   Treatment is defined as wastewater with the following strength
parameters or less:
               a.    BOD = 20mg/l
               b.   TKN = 10mg/l
               c.   TSS = 45mg/l
            2.   If all the strength parameters are met for testing performed
during the monthly billing cycle, the credit will be applied to the base rate.
The credit for maintaining all the required wastewater strength parameters
shall be per 1,000 gallons for service:
 
Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective
January 1, 2023 January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
$0.87           $0.92           $0.97           $1.02           $1.07
 
If at any time any one of the strength parameters is exceeded in a billing
cycle within a month, the monthly billing for such period will not include a
treatment credit to the base rate. The credit will not be applied thereafter
until all wastewater strength parameters are met for an entire calendar monthly
billing cycle.
         C.   Prorated base rate credits. At the discretion of the manager, a
prorated credit may be established through the wastewater joint powers
agreement for a regional wastewater customer that is unable to achieve the
above set criteria.
   (c)   Surcharges and rates for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loans 35 and
36. The following wastewater service surcharges shall be applicable to all
customers served by the Sioux Falls Wastewater System and shall be in
proportion to the volume of wastewater generated by the customers as follows:
      (1)   The surcharge for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 35 as
approved by Sioux Falls Ordinance 45-15 is $0.32 per 1,000 gallons of
wastewater for services listed in §
51.081.01(b)(1). The surcharge as approved by Sioux Falls Ordinance 112-15 is
$0.70 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater for services listed in §
51.081.01(b)(1).
      (2)   The volumetric rates for sanitary sewer service in §
51.081.01(b)(1) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sioux Falls are hereby
reduced in an amount equivalent to the surcharges established above.
      (3)   The surcharge for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 35 shall
remain in effect until the bonds provided in Ordinance 44-15 are discharged or
defeased and all costs of the project approved in said ordinance have been
paid. The surcharge for Clean Water State Revolving Fund Loan 36 shall remain
in effect until the bonds provided in Ordinance 113-15 are discharged or
defeased and all costs of the project approved in said ordinance have been
paid.
(Ord. 35-13, passed 6-18-2013; Ord. 35-14, passed 6-17-2014; Ord. 46-15, passed
5-12-2015; Ord. 111-15, passed 11-17-2015; Ord. 47-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord.
114-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 43-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 51.081.02 REGIONAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES (REGIONAL SDCs).
   (a)   Regional wastewater users. 
      (1)   All regional wastewater users will be required to pay to the city
the regional wastewater system development charges, "Regional SDCs," for
regional wastewater system capacity.
      (2)   The amount of the Regional SDCs shall be established from time to
time by the city via ordinance, which ordinances (and the Regional SDCs set
forth therein), as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated herein by
reference. The Regional SDC charges shall be charged based on the number and
size of water meters. The following table indicates the Regional SDC charges
based on water meter size:
 
Water Meter Size, Inch Regional Wastewater System "Regional SDC"
                       Cost Per Water Meter Size
5/8" to 3/4"           $2,391
1"                     $5,978
1 1/2"                 $11,954
2"                     $19,127
3"                     $35,863
4"                     $60,000
 
      (3)   The Regional SDC charges shall be determined and allocated to the
separate Regional SDC account annually.
      (4)   Where new development of an existing property requires a larger
water meter size, the Regional SDC shall be determined based on the difference
between the previous use water meter size Regional SDC and the new water meter
size Regional SDC.
      (5)   In no case will the Regional SDC be allowed a credit for decreased
capacity use or water meter size.
      (6)   Fire flows shall not be included in calculating the Regional SDC.
If fire flows do not have separate metered systems, the manager shall
administratively calculate the actual water use meter size for determining the
Regional SDC.
   (b)    Regional wastewater customers.
      (1)   The city shall request in January of each year the number and size
of new water meters installed for the previous year from all regional
wastewater customers. The regional wastewater customer shall submit the data to
the city by February 15 each year. The city will use this data for calculating
and invoicing the total annual Regional SDC for the regional wastewater
customer. The regional wastewater customer will be required to submit full
payment to the city by March 15 of each year for the previous year's Regional
SDC. If the regional wastewater customer is late on payment, interest shall
begin accruing on March 15 and shall continue to accrue until full payment is
received. Interest shall be in accordance with § 51.009.
      (2)   Quarterly reports of the number and sizes of water meters installed
in the noncity regional wastewater customers shall be submitted to the city by
January 15, April 15, July 15, and October 15 of each year.
      (3)   The city shall at any time have access to the water meter data for
the noncity regional wastewater customer for review, inspection, and audit.
(Ord. 35-13, passed 6-18-2013)
§ 51.081.03 SYSTEM CAPACITY CHARGE FOR WASTEWATER CUSTOMERS.
   As authorized by state law, a wastewater system capacity charge (SCC) is
hereby established for all Sioux Falls wastewater customers and shall be
imposed upon all development and redevelopment within the city and joint
jurisdiction areas for the purpose of recovering past capital costs and to fund
an equitable share of the capital costs of developing new capacity for those
developments and redevelopments that create the need for or increase the
demands on wastewater capital infrastructure improvements.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following mean:
      CAPITAL COSTS. Include:
         A.   Costs of construction or expansion of infrastructure that is
necessary to serve a new development or redevelopment, including the design,
surveying, engineering, environmental, and other professional fees that are
directly related to the construction or expansion of the POTW;
         B.   Land acquisition costs, including the purchase of interest in
land, any court award or settlement, appraisal, relocation service, negotiation
service, title insurance, expert witness, attorney, and other professional fees
that are directly related to the land acquisition;
         C.   Debt service;
         D.   Rate of return, including a risk premium for any potential
default; and
         E.   Directly related expenses incurred in preparing or updating the
comprehensive plan or zone improvement plan, including all administrative,
consulting, attorney, and other professional fees.
      DEVELOPMENT. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; or any use or extension of the use
of land resulting in placement of a water meter or the change in water meter
size, including change in meter size during redevelopment, renovation, or other
alteration of water meter size.
      OWNER. The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers
under a recorded land sales agreement and other persons having an interest of
record in the described real property.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). Any wastewater treatment plant
owned and operated by the city including all devices and systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of wastewater or
industrial waste and any conveyances that transport wastewater to the plant.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling that is designed for and occupied by
not more than one family and is surrounded by yards and is not attached to any
other dwelling by any means.
      WASTEWATER SYSTEM CAPACITY CHARGE (SCC). Does not include:
         A.   Any fees assessed or collected as part of an existing cost
recovery area;
         B.   A charge, fee, or assessment collected pursuant to city
assessment or tax increment financing district;
         C.   The cost of complying with requirements or conditions of
development agreements, finance agreements, or any other agreement as may exist
between the city and any owner.
   (b)   Wastewater system capacity charge (SCC) established.
      (1)   The wastewater SCC shall be charged for all installations of a city
water meter, which includes a change in meter size due to redevelopment,
renovation, or any other actions that may alter the water meter size, increased
usage of a capital improvement, connection to the city’s sanitary sewer system,
and upon all development or redevelopment within the joint jurisdiction
boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the city’s POTW.
      (2)   Wastewater SCCs shall not be expended for costs of the operation or
routine maintenance of city wastewater capital improvements.
   (c)   Wastewater system capacity charge (SCC) rates.
      (1)   The amount of the wastewater SCCs shall be established from time to
time by the city via ordinance, which ordinances, as amended from time to time,
are hereby incorporated herein by reference. The wastewater SCC shall be based
on the number and size of water meters. The following table indicates the
wastewater SCCs based on water meter size:
Wastewater System Capacity Charge
Effective 5/8" or 3/4" 1" 1-1/2" 2" 3" 4" 6"
Wastewater System Capacity Charge
Effective 5/8" or   1"        1-1/2"     2"         3"         4"         6"
          3/4"
January   $ -       $ -       $ -        $ -        $ -        $ -        $ -
1, 2025
January   $474.30   $1,185.75 $2,371.50  $3,794.40  $7,114.50  $11,857.50 $23,715.00
1, 2026
January   $948.60   $2,371.50 $4,743.00  $7,588.80  $14,229.00 $23,715.00 $47,430.00
1, 2027
January   $1,422.90 $3,557.25 $7,114.50  $11,383.20 $21,343.50 $35,572.50 $71,145.00
1, 2028
January   $1,897.20 $4,743.00 $9,486.00  $15,177.60 $28,458.00 $47,430.00 $94,860.00
1, 2029
January   $2,371.50 $5,928.75 $11,857.50 $18,972.00 $35,572.50 $59,287.50 $118,575.00
1, 2030
January   $2,845.80 $7,114.50 $14,229.00 $22,766.40 $42,687.00 $71,145.00 $142,290.00
1, 2031
January   $3,320.10 $8,300.25 $16,600.50 $26,560.80 $49,801.50 $83,002.50 $166,005.00
1, 2032
January   $3,794.40 $9,486.00 $18,972.00 $30,355.20 $56,916.00 $94,860.00 $189,720.00
1, 2033
January   $4,268.70 $10,671.7 $21,343.5  $34,149.6  $64,030.5  $106,717.  $213,435.
1, 2034             5         0          0          0          50         00
January   $4,743.00 $11,857.5 $23,715.0  $37,944.0  $71,145.0  $118,575.  $237,150.
1, 2035             0         0          0          0          00         00
 
      (2)   Wastewater SCC credits will be provided based on the difference in
the wastewater SCC amount for meter(s) that are removed and replaced with
larger meter(s) in cases of redevelopment or increased service requirements.
Credits will not be granted for decreased capacity use or reductions in water
meter size.
      (3)   Any wastewater SCC credit must stay with the property of origin and
may not be transferred to another property, sold, or otherwise transferred.
   (d)   Wastewater system capacity charge (SCC) phase-in rates in city cost
recovery areas.
 
Wastewater System Capacity Charge Phase-In Rates
Effective 5/8" or 1"        1-1/2"    2"        3"         4"         6"
          3/4"
January   $ -     $ -       $ -       $ -       $ -        $ -        $ -
1, 2025
January   $239.10 $597.75   $1,195.50 $1,912.80 $3,586.50  $5,977.50  $11,955.00
1, 2026
January   $478.20 $1,195.50 $2,391.00 $3,825.60 $7,173.00  $11,955.00 $23,910.00
1, 2027
January   $717.30 $1,793.25 $3,586.50 $5,738.40 $10,759.50 $17,932.50 $35,865.00
1, 2028
January   $956.40 $2,391.00 $4,782.00 $7,651.20 $14,346.00 $23,910.00 $47,820.00
1, 2029
 
      (1)   Wastewater SCCs will be collected based on the implementation table
in this division (d) for connections located in city sanitary sewer cost
recovery areas in years 2026, 2027, and 2028.
      (2)   All city sanitary sewer cost recovery areas shall be terminated on
January 1, 2029, and thereafter city cost recovery fees shall not be collected
by the city.
      (3)   Property that paid the cost recovery fees prior to December 31,
2028, will be eligible to pay the wastewater SCC phase-in rates in the table in
thisdivision (d) until December 31, 2029. Service connections completed on or
after January 1, 2030, will be charged the wastewater SCC outlined in division
(c) of this section.
      (4)   Property that did not pay the cost recovery fees prior to December
31, 2028, will be charged the wastewater SCC outlined in division (c) of this
section.
   (e)   Calculated wastewater SCCs.
      (1)   Wastewater SCCs shall be calculated on an equivalent flow basis for
any combination of meters three inches in diameter and greater for primary
forms WM1 (Warehouse and Manufacturing—Light), WM2 (Warehouse and
Manufacturing—Heavy), WM4 (Airport Facilities), BCF3 (Business and Community
Facilities—Large).
      (2)   The city reserves the right to review, verify, and adjust the
calculated wastewater SCC based on an equivalent flow basis at any time.
      (3)   Wastewater SCC shall be reviewed anytime a facility remodels,
expands, or changes processes.
      (4)   Facilities shall be charged the additional adjusted calculated
wastewater SCC amount in the year of adjustment.
      (5)   Credits will not be granted for decreased capacity use or
reductions in water meter size.
      (6)   In no circumstances shall the calculated wastewater SCC be less
than the yearly charge as shown in the tables found in divisions (c) and (d) of
this section.
   (f)   Collection of wastewater system capacity charge (SCC). Collection of
the wastewater SCC shall utilize the following process:
      (1)   The wastewater SCC is payable at the time of issuance and
installation of a city water meter.
      (2)   The city shall not issue the water meter or allow water connection
until the wastewater SCC and the material and cost of the meter has been paid
in full.
   (g)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the wastewater SCC or an
increase in the wastewater SCC:
      (1)   A building or other structure for which a water meter application
was filed prior to the effective date of this section or an amendment of this
section, providing the information accompanying the application was complete to
meet the requirements for issuance of a water meter for the entire structure,
and all previously applicable fees and charges are paid, and substantial
construction begins within 180 days of the date the water meter was issued;
      (2)   Any structure that is built to replace a structure that was
destroyed, demolished, or removed shall not be assessed wastewater SCCs if
construction of the new structure is completed within 60 months of the time
that the original structure was destroyed, demolished, or removed, provided,
however, that any new structure does not increase the size of the water meter;
      (3)   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the city Uniform Building Code, are
exempt from all portions of the wastewater SCC, provided, however, that any new
addition, renovation, or structure does not increase the size of the water
meter;
      (4)   An alteration, addition, replacement, or change in use that does
not increase the parcel’s or structure’s size of the water meter;
      (5)   Water meters used solely on fire suppression and irrigation
systems; and
      (6)   Water meters that include service for fire suppression and
irrigation systems will be charged the wastewater SCC based on the approved
implementation schedule and shall not be administratively calculated.
   (h)   Prohibited connection. No person or entity may connect to the water or
wastewater of the city unless the appropriate wastewater SCC has been paid.
(Ord. 16-25, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 51.082 FUNDS ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   There are hereby established the required accounts for the purpose of
managing the revenues derived and to be derived from the city's sanitary sewer
system. A separate account, to be known as the operation and maintenance
account, shall be established for purposes of paying the operation and
maintenance costs of the POTW. Funds required for this account shall take
precedence to ensure satisfactory operation of the system.
   (b)   A separate account to be known as the Regional SDC account shall be
established and collected annually. The Regional SDC account funds will be
allocated annually in accordance with the city's internal policies. No regional
wastewater customer or city wastewater customer shall have any right, title, or
interest in such account.
   (c)   A separate account to be known as the Wastewater SCC account shall be
established for the purpose of managing the revenues derived and to be derived
from the city’s wastewater SCC for the purposes of recovering past capital
costs and fund the capital costs of developing new capacity, as defined in this
chapter. The wastewater SCC account funds will be allocated from time to time,
in accordance with the city’s internal policies and pursuant to this chapter.
No city water or wastewater customer shall have any right, title, or interest
in such an account.
(1992 Code, § 41-73) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-30-
1985; Ord. 88-87, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 96-89, passed 9-11-1989; Ord. 35-13,
passed 6-18-2013; Ord. 16-25, passed 4-1-2025)
§ 51.083 REVIEW OF RATES.
   Sewer use rates shall be reviewed at least biennially and shall be revised
as necessary to keep revenues reasonably in balance with anticipated
expenditures. Excess funds may be carried forward from year to year in the
respective accounts. This review shall include an analysis of the balance
credited to the repair and replacement account, so that sufficient funds are
accrued to provide for the expected replacement costs of the sewer system.
Adequate funds shall be generated and credited to the operation and maintenance
account to pay the costs of operation and maintenance. This rate review shall
continue the fair and equitable distribution of all costs to all of the
system’s users.
(1992 Code, § 41-74) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981)
§ 51.084 NOTICE OF RATE REVIEW.
   The user shall be provided with written annual notice of the sewer use rate
and of that portion of the user charge which is attributed to wastewater
treatment. The notice shall also be provided to the user after the review of
rates described in §
51.083, and shall include the findings and determination of the review.
(1992 Code, § 41-75) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981)
§ 51.085 TOXIC POLLUTANTS.
   Any user discharging toxic pollutants to the wastewater collection system
shall pay for the increased costs of managing the effluent or sludge by the
treatment works. Charges shall be as deemed necessary by city to recover the
increased costs.
(1992 Code, § 41-76) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981)
§ 51.086 WATER METER REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The owner or occupant of any commercial or industrial premises or
commercial or industrial structure using water from a private well where the
sanitary sewer system is in use is hereby required to have a water meter
installed in a manner that all water from the private well which is used in the
building shall be registered by the meter, provided, however, that any water
for use on lawns or gardens or for other purposes which does not flow into the
sanitary sewer system of the city may be bypassed so as to not pass through the
water meter.
   (b)   All meters shall be approved by the water department and shall be
installed by the water department at the expense of the owner or occupant of
the premises and the officers and employees of the city shall have access to
the premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting the water
system, installing and repairing the meters, and reading the meters.
   (c)   The meters shall be read and the sewer charge shall be computed,
billed and collected in the same manner as provided by this section.
(1992 Code, § 41-77) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981)
§ 51.087 CONTRACTS FOR PRIVATE, INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER CONNECTIONS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to limit or restrict
the power of the city to contract for sewerage utility services as granted by
state law, and any contract entered into under the power shall be in lieu of
any fees, rates, rentals or charges established under this subchapter, but in
no event shall a contract for services be entered into at rates less than the
cost of service.
(1992 Code, § 41-77.1) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 111-94, passed 12-5-
1994)
§ 51.088 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Failure to comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall result in the
premises being disconnected from the sanitary sewer system of the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-78) (Ord. 48-81, passed 6-1-1981)
§ 51.089 ASSESSMENT AND RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR PROPORTIONATE SHARE OF SEWER
PLANNED OR PREVIOUSLY CONSTRUCTED.
   (a)   Whenever either a main sewer or trunk sewer or service sewer has been
constructed by the city, or has been planned for construction in the city's
current comprehensive development plan consistent with the city's wastewater
collection system master plan, and the cost has not been apportioned against
property which may be benefitted thereby, the city council may require the
property to pay its proportionate share of the cost of the construction or
proposed construction, without interest, according to the benefit to accrue to
the property before platting or replatting the property or before the property
may be served by the facilities, whichever date is earlier. The city shall make
an investigation as necessary and shall find and determine the amount to be
paid, which amount so paid shall be apportioned by the city council as it
determines among the persons, including the city, paying the cost.
   (b)   In determining the proportionate share of the benefit derived from the
construction of a main, trunk, or service sewer, the city may apportion the
amount to be paid by averaging the cost for properties receiving substantially
the same benefit.
   (c)   Any payments required for cost recovery assessments shall be recorded
against each parcel of property and notice of satisfaction of such payments may
be recorded by the City Engineer when fully paid.
(1992 Code, § 41-79) (Ord. 106-98, passed 10-5-1998; Ord. 14-05, passed 2-14-
2005; Ord. 42-16, passed 5-3-2016)
STORM DRAINAGE
§ 51.100 STORM DRAINAGE FEE.
   (a)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a charge against real
property within the city for the operation, maintenance, and capital expenses
of the storm drainage system. The storm drainage system includes the storm
drainage pipe network, storm drains, drainageways, the levee diversion (Flood
Risk Reduction Project), Big Sioux River, and Skunk Creek within the city.
   (b)   (1)   All real property, except property owned by cemetery
corporations unless exempted by state law, within the city shall be charged an
annual storm drainage fee for the operation, maintenance, and capital
improvements of the storm drainage system.
      (2)   Storm drainage fee for the parcel is determined by the runoff
weighting factor, multiplied by parcel area (in square feet), multiplied by
unit financial charge (in dollars per square feet).
         A.   Runoff weighting factor.
            1.   The runoff weighting factor is determined by the type of land
use for the parcel, and indicates the relative volume of storm water runoff
from a land parcel, as a function of the percentage of impervious surfaces
covering each land parcel. The runoff weighting factor is to be assigned by
land use type, as shown in Table I.
Table I*
Land Use Code Land Use Runoff Weighting Factor
Table I*
Land                                                                        Runoff
Use  Land Use                                                               Weighting
Code                                                                        Factor
12   Duplex                                                                 7.5
13   Town houses                                                            7.5
14   Apartment building (1—3 stories)                                     11.25
15   Apartment building (4 stories or more)                                 11.25
16   Dormitories                                                            11.25
17   Mobile homes and trailers                                              11.25
18   Other residential                                                      11.25
21   Apparel and textiles                                                   17.0
22   Wood, furniture, fixtures                                              17.0
23   Lumberyards                                                            17.0
24   Printing and publishing                                                17.0
25   Warehouse, indoor storage                                              17.0
26   Electronic, scientific, optical                                        17.0
27   Construction yards, including plumbing, electrical, heating            17.0
     contractors
28   Chemical, petroleum storage                                            17.0
29   Other light, pollution-free manufacturing not included elsewhere       17.0
31   Food, agricultural processing, stockyards, rendering                   17.0
32   Paper and pulp                                                         17.0
33   Chemical, petroleum, rubber and plastic                                17.0
34   Stone, glass, clay, cement, brick                                      17.0
35   Primary metal, smelting                                                17.0
36   Metal fabricating                                                      17.0
37   Salvage, junkyard, resource recycling                                  7.5
38   Other heavy manufacturing not elsewhere coded                          17.0
41   Bus, railroad yards, terminals, right-of-way                           5.0
42   Airport                                                                5.0
43   Auto parking ramps and lots (commercial or public only—not auxiliary 18.75
     parking)
44   Highway and street right-of-way                                        5.0
45   Communication (TV, radio, and the like)                                17.0
46   Utilities (gas, sewer, water, telephone, and the like)                 17.0
47   Truck terminal                                                         17.0
48   Military base                                                          17.0
49   Other transportation, communication and utilities not elsewhere coded  17.0
51   Wholesale—food, produce                                              18.75
52   Wholesale—other                                                      18.75
53   Extensive retail—building supplies, including lumber, home repair    18.75
     supplies
54   Extensive retail—farm equipment and implements                       18.75
55   Extensive retail—new and used car dealers                            18.75
56   Extensive retail— recreational vehicles, marine                      18.75
57   Extensive retail—tires, batteries, auto accessories                  18.75
58   Extensive retail—auto repair, body shop                              18.75
59   Extensive retail—other retail with outside storage                   18.75
61   Food store                                                             18.75
62   Neighborhood commercial, hardware, drugs, Laundromat, beauty shop,     18.75
     barbershop, neighborhood shopping center
63   Gasoline, auto service station                                         18.75
64   Department store, discount store, regional shopping center             18.75
65   Clothes and apparel                                                    18.75
66   Specialty retail—jewelry, gifts, and the like                        18.75
67   Furniture, household appliances                                        18.75
68   Other retail not elsewhere coded                                       18.75
71   Banks and financial institutions                                       18.75
72   Churches                                                               11.25
73   Nursing homes and hospitals                                            11.25
74   Colleges and universities, adult education                             11.25
75   Primary and secondary education                                        11.25
76   Day care centers                                                       11.25
77   Medical offices, clinics                                               18.75
78   Government offices                                                     18.75
79   Offices not elsewhere coded (real estate, law, and the like)           18.75
81   Cultural activities—libraries, museums, and the like                 18.75
82   Assembly areas, arenas, stadiums                                       18.75
83   Theaters                                                               18.75
84   Restaurants, bars, lounges                                             18.75
85   Hotels, motels, resort lodging                                         18.75
86   Public parks, golf courses, fairgrounds                                1.0
87   Private country club and other recreational uses                       1.0
88   Other cultural and entertainment uses, not elsewhere coded             1.0
91   Cropland and farms                                                     1.0
92   Feedlots                                                               1.0
93   Grasslands                                                             1.0
94   Mining and quarrying**                                                 1.0
95   Cemetery                                                               0.0
96   Sanitary landfills                                                     1.0
97   Vacant                                                                 1.0
98   Under construction                                                     1.0
99   Other not elsewhere coded                                              1.0
110  Single-family (parcel area less than 30,000 square feet)               7.5
110  Estate (parcel area of 60,000—100,000 square feet)                   3.5
110  Estate (parcel area greater than 100,000 square feet)                  2.5
111  Single-family (parcel area of 30,000—60,000 square feet)             5.75
*    Parcels included in the regulatory floodway shall be assigned a runoff weighting
factor of zero for the actual regulatory floodway area.
**    Quarries are individually calculated with a runoff weighting factor of zero for
the actual quarry area.
 
            2.   Upon written request from a property owner, a detailed site
study of the parcel will be conducted by the city engineering department to
redetermine the runoff weighting factor. This written request must be submitted
to the director on or before April 30 of the year the fees are charged to the
subject parcel. The engineering department shall calculate the percentage of
impervious area for the subject parcel which contributes storm water runoff to
the storm drainage system of the city. The runoff weighting factor is then
redetermined through utilization of Table II. The detailed site study to
redetermine the runoff weighting factor shall be completed by July 1 of the
year the written request is submitted in accordance with this paragraph.
Table II
Percentage Impervious Average Runoff to Rainfall Runoff Weighting Factor (Rv ×
Area                  Ratio (Rv*)                25)
Table II
Percentage Impervious Average Runoff to Rainfall Runoff Weighting Factor (Rv ×
Area                  Ratio (Rv*)                25)
0                     0.04                       1.0
10                    0.19                       4.75
15                    0.26                       6.5
20                    0.30                       7.5
30                    0.38                       9.5
40                    0.45                       11.25
50                    0.53                       13.25
60                    0.60                       15.0
70                    0.68                       17.0
80                    0.75                       18.75
90                    0.83                       20.75
100                   0.90                       22.5
*   These values are derived from the “STORM” equation (figure 5-20, page 5-
49), A Statistical Method for the Assessment of Urban Storm Drainage, EPA,
Washington, D.C., January 1979. For low percentage impervious surfaces (0% to
20%), a linear relationship was assumed between the “STORM” equation and
empirical data derived from drainage runoff in high depression storage, loose
soils, and flat areas.
 
            3.   Interpolation of the runoff weighting factor for a given
percentage of impervious area not listed in Table II shall be determined by
linear relationship between the values listed in Table II.
            4.   The director may direct that the runoff weighting factor for a
given parcel be redetermined by a detailed site investigation and Table II,
where an obvious departure from the percentage of impervious surfaces of
similar land uses exists.
            5.   A redetermination of the runoff weighting factor, resulting
from a detailed site investigation and Table II, brought about either by
written request from a property owner or direction from the director, shall be
used in the calculation of the subject parcels storm drainage fee and shall
replace the runoff weighting factor previously derived from Table I, even if
the resulting value is higher.
      (3)   Parcel area. Parcel area is to be obtained from the records of the
Minnehaha County department of equalization and the Lincoln County assessor’s
office or as calculated by city engineer.
      (4)   Unit financial charge. The unit financial charge shall be as shown
in Table III below:
 
Table III
Effective Date  Unit Financial Charge Sioux Falls Airport Authority Unit
                                      Financial Charge
January 1, 2023 0.001089              0.000419
January 1, 2024 0.001133              0.000436
January 1, 2025 0.001178              0.000453
January 1, 2026 0.001225              0.000471
January 1, 2027 0.001262              0.000485
 
(1992 Code, § 41-80) (Ord. 101-82, passed 9-20-1982; Ord. 20-83, passed 4-25-
1983; Ord. 83-86, passed 9-22-1986; Ord. 85-90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 27-93,
passed 4-5-1993; Ord. 84-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 110-94, passed 12-5-1994;
Ord. 140-95, passed 11-6-1995; Ord. 27-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 98-03, passed
10-14-2003; Ord. 15-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 34-14, passed 6-17-2014; Ord.
45-16, passed 5-3-2016; Ord. 113-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 44-23, passed 6-20-
2023)
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Financial regulations, see §§
36.001 through
36.005
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Taxation, see
ch. 37
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
§ 51.101 COLLECTION.
   The storm drainage fee established in §
51.100 shall be an annual charge. The first half of the fee is due on May 1,
and the second half is due on November 1, of the same year, payable at the
office of county treasurer within which the land parcel lies. These fees shall
be remitted or turned over to the city finance director, at least once a month,
by the county treasurer.
(1992 Code, § 41-81) (Ord. 101-82, passed 9-20-1982)
§ 51.102 FUND ESTABLISHED.
   The drainage fees paid to the city shall be kept in a separate fund to be
known as the storm drainage fund. This fund shall be used to pay the cost of
financing the operation, maintenance, or construction of the storm water
drainage system.
(1992 Code, § 41-82) (Ord. 101-82, passed 9-20-1982; Ord. 113-18, passed 12-4-
2018)
§ 51.103 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The unit financial charge in this subchapter shall be reviewed annually and
shall be revised as necessary to keep revenues reasonably in balance with
anticipated expenditures. Excess funds may be carried forward from year to year
in order to build sufficient funds for large drainage construction projects
which are scheduled or programmed for the near future. In addition, funds may
be carried over to provide sufficient monies for unanticipated repairs,
replacements or maintenance of the drainage system.
(1992 Code, § 41-83) (Ord. 101-82, passed 9-20-1982)
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COST RECOVERY
§ 51.115 STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS.
   Costs for storm water drainage system improvements shall be determined and
collected as described in this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 41-85) (Ord. 5-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 51.116 DEFINITION.
   A DRAINAGE SYSTEM COST RECOVERY is the process by which 50% of the
applicable cost of the storm water drainage system is collected from all
developing properties. The STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM applicable costs for
drainage system cost recovery includes regional detention facilities excluding
land, storm drainage appurtenances eligible for reimbursement pursuant to
Reimbursement Procedures for Drainage System Cost Recovery- Executive Order,
drainageway improvements or storm drainage facilities approved by city
engineer. A REGIONAL DETENTION CHARGE is the process by which 50% of the cost
of land acquisition for regional detention facilities is collected from
development of parcels contributing stormwater runoff to a regional detention
facility. REGIONAL DETENTION FACILITIES are identified in the Stormwater BMP
Master Plan dated July 2003 and subsequent updates by city engineer.
(1992 Code, § 41-86) (Ord. 5-02, passed 1-14-2002; Ord. 97-03, passed 10-14-
2003; Ord. 113-18, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 51.117 DRAINAGE BASIN BOUNDARIES.
   Drainage basin boundaries shall be established by the city engineer.
(1992 Code, § 41-89) (Ord. 5-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 51.118 RECOVERY OF COST OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to impose storm drainage platting fees on
real property to recover the platted or replatted developed real property’s
proportionate share of the costs to expand and sustain storm water drainage
systems. The city shall recover 50% of the cost for the development of storm
water drainage systems and regional detention facilities from all developing
property as follows:
   (a)   The city shall determine and update annually the cost recovery per
acre separating the Drainage System Cost Recovery (cost for the development of
storm drainage systems) from the Regional Detention Charge (cost of land
acquisition for regional detention facilities).
   (b)   The cost recovery shall, at a minimum, consider type of land use and
runoff to calculate the Drainage System Cost Recovery (DSCR) platting fee per
classification indicated in Table IV and Regional Detention Charge (RDC)
platting fee per classification indicated in Table V.
   (c)   This subchapter incorporates the Development Area Maps as set forth in
the city’s comprehensive plan.
   (d)   (1)   For platted or replatted real property located in Tier I or Tier
II of the city’s comprehensive plan the DSCR platting and RDC platting fee
shall be paid prior to approval of any plat or replat.
      (2)   For platted or replatted real property located outside of Tier I
and Tier II but within the joint jurisdiction area of the city’s comprehensive
plan detailed in subsection (c), the owner may defer payment of the DSCR
platting and RDC platting fees. Any deferred payment of the DSCR platting and
RDC platting fees shall be due and payable for the platted or replatted
property at the earliest of:
         A.   Annexation of such platted or replatted real property or such
platted or replatted real property’s location within Tier I or Tier II; or
         B.   The owner’s application or request for a re-zoning or other
required city conditional use permit or license on such platted or replatted
real property; or
         C.   The city’s provision of storm drainage systems to or immediately
adjacent or adjoining the platted or replatted real property.
   The amount of such platting fee shall be the fee amount in effect at the
time of the event triggering the platting or replatting fee. Unpaid and
deferred platting and replatting fees shall constitute an encumbrance and lien
running with the land upon the platted and replatted real property and the
obligation to pay shall be binding upon the owner, and the owner’s successors,
successors in title, and assigns.
      (3)   The city may increase, waive, reduce or defer the payments if: (a)
the plat or replat is a minor plat or replat; (b) the plat or replat is a
transfer of ownership; (c) as set forth in a Development Agreement; or (d)
based on the city’s individualized determination as to the nature and extent of
the impact of the development.
      (4)   The city may condition approval of zoning or other city required
conditional use permits and licenses until all platting fees are paid in full
or arrangements for payment are made.
      (5)   For any property platted or replatted the plat or replat shall
contain a note identifying the zoning classifications in effect at the time of
plat or replat submittal. The owner’s certificate of compliance for the plat or
replat shall indicate the plat or replat is subject to the DSCR platting and
RDC platting fees and shall provide that the DSCR platting and RDC platting
fees shall be paid by an applicant requesting rezoning of the plat or replat in
accordance with this section.
   (e)   The DSCR platting fee shall be paid to the city prior to approval of
the plat for development or replat of the real property. The RDC platting fee
shall be paid to the city prior to approval of the plat for development or
replat of the real property contributing runoff to a regional detention
facility. The platting fee amounts to be paid shall be based on the total of
acres platted and right-of-way dedication. All real property platted or
replatted after the initial effective date of this subchapter shall be subject
to the DSCR and RDC platting fee. Replats shall be subject to the DSCR and RDC
platting fee if the replat involves rezoning to a higher intensity zoning or if
the parcel is not serviced by street and drainage infrastructure constructed
according to city design standards.
   (f)   The value of contributions made by the fee payer toward the cost of
expanding and sustaining the public storm water drainage system may be credited
to the amount of DSCR and RDC platting fees otherwise due for the parcel. The
value of the contribution shall be determined by the city engineer, based on
information submitted by the fee payer, and shall be in compliance with
applicable law. No credit will be given for the value of land dedicated or to
be dedicated to the city for right-of-way or areas zoned REC or CN. Credit for
the contributions not claimed prior to payment of the DSCR and RDC platting fee
shall be waived. A credit may be allowed against the DSCR and RDC platting fees
for developer-constructed and funded public drainage improvements, including
land, engineering, and construction costs providing a public drainage benefit
as determined by city engineer.
   (g)   The DSCR platting fee classification shall be determined by city
engineer based on Engineering Design Standards. The DSCR platting fees shall be
based on classification as follows in Table IV:
Table IV - DSCR Platting Fee Per Acre
DSCR Platting Fee    Effective Date
Classification    1/1/2017 1/1/2019 1/1/2020 1/1/2021 1/1/2022 1/1/2023
Table IV - DSCR Platting Fee Per Acre
DSCR Platting Fee           Effective Date
Classification           1/1/2017  1/1/2019 1/1/2020 1/1/2021 1/1/2022 1/1/2023
Agricultural (AG, CN)    $0.00     0        0        0        0        0
Commercial (C-2, C-3, C- $6,529.54 7,012.73 7,461.54 7,864.46 8,281.28 8,562.84
4)
Industrial (I-1, I-2,    $4,946.62 5,312.67 5,652.68 5,957.93 6,273.70 6,487.00
AP)
Multifamily Residential  $3,957.30 4,250.14 4,522.15 4,766.35 5,018.96 5,189.61
(RA-1, RA-2, RA-3)
Office and Institutional $3,957.03 4,250.14 4,522.15 4,766.35 5,018.96 5,189.61
(O, C-1, LW, S-1, S-2)
Recreational (REC)       $0.00     0        0        0        0        0
Single-family
residential (RS, RT-1,   $1,978.65 2,125.07 2,261.07 2,383.17 2,509.48 2,594.80
RT-2, RD, RCD, MH)
Hybrid                   NA        3,187.61 3,391.61 3,574.76 3,764.22 3,892.20
If the property is not zoned or does not meet the criteria of a DSCR platting
fee classification in Table IV, the DSCR platting fee shall be at the single-
family residential rate.
 
   (h)   The DSCR and RDC platting fee shall be collected only once on each
parcel if the zoning and storm water runoff remains the same as determined by
city engineer. If the parcel is rezoned or redeveloped which results in a
higher DSCR or RDC platting fee, the property owner shall pay the difference
between the previously paid platting fees and current platting fees for the
rezoned/redeveloped platting fee classification.
   (i)   The RDC platting fee classification shall be determined by city
engineer based upon Engineering Design Standards. The RDC platting fees shall
be based on classification as follows in Table V:
Table V - Regional Detention Charge Platting Fees Per Acre
RDC Platting Fee    Effective Date
Classification   1/1/2017 1/1/2019 1/1/2020 1/1/2021 1/1/2022 1/1/2023
Table V - Regional Detention Charge Platting Fees Per Acre
RDC Platting Fee            Effective Date
Classification           1/1/2017  1/1/2019 1/1/2020 1/1/2021 1/1/2022 1/1/2023
Agricultural (AG, CN)    $0.00     0        0        0        0        0
Commercial (C-2, C-3, C- $2,671.79 2,818.74 2,931.49 3,034.09 3,125.11 3,218.87
4)
Industrial (I-1, I-2,    $2,024.08 2,135.40 2,220.82 2,298.55 2,367.51 2,438.53
AP)
Multifamily residential  $1,619.27 1,708.33 1,776.66 1,838.85 1,894.01 1,950.83
(RA-1, RA-2, RA-3)
Office and Institutional $1,619.27 1,708.33 1,776.66 1,838.85 1,894.01 1,950.83
(O, C-1, LW, S-1, S-2)
Recreational (REC)       $0.00     0        0        0        0        0
Single-family
residential (RS, RT-1,   $809.63   854.16   888.33   919.42   947.00   975.41
RT-2, RD, RCD, MH)
Hybrid                   NA        1,281.24 1,332.49 1,379.13 1,420.50 1,463.11
 
   (j)   A person harmed by an administrative decision of the city under this
subchapter may appeal the decision through the procedures provided in
Administrative Appeals subchapter, §§ 30.040 et seq. of this Code, as that
subchapter may be amended from time to time, except as modified below.
      (1)   The appeal shall be heard in a closed hearing by a hearing examiner
with substantial experience in land development, and the cost shall be divided
equally between the city and the appellant.
      (2)   The hearing examiner may amend, remand, or reverse the decision of
the city only if clear error is found in:
         A.   The determination of the number of acres subject to the cost
recovery;
         B.   The determination of the applicable classification for
determination of the cost recovery;
         C.   The value of any credit;
         D.   Any mathematical computation; or
         E.   Determining or applying any other objective fact on which the
decision was based.
      (3)   If the hearing examiner finds an error and has adequate facts to
correct the error (such as correcting the number of acres used in the
computation or correcting a mathematical error), the hearing examiner shall
amend the decision accordingly and the decision shall be binding as amended.
Otherwise, the hearing examiner shall reverse the decision or remand it with
instructions for correcting the error(s) found.
      (4)   The provision for appeals under this division (j) is not intended
to serve as a provision for variances or waivers; issues of hardship or other
factors that might be considered in granting a zoning variance shall not be
considered by the hearing examiner in reaching a decision.
      (5)   Unless the hearing examiner finds clear error, the hearing officer
shall affirm the original administrative decision.
      (6)   The decision of the hearing examiner may be subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 41-90) (Ord. 5-02, passed 1-14-2002; Ord. 97-03, passed 10-14-
2003; Ord. 15-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 10-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 34-14,
passed 6-17-2014; Ord. 113-18, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 64-24, passed 7-16-2024)
WATER CONSERVATION REIMBURSEMENT
§ 51.130 WATER CONSERVATION TOILET REIMBURSEMENT.
   Subject to annual appropriations and procedures established by the city, the
city may reimburse residential and nonresidential city water utility customers
a portion of the cost of purchase and installation of a replacement of a toilet
manufactured before 1992 with a new conservation toilet using no more than one
and six-tenths gallons of water per flush pursuant to the schedule below.
 
User                        Maximum Amount of Reimbursement
Multi-family/nonresidential $50
Single-family               $75
Single-family               $60 (second toilet)
Single-family               $50 (each additional toilet)
 
(1992 Code, § 41-91) (Ord. 104-02, passed 12-9-2002; Ord. 59-08, passed 5-12-
2008)
§ 51.132 RAIN SENSOR REIMBURSEMENT.
   Subject to all annual appropriations and procedures established by the city,
the city may reimburse residential and nonresidential city water utility
customers a portion of the cost of purchase and installation of rain sensors in
automatic irrigation systems installed prior to May 12, 2005, pursuant to the
schedule below.
 
User           Maximum Amount of Reimbursement
Nonresidential $50
Nonresidential $35 (for each additional rain sensor)
Residential    $50
Residential    $35 (for each additional rain sensor)
 
(1992 Code, § 41-92.1) (Ord. 57-05, passed 6-13-2005)
§ 51.133 PROGRAMMABLE TIMER REIMBURSEMENT.
   Subject to all annual appropriations and procedures established by the city,
the city may reimburse residential and nonresidential city water utility
customers a portion of the cost of purchase of programmable timers in automatic
irrigation systems pursuant to the schedule below.
 
User           Maximum Amount of Reimbursement
Nonresidential $80
Nonresidential $65 (second timer)
Residential    $80
Residential    $65 (second timer)
 
(1992 Code, § 41-92.2) (Ord. 59-08, passed 5-12-2008)
CHAPTER 52: REGULATION OF NONESSENTIAL USES OF WATER
Section
   
52.001   Authority to regulate distribution and use of water supplied by city
   
52.002   Certain uses of water determined nonessential
   
52.003   Certain uses of water regulated or prohibited upon adoption of
resolution
   
52.003.1   Certain uses of water regulated or prohibited based upon water flow
in the Big Sioux River
   
52.004   Restriction on residential, business and industrial water users
   
52.005   Wasting water prohibited
   
52.006   Rain sensors required
   
52.007   Rain sensor installation and setting
   
52.008   Authority of health officer to permit reasonable use of water
   
52.009   Exception permits; application
   
52.010   Exception permits; grant or denial
   
52.011   Duty to comply
   
52.012   Enforcement; violations
§ 52.001 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF WATER SUPPLIED BY CITY.
   Pursuant to SDCL 9-47-1, the city council shall have authority to regulate
the distribution and use of water supplied by the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-200) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977)
§ 52.002 CERTAIN USES OF WATER DETERMINED NONESSENTIAL.
   The following uses of water are hereby determined to be nonessential and are
hereby prohibited:
   (a)   Washing outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling
station aprons, porches and other outdoor surfaces except by container not
exceeding three-gallon capacity or pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009;
   (b)   Washing mobile equipment. The washing of automobiles, trucks,
trailers, trailer houses, railroad cars or any other type of mobile equipment
except where required by health and sanitary requirements and except from water
contained in a container not exceeding three-gallon capacity or from a hose
equipped with an automatic shutoff device at the end from which water is taken.
This division (b) shall not apply to commercial vehicle washing facilities
operating at fixed locations;
   (c)   Cleaning buildings. The washing by hose of the inside and outside of
dwellings and buildings except pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009;
   (d)   Ornamental fountains. The operation of any ornamental fountain or
other structure making a similar use of water unless equipped with a
recirculating device;
   (e)   Swimming pools. Swimming and wading pools with a volumetric capacity
of greater than 1,500 gallons not employing a filter and recirculating system;
and
   (f)   Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water through
defective plumbing which shall mean the knowing permission for defective
plumbing to remain out of repair.
(1992 Code, § 41-201) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 45-77, passed 6-13-
1977; Ord. 37-90, passed 4-23-1990)
§ 52.003 CERTAIN USES OF WATER REGULATED OR PROHIBITED UPON ADOPTION OF
RESOLUTION.
   Upon the passage and publication of a resolution of the city council
providing for the use and withdrawal of water by any person, any or all of the
following purposes, as specified by the resolution, may be regulated or
prohibited as follows:
   (a)   Water vegetation. The sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of lawns,
turf, shrubbery, trees, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens,
vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation by any method may be regulated as
prohibited, except pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009;
   (b)   Washing mobile equipment. The washing of automobiles, trucks,
trailers, trailer houses, railroad cars, or any other type of mobile equipment
except where required by health and sanitary requirements and except pursuant
to an exception granted under §
52.009;
   (c)   Swimming pools. The filling of any swimming pool except pursuant to an
exception granted under §
52.009;
   (d)   Cleaning equipment and machinery. The washing and cleaning of any
business or industrial equipment and machinery except where required by health
and sanitation requirements and except pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009; and
   (e)   Air conditioners. The use of air-conditioning equipment except
pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009.
(1992 Code, § 41-202) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 75-88, passed 8-8-
1988; Ord. 23-13, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 52.003.1 CERTAIN USES OF WATER REGULATED OR PROHIBITED BASED UPON WATER FLOW
IN THE BIG SIOUX RIVER.
   The following uses of water shall be regulated or prohibited as follows:
   Watering yards. The day and time for sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of
yards and grass by any method shall be regulated or prohibited as follows:
   (a)   Municipal water users are prohibited from watering lawns during the
hours of 12 noon to 5 p.m. except pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009.
   (b)   Municipal water users having even- numbered addresses may water lawns
on even- numbered calendar dates. Municipal water users having odd-numbered
addresses may water lawns on odd-numbered calendar dates. This annual lawn
watering schedule is in effect when the water flow rate in the Big Sioux River
is at 50 cubic feet per second (cfs) or more as measured at the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) Cliff Avenue gauging station except pursuant to an
exception granted under §
52.009.
   (c)   (1)   Municipal water users may water lawns one day of each week when
the water flow rate in the Big Sioux River as measured at the USGS Cliff Avenue
gauging station is at 49 cfs or less for a period of ten consecutive days and
greater than 20 cfs and the daily demand for water exceeds 42 million gallons
per day (mgd). Each municipal water user will have a designated lawn watering
day as determined by the manager that will best protect the water supply except
pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009.
      (2)   To move from one day of each week back to odd/even lawn watering
restrictions, the water flow rate in the Big Sioux River as measured at the
USGS Cliff Avenue gauging station will have to reach 75 cfs or greater for a
period of 20 consecutive days.
   (d)   (1)   Municipal water users will be prohibited from watering lawns
when the water flow rate in the Big Sioux River as measured at the USGS Cliff
Avenue gauging station is at 20 cfs or less for five consecutive days and stays
below 20 cfs and the daily demand for water exceeds 34 mgd except pursuant to
an exception granted under §
52.009.
      (2)   To move from lawn watering prohibition, the water flow rate in the
Big Sioux River as measured at the USGS Cliff Avenue gauging station will have
to reach 40 cfs or greater for a period of 20 consecutive days.
   (e)   During periods of extended dry weather, severe drought conditions, or
other man-made or natural disaster conditions, the mayor at the recommendation
of the manager may enact additional restrictions necessary to protect the local
water supply for a period of up to 30 days.
   (f)   Each stage of lawn watering restriction will stay in effect until such
time it is deemed safe by the manager to remove and change the status of the
restrictions.
(Ord. 23-13, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 52.004 RESTRICTION ON RESIDENTIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL WATER USERS.
   Upon the passage and publication of a resolution of the city providing
therefor:
   (a)   All residential water users shall be restricted to the use of 50
gallons per person per day except pursuant to an exception granted under §
52.009; and
   (b)   All business and industries and parties to contracts with the city
using city water shall be restricted to the use of a percentage of their prior
usage of water as determined by resolution of the city.
      (1)   The provisions of this division (b) shall not apply to those
businesses and industries declared by resolution of the city to be necessary
for the public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   Business and industries processing animal, vegetable and mineral
matter for food purposes shall be regulated in the use of water as follows. The
mayor, when so ordered by resolution of the city, shall hold a public hearing,
after one week’s public notice, to determine, by resolution, the amount of
water to be used, based on the amount needed during normal years in the
particular food processing business.
(1992 Code, § 41-203) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-
2005; Ord. 13-05, passed 2-14-2005)
§ 52.005 WASTING WATER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall waste water while watering in the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-203.1) (Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 52.006 RAIN SENSORS REQUIRED.
   Rain sensors shall be installed on all automatic irrigation systems
installed after the effective date of this chapter that receive water supplied
by the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-203.2) (Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 52.007 RAIN SENSOR INSTALLATION AND SETTING.
   All rain sensors shall automatically shut off the irrigation system after
one-fourth inch of rainfall has occurred. All rain sensors shall be installed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions in a location providing full
exposure to rainfall to assure accurate operation. The sensors shall be
maintained in good working condition. No person shall, with the intent of
circumventing the purpose of this section, adjust either the rain sensor or
irrigation system so that the sensor cannot override and turn off the
irrigation system after one-fourth inch of rain has fallen.
(1992 Code, § 41-203.3) (Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 52.008 AUTHORITY OF HEALTH OFFICER TO PERMIT REASONABLE USE OF WATER.
   The city health officer may permit a reasonable use of water in any case
necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards.
(1992 Code, § 41-204) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-
2005)
§ 52.009 EXCEPTION PERMITS; APPLICATION.
   Upon written application by the water user, the city may grant exception
permits for uses of water otherwise prohibited hereby, if it is found that the
restrictions in this chapter:
   (a)   Are not warranted by weather conditions or would cause an unnecessary
and undue economic or other hardship to the applicant or to the public; or
   (b)   Would cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation,
fire protection or safety of the applicant or the public.
(1992 Code, § 41-205) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-
2005)
§ 52.010 EXCEPTION PERMITS; GRANT OR DENIAL.
   Within five working days after receipt of an application for an exception
permit, the city shall inform the applicant in writing of its decision,
including any reasons for refusing the permit. The city may revoke a permit
upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance involving water use.
(1992 Code, § 41-206) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-
2005)
§ 52.011 DUTY TO COMPLY.
   (a)   Every municipal water user (occupant, person in charge, or owner of
any lot or parcel of land) in the city, regardless of whether any person using
water shall have a contract for water service with the city, shall abide by the
current lawn watering restriction schedule and prohibition of water waste.
   (b)   The manager has the authority to require compliance with this article
on all property utilizing a municipal water supply. The manager shall cause
public notice to be given as to the proper lawn watering schedule as set forth
in this chapter.
      (1)   Upon the first notice to the responsible party, as that term is
defined in
chapter 40, for failure to follow the proper lawn watering schedule or water
waste, the city shall place a notice of violation in a conspicuous place on or
near the property and mail a copy of the notice of violation to the responsible
party. The responsible party shall correct the violation immediately upon
direct notification from the city or within 24 hours of the posting of the
notice of violation on or near the property.
      (2)   Upon the second (or more) violation, the responsible party shall be
subject to administrative citations in accordance with
chapter 40.
(1992 Code, § 41-207) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-
2005; Ord. 23-13, passed 4-16-2013)
§ 52.012 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Every police officer of the city shall, in connection with his or her
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by the
discontinuance of water service for violation of this chapter.
   (c)   The city shall have available and furnish all records necessary to
determine all usages of water restricted by this chapter.
   (d)   It shall be both unlawful and cause for the issuance of a civil
penalty for any municipal water user to fail to follow the provisions of this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 41-208) (Ord. 20-77, passed 3-21-1977; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-
2005; Ord. 23-13, passed 4-16-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 53: PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Definitions
   
53.002   Administration
Regulation of Sewers
   
53.015   Use of public sewers required
   
53.016   Private wastewater disposal
   
53.017   Administrative procedures
   
53.018   Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections
   
53.019   Roof drain rebates
   
53.020   Sewer backups
   
53.021   Resolution and notice to owners to construct sewer connections
   
53.022   Special assessment for sewer connections
   
53.023   Prohibited use of public sewers
   
53.024   Interceptors and traps
   
53.025   Protection of property
   
53.026   Prohibited discharge standards
Industrial Pretreatment
   
53.040   Definition
   
53.041   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
53.042   State pretreatment standards
   
53.043   Local limits
   
53.044   Right of revision
   
53.045   Dilution
   
53.046   Pretreatment facilities
   
53.047   Additional pretreatment measures
   
53.048   Wastewater analysis
   
53.049   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
53.050   Wastewater discharge permit requirement
   
53.051   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections
   
53.052   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections
   
53.053   Wastewater discharge permit application contents
   
53.054   Application signatories and certification
   
53.055   Wastewater discharge permit decisions
   
53.056   Wastewater discharge permit duration
   
53.057   Wastewater discharge permit contents
   
53.058   Wastewater discharge permit appeals
   
53.059   Wastewater discharge permit modification
   
53.060   Wastewater discharge permit revocation or termination
   
53.061   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance
   
53.062   Continue permits beyond expiration date
   
53.063   Wastewater discharge permit transfer
   
53.064   Regulation of waste received from regional wastewater customers or
other public agencies
   
53.065   Hauled liquid waste
   
53.066   Baseline monitoring reports
   
53.067   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
53.068   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
53.069   Periodic compliance reports
   
53.070   Reports of changed conditions
   
53.071   Reports of potential problems
   
53.072   Reports from unpermitted users
   
53.073   Notice of violations; repeat sampling and reporting
   
53.074   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
53.075   Analytical requirements
   
53.076   Sample collection
   
53.077   Timing
   
53.078   Record keeping
   
53.079   Right of entry; inspection and sampling
   
53.080   Search warrants
   
53.081   Confidential information
   
53.082   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
Enforcement
   
53.095   Notification of violation
   
53.096   Consent orders
   
53.097   Show cause hearing
   
53.098   Compliance orders
   
53.099   Cease and desist orders
   
53.100   Violations; penalties
   
53.101   Emergency suspensions
   
53.102   Termination of discharge
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water
Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         A.   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
         B.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BASIC CHARGE. The monthly wastewater charge, as defined in §
51.081, to be added to the water basic charge.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under aerobic conditions in five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage  pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
four feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal; also called house connection.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the United States EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of
the Act, which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which
appear in 40 C.F.R. §§ 405 through 471.
   CITY ENGINEER. The city engineer or his or her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample composited from an appropriate number of discrete
samples collected over a designated monitoring period greater than 15 minutes.
The sample may be a flow-proportional or time-proportional composite as long as
the sample has a minimum of four grab samples and represents the average
quality of wastewater discharged.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. A limit indicating the maximum allowable discharge of a
pollutant as monitored by a composite sample taken during a 24-hour period that
corresponds to the designated monitoring period.
   DENR. The South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   DOMESTIC ONLY COMMERCIAL USER. A business or commercial establishment whose
only uses of water are for sanitary, culinary, drinking, washing, bathing and
other domestic purposes.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards which would be applicable to that source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 of the Act.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of FLOATABLE OIL if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A discrete sample collected or measured from a wastewater
stream over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste containing materials or exhibiting specific
properties identified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. All waste other than those identified as hazardous waste
that interfere with, pass through, or are incompatible with the city wastewater
treatment facility.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. Introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any person who introduces pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under the Act, state law or local ordinance.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM. A limit indicating the maximum concentration of a
pollutant, as measured by a grab sample, allowed to be discharged at any
specific time.
   INTERCEPTOR. A plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a
sanitary drainage system to intercept non-petroleum fats, oil, greases,
inorganic material, and other harmful pollutants from a wastewater discharge,
including without limitation: grease trap, gravity interceptor, sand-oil
interceptor, and hydro-mechanical grease interceptor.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the operation, treatment process, sludge
processes, sludge use, or sludge disposal of the POTW; and
      (2)   Causes a violation of the city's surface water discharge permit
including but not limited to an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation or of the prevention of sludge use or disposal in compliance with
regulatory provisions or permits.
   LIQUID WASTE. All nonhazardous waste that is mostly water and contains no
more than 25% treatable contaminants not directly discharged to the sanitary
sewer system.
   LIQUID WASTE DISPOSAL COUPON. A document identifying the source, contents
and conditions for disposal of a liquid waste.
   LIQUID WASTE GENERATOR (LWG). Any person, corporation, residence, commercial
establishment, industry or institution that produces a liquid waste which is
hauled to a designated discharge point and not directly discharged into the
sanitary sewer collection system.
   LIQUID WASTE HAULER. Any person, corporation, commercial establishment,
industry or institution that engages in the activity of transporting liquid
waste from a source or generator to a point of final disposal.
   LIQUID WASTE GENERATOR PERMIT (LWG PERMIT). An industrial wastewater
discharge permit issued to a LWG for the discharge of hauled industrial liquid
waste.
   MANAGER. The director of public works or his or her authorized deputy, agent
or representative.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Any waste as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 60.51c, including but not
limited to: isolation waste, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological waste, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical waste,
potentially contaminated laboratory waste and dialysis waste.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows which drain into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317
(c) of the Act which will be applicable to that source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         A.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         B.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that caused the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         C.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent factors, the integration of the new facility with the
existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
      (2)   Any existing building, structure, facility or installation which is
an existing source at which construction occurs if (a) the construction results
in a modification of the existing source rather than a new source, and (b) the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of division (1)B. or (1)C. above, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         A.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities that is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         B.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment that are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling that does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   PASS-THROUGH. A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, may result in a violation of any requirement of
the city’s surface water discharge permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
   PERMIT. An industrial wastewater discharge permit issued to industrial users
for the discharge of nondomestic waste into the sanitary sewer collection
system.
   pH. The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen ion
concentration of ten to the minus seven power.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
garbage, sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., flow pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing those
pollutants into a POTW.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to Pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an
Industrial User.
   PRETREAMENT STANDARDS. Any local, state or federal regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits. This term includes local limits, prohibitive
discharge limits including those promulgated under 40 C.F.R. § 403.5, and
categorical pretreatment standards.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge
of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in §
53.040.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The waste from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). Any wastewater treatment plant owned
and operated by the city including all devices and systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater or
industrial waste and any conveyances that transport wastewater to the plant.
   REGIONAL WASTE. Wastewater generated by regional wastewater users.
   REGIONAL WASTEWATER CUSTOMER. Each municipality, sanitary sewer district,
and other governmental subdivision, or any combination thereof, which is
allowed to connect to and use the regional wastewater system pursuant to a
written agreement with the city.
   REGIONAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM. All wastewater infrastructure that: (a) is now
or hereafter owned by the city; and (b) is conveying or treating, has the
potential to convey or treat, or otherwise relates to regional waste. Portions
of the city wastewater infrastructure that are only intended to convey or treat
Sioux Falls local wastewater customers may be excluded from the REGIONAL
WASTEWATER SYSTEM. Whether any particular item of wastewater infrastructure is
included within the REGIONAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM shall be determined by the city
in its sole discretion as determined by the city engineer.
   REGIONAL WASTEWATER USERS. Collectively, all persons and other users whose
property is within the jurisdictional boundaries of a regional wastewater
customer and is connected to the regional wastewater system via a wastewater
system owned by one or more regional wastewater customers.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried waste from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together
with minor quantities of groundwater, storm water and surface water that are
not admitted intentionally.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical standards; or
      (2)   Industrial users that:
         A.   Discharge an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater;
         B.   Contribute a process wastewater that makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant; or
         C.   Are designated as significant by the city on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (2)
above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user,
and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that
the user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. The same as the definition of SIGNIFICANT
NONCOMPLIANCE under §
53.082.
   SIOUX FALLS LOCAL WASTEWATER CUSTOMER. All persons or other users whose
property is served by the city for wastewater collection and treatment that are
located within the municipal boundaries of the city.
   SLUG or SLUG LOAD. Any substance released in a discharge at a flow rate and/
or concentration that will adversely affect the wastewater treatment plant or
hydraulically overloads the sanitary sewer collection system. This includes,
but is not limited to, accidental spills and batch discharges.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). The classification pursuant to the
latest revision of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by
the office of management and budget.
   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN). Nitrogen in the form of organic proteins or
their decomposition product ammonia, as measured by the Kjeldahl method.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. One of the 126 pollutants, or combinations of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the
provisions of 33 U.S.C. § 1317 of the Act.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water  that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge into the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   VOLUMETRIC CHARGE. The monthly metered charges to be paid by regional
wastewater customers to the city.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. Liquid and water-carried
industrial waste and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE. Collectively, any and all main sewers, service
sewers, trunk sewers, septic or sewer treatment plants, POTWs, drains and
manholes, pumping stations, lift stations, interceptors, collectors, water
reclamation facilities, wastewater administrative facilities, force mains,
other wastewater treatment facilities, and all other facilities and items of
equipment or materials that reasonably pertain to or are used in connection
with a POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(1992 Code, § 41-110) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 125-84, passed 9-10-
1984; Ord. 111-85, passed 12-30-1985; Ord. 23-86, passed 3-31-1986; Ord. 51-88,
passed 6-20-1988; Ord. 50-91, passed 6-3-1991; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993;
Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 56-12, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 19-21, passed
2-16-2021; Ord. 143-22, passed 12-20-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 53.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as herein provided, the department of public works water reclamation
division shall be charged with the administration of this chapter and shall be
in full charge and control of the publicly owned treatment works.
(1992 Code, § 41-109) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16-2021)
Cross-reference:
   City council, see
ch. 30
   City organizations, see
ch. 32
REGULATION OF SEWERS
§ 53.015 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with this subchapter, or permitted by the DENR or EPA.
   (c)   Except as provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (d)   The owner of each house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, in the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located or may be
located a public sanitary sewer of the city, shall at the owner’s expense
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and connect the facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, within five years after the date of official notice to do so,
provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line and
reasonably accessible as determined by the city engineer.
(1992 Code, § 41-111) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 48-03, passed 6-9-2003) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.016 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (a)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
53.015(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this subchapter and State of
South Dakota Administrative Rules for individual and small on-site wastewater
systems (ARSD Chapter 74:03:01).
   (b)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city
engineer. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and
other information deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee
established by ordinance shall be paid to the city when the application is
filed.
   (c)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
engineer. The city engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction. The applicant for the permit shall notify the city engineer
when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the
receipt of notice by the city engineer.
   (d)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the South Dakota
Department of Environment and Natural Resources. For persons with a public
water supply, no permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than one-half acre. For persons with a private well, no permit
shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface
soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than one acre. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (e)   When a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
53.015(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within five
years, or as otherwise established by an annexation agreement, in compliance
with this subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material.
   (f)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city.
   (g)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by a health
officer.
(1992 Code, § 41-112) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 19-82, passed 3-8-
1982; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 48-03,
passed 6-9-2003; Ord. 19- 21, passed 2-16-2021; Ord. 30-22, passed 3-1-2022)
§ 53.017 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Administrative procedures for enforcement of §§
53.015 and
53.016 for existing and annexed property shall be established by executive
order of the mayor.
(1992 Code, § 41-112.1) (Ord. 48-03, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 53.018 SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Connections to service.
      (1)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections to or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer.
      (2)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits as follows:
         A.   For residential and commercial service; and
         B.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (3)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application for the appropriate permit on a form furnished by the city. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent by the city engineer. A permit fee and
inspection fee established by ordinance shall be paid to the city when the
application is filed.
   (b)   Premises service connection.
      (1)   A separate and independent sewer service shall be provided for each
living unit where a separate ownership or billing is anticipated, each unit
where a separate water service is required; and in house, building or property
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes.
      (2)   In lieu of a separate sewer service for every living unit, a single
building sewer of a size to be determined by the city engineer may be provided.
The city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for
damage caused by or resulting from any single connection.
      (3)   In the event one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
      (4)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, following examination and testing by the owner and
approved by the city engineer, to meet all requirements of this subchapter.
   (c)   Installation.
      (1)   The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of all
sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and
other applicable specifications or requirements of the city. In the absence of
suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual
of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
      (2)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless the connection is specifically
authorized by the city engineer or manager.
      (3)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other
applicable specifications and requirements of the city, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice
No. 9. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the city engineer before installation.
      (4)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city
engineer when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the city engineer.
      (5)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (d)   Owner responsibility. All costs incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the building drain and the building sewer.
(1992 Code, § 41-113) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 19-82, passed 3-8-
1982; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 19-21,
passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.019 ROOF DRAIN REBATES.
   (a)   The city may reimburse any user up to 50% of the reasonable cost of
the removal of a roof drain or other inflow source, not including sump pumps,
from an unauthorized direct or indirect connection to a public sanitary sewer.
   (b)   Any rebate program shall be administered according to a schedule and
approval procedures to be established by the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-113.1) (Ord. 92-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 53.020 SEWER BACKUPS.
   (a)   Every property owner, occupant and user shall notify the city
immediately upon the discovery of a sanitary sewer backup.
   (b)   Upon notification to the city, the director of public health may
inspect the premises and determine if the sanitary sewer backup has created a
health emergency.
   (c)   If the director of public health determines that a health emergency
exists and the city determines that the backup is not caused by the private
service line, the city will contract for cleanup and disinfection to eliminate
the public health emergency. In lieu thereof, the city will reimburse any
insured party for any insurance deductible paid for cleanup and disinfection
services performed according to city standards by a city-approved sewer cleanup
service. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
36.030 of this Code, the city may contract for the cleanup if the director of
public health determines a health emergency exists.
   (d)   The owner or occupant shall, prior to the city performing any work,
hold the city harmless from any damages that might occur during the work and
give written authority to enter the premises to perform the work and to inspect
the premises after the work has been performed. The owner or occupant shall
also assign to the city any claim it has for recovery of costs to eliminate the
health hazard.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the provisions of
chapter 92 of this Code, any contractor performing work for the city that
results in a sanitary sewer health emergency shall reimburse the city for the
cost of the cleanup if the city determines the contractor or any of its
subcontractors are responsible for causing the backup.
   (f)   The city shall not be responsible for any costs associated with the
following:
      (1)   Damage to personal or real property associated with any sewer
backup;
      (2)   Sewer backups caused within any sanitary sewer service (private)
line;
      (3)   Sewer backups caused by flood or other catastrophic acts of God;
and
      (4)   Sewer backups incurred by industrial users subject to the high-
strength rates in §
51.081(a)(4).
(1992 Code, § 41-113.2) (Ord. 8-03, passed 1-21-2003; Ord. 38-03, passed 5-5-
2003; Ord. 19- 21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.021 RESOLUTION AND NOTICE TO OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Whenever the city shall deem it necessary to construct sewer service
connections from the trunk or service sewers to the curbline in the streets or
alleys, a resolution shall be passed by the city council requiring the property
owners whose property has not been connected with the trunk or service sewers
to construct the connecting sewers from the trunk or service sewers to the
curbline in the streets or alleys within the time specified not less than 30
days from the passage of the resolution.
   (b)   The resolution shall contain a notice to the owners stating what work
is to be done and the time within which they are required to do it. The notice
may be general as to the owners but must be specified as to the descriptions of
the lots or parcels of ground in front of which the sewer connections are to be
constructed.
(1992 Code, § 41-114) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 53.022 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   If the sewer connections are not built, laid and constructed in the
manner and within the time prescribed in the resolution described in §
53.021, the city council may order the construction to be done by that person
as they may contract with and under the direction of the city engineer at the
expense of the lots and parcels of land adjoining in front of and for the
benefit of which the sewer connections have been laid, built and constructed.
The expense shall be assessed upon the lots and parcels of land so chargeable
by the city engineer and returned by him or her to the city council.
   (b)   The city finance director shall cause to be published the estimate of
the city engineer, together with a notice of the time and place when the city
council will meet to approve the construction, by one publication in the
official newspaper at least one week prior to the meeting of the city council
to approve the construction.
   (c)   Payments therefore shall be due and payable from and after the filing
of the assessment roll with the city finance director and shall be collected in
the same manner as other special assessments are now collected as provided by
law.
   (d)   All steps taken for the charge of the property affected and the
collecting of the assessment and the selling of the property in default of
payment of the assessment shall be done and performed in the same manner as
other special assessments for local improvements are now collected by the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-115) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 53.023 PROHIBITED USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (a)   Unpolluted water.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, unless
specifically authorized by the city engineer.
      (2)   Storm water other than that exempted under subsection (a)(1) of
this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers to the street or to a
natural outlet approved by the city engineer.
      (3)   Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water may be
discharged, on approval of the city engineer, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
   (b)   Groundwater and sump pump discharge.
      (1)   Groundwater collected by building subdrains must discharge to the
ground surface outside of the building, a storm drain, a sump pump collection
system, or a natural outlet.
      (2)   No sump pump discharge to the ground surface shall create a hazard
or a nuisance including, but not be limited to, ice accumulation on city
streets, alleys, and sidewalks; damaging a city street or sidewalk; creating
ponds of standing water or algae; or flowing over adjoining property.
      (3)   If a storm drain or sump pump collection system exists or is
constructed adjacent to the property, the property owner shall be charged a
permit fee and connect the sump pump or building subdrains to the storm sewer
system.
      (4)   A sump pump collection system fee shall be paid whenever a
connection is made to an existing collection system not constructed by the
developer of the lot connecting to the system.
(1992 Code, § 41-116) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 70-01, passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 13-05,
passed 2-14-2005; Ord. 6-13, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16- 2021)
§ 53.024 INTERCEPTORS AND TRAPS.
   If the city engineer or manager determines that an interceptor is necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease, oil, sand
or other harmful pollutants in excessive amounts, the property owner shall be
responsible for providing, installing and maintaining the interceptor.
Interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
engineer or manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal
by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates, and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the city engineer
and manager. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed
by the owner's personnel must be performed by a currently licensed liquid waste
hauler.
(1992 Code, § 41-117) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.025 PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the POTW. Any person violating this section shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(1992 Code, § 41-118) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.026 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flash point of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or
by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Liquid waste or pollutants which are transported for final
disposal, unless such liquid waste or pollutants are transported for final
disposal pursuant to §
53.065;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or which prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes, except as specifically authorized by the manager;
      (13)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (14)   Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in amounts
which will cause obstruction of the flow in sanitary sewers; or
      (15)   Light water foaming agents in quantities which would cause foaming
problems in the POTW.
   (c)   Prohibited pollutants, substances or wastewater. Pollutants,
substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in a manner which could result in a discharge to the POTW.
(1992 Code, § 41-119) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 23-86, passed 3-31-
1986; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-3-1991; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96,
passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 19- 21, passed 2-16-2021)
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT
§ 53.040 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the term USER shall only refer to
"significant industrial user," "industrial user" or other permitted USERS,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.041 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter N, parts 405471 are hereby incorporated.
   (a)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
   (b)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the manager shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(e).
   (c)   A user, in the sole discretion of the manager, may obtain a variance
from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
   (d)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(1992 Code, § 41-119.1) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 19- 21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.042 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   State pretreatment standards found at § 74:52:11 of the Administrative Rules
of South Dakota are hereby incorporated.
(1992 Code, § 41-119.2) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 56-12, passed 8-7-
2012)
§ 53.043 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (a)   The following pollutant limits are established in order to protect
POTW, receiving water quality, worker health and safety, and improve
opportunities for beneficial use of biosolids from nondomestic discharges.
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/L) Instantaneous Maximum (mg/L)
Pollutant Daily Maximum (mg/L) Instantaneous Maximum (mg/L)
Arsenic   0.19                 0.38
Cadmium   0.024                0.048
Copper    2.79                 5.58
Lead      1.06                 2.12
Nickel    1.52                 3.04
Selenium  0.19                 0.38
Silver    3.04                 6.08
Zinc      11.57                23.14
 
   (b)   The following pollutant limits are established in order to protect
POTW, receiving water quality, worker health and safety, and improve
opportunities for beneficial use of biosolids from nondomestic discharges. The
following pollutant loading limits to the POTW shall not exceed the allowable
total pounds. The mass allocation shall be imposed on significant industries of
concern by their wastewater discharge permits.
 
Pollutant  Maximum Allowable Industrial Loading  Unit of Measure Unit of Limit
           (MAIL)
BOD        20,692                                lbs/day         30-day average
Molybdenum 6.17                                  lbs/day         Daily
TKN        3,527                                 lbs/day         30-day average
TSS        15,095                                lbs/day         30-day average
 
   (c)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
into the POTW. All concentrations and limits for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The manager may impose industry
specific mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based
limitations above. The manager may also develop site specific permit limits for
pollutants that are specific to an individual user or user group.
   (d)   Liquid waste generators (LWG) in compliance with a valid LWG permit
are exempt from the local limits listed in division (a) above.
   (e)   Liquid waste haulers in compliance with the revised ordinances and the
liquid waste control program rules are exempt from local limits in division (a)
above when servicing LWGs that are exempted in accordance with division (d)
above.
(1992 Code, § 41-119.3) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 23-86, passed 3-31-
1986; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-3-1991; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96,
passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 56-12, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16- 2021)
§ 53.044 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW.
(1992 Code, § 41-119.4) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.045 DILUTION.
   No user shall attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard
or requirement. The manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(1992 Code, § 41-119.5) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16-
2021)
§ 53.046 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
subchapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §
53.040 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the
manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed
plans describing the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the manager before the
facilities are constructed. The review and acceptance of the plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying the facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
the city under the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 41-120) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993; Ord. 19- 21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.047 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (a)   Whenever deemed necessary, the manager may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams and those
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user’s compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (b)   The manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (c)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(1992 Code, § 41-120.1) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.048 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the manager, a user must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its wastewater within a time period specified by the
manager. The manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.
(1992 Code, § 41-120.2) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996)
§ 53.049 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (a)   At least once every two years, the manager shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan.
The manager may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement
a plan. Alternatively, the manager may develop a plan for any user.
   (b)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the manager of any accidental
or slug discharge, as required by §
53.071; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(1992 Code, § 41-121) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.050 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the manager,
except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application
pursuant to §
53.051 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
   (b)   The manager may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter.
   (c)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections of this
subchapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and
local law.
(1992 Code, § 41-122) (Ord. 125-84, passed 9-10-1984; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.051 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any nonpermitted user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
subchapter and who wishes to continue the discharges in the future, shall,
within 60 days after notification by the manager, apply to the manager for a
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
53.053, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
180 days of the notification date of the manager except in accordance with a
wastewater discharge permit issued by the manager.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.1) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996)
§ 53.052 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain the permit prior to
the beginning or recommencing of the discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with §
53.053, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.2) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996)
§ 53.053 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (a)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a complete and accurate permit application. The manager may require all users
to submit as part of an application the following information:
      (1)   All information required by §
53.066(b);
      (2)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the manager to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   (b)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the user for revision.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.3) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996)
§ 53.054 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed
by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.4) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.055 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit
application, the manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit. The manager may deny any application for a wastewater
discharge permit.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.5) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996)
§ 53.056 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the
discretion of the manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.6) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.057 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall include those conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the manager to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal and
protect against damage to the POTW.
   (a)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   The expiration of the wastewater discharge permit;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the manager in accordance with §
53.063;
      (3)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on federal, state and local law; and
      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond
that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
   (b)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the manager to ensure
compliance with this ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.7) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.058 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.
   (a)   The manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit.
   (b)   Any person, including the user, may petition the manager to reconsider
the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its
issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to
be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      (4)   If the manager fails to act within 30 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
      (5)   The final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision is
subject to judicial review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.8) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 43-07, passed 3-5-
2007)
§ 53.059 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the city’s POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters;
   (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
   (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   (g)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13; and
   (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.9) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.060 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION OR TERMINATION.
   (a)   The manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the manager of changed
conditions pursuant to §
53.070;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the manager timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this subchapter.
   (b)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be terminated upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user terminate upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.10) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-
3-1996)
§ 53.061 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete and accurate
permit application, in accordance with §
53.053, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.11) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-
3-1996)
§ 53.062 CONTINUE PERMITS BEYOND EXPIRATION DATE.
   The manager may extend the permit beyond its expiration date where permittee
has complied with §
53.061 but, through no fault on the part of the industrial user, is not
reissued a permit at time of expiration.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.12) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.063 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (a)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the
manager and the manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The
notice to the manager must include an authorized representative designation
form and a written certification by the authorized representative which:
      (1)   States that the new company has no immediate intent to change
facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
   (b)   Failure to provide advanced notice of a transfer terminates the
wastewater discharge permit as of the date of facility transfer.
(1992 Code, § 41-122.13) (Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 53.064 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM REGIONAL WASTEWATER CUSTOMERS OR
OTHER PUBLIC AGENCIES.
   (a)   If any other public agency contributes waste to the POTW, the city may
enter into a joint powers agreement with the other public agency.
   (b)   Prior to entering into a joint powers agreement required by division
(a) above, the manager or his or her representatives shall request the
following information from the public agency:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the public agency;
      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing public
agency that are discharging to the POTW;
      (3)   Other information as the manager or his or her representative may
deem necessary.
   (c)   A joint powers agreement, as required by division (a) above, shall at
a minimum contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the regional wastewater customer or other public
agency to adopt or adopt by reference a wastewater ordinance which is at least
as stringent as this subchapter and local limits which are at least as
stringent as those set out in §
53.043. The requirement shall specify that the ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to ordinances or local limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the city regional wastewater customer or other
public agency to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the regional wastewater
customer or other public agency; which of these activities will be conducted by
the manager or his or her representative; and which of these activities will be
conducted jointly by the regional wastewater customer or other public agency
and the manager or his or her representative;
      (4)   A requirement for the regional wastewater customer or other public
agency to provide the manager or his or her representative with access to all
information that the regional wastewater customer or other public agency
maintains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the regional
wastewater customer or other public agency's wastewater at the designated
monitoring point before it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the regional wastewater customer or
other public agency's discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the manager and his or her representative's
access to the facilities of users located within the regional wastewater
customer or other public agency's boundaries for the purpose of inspection,
sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the manager;
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available to the city for breach of
the terms of the joint powers agreement including, but not limited to,
suspension or termination by the city without liability on the part of the
city.
(1992 Code, § 41-123) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996; Ord. 35-13, passed 6-18-2013; Ord. 19-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.065 HAULED LIQUID WASTE.
   (a)   No person, corporation, residence, commercial establishment, industry
or institution shall engage in the practice of pumping, hauling or disposing of
liquid waste in the city, unless a current license issued by the city is held
to engage in the practice. An application for a liquid waste hauler’s license
shall be submitted to and approved by the manager. Any license issued pursuant
to the provision of this subchapter is subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The license shall expire on December 31 following its date of
issuance;
      (2)   The license shall be nontransferable;
      (3)   The licensee shall furnish proof of:
         A.   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles, trucks and trailers. The insurance shall provide coverage at
least as broad as that found in the standard comprehensive automobile liability
policy with limits of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit each
occurrence;
         B.   Commercial general liability insurance providing coverage not
less than that of the standard commercial general liability insurance policy
for operations of the licensee. The policy shall include contractual personal
injury, bodily injury and property damage liability coverages not less than
$2,000,000 general aggregate; and
         C.   Workers’ compensation insurance with statutory limits of the
workers’ compensation laws of the state and Coverage B, employer’s liability,
covering operation of the licensee. This shall include “other states insurance”
so as to include all states not named on the declarations page of the insurance
policy, but excepting monopolistic state funds states. The available limits for
Coverage B, employer’s liability shall not be less than $1,000,000 each
accident, $1,000,000 disease–policy limits.
      (4)   All liquid waste haulers shall be bonded in an amount of at least
$25,000, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of any
spill, dumping or discharge of any liquid waste, hazardous waste or
incompatible waste within the jurisdictional limits of the city. Proof of
bonding shall be filed with the manager prior to issuance of a license;
      (5)   The license is subject to denial or revocation for violation by the
licensee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city rule or
regulation; and
      (6)   The license required by this section for liquid waste haulers shall
not apply to vehicles owned by the city engaged in work as authorized by the
manager or his or her authorized representative.
   (b)   At the time of collection, all liquid waste generators shall supply
the liquid waste hauler with a completed liquid waste disposal coupon
accurately identifying the contents of the liquid waste. The manager may
require site specific liquid wastes to be hauled separately by liquid waste
haulers. At the time of disposal, the liquid waste hauler must supply the city
with a complete and accurate liquid waste disposal coupon. Unauthorized dumping
or discharge is prohibited as follows.
      (1)   The unauthorized dumping or discharge of liquid waste into the
sanitary sewer system of the city, other than at a disposal station designated
by the manager, is prohibited.
      (2)   The dumping or discharge of hazardous wastes or incompatible wastes
into the sanitary sewer system of the city is prohibited.
      (3)   Intentionally providing false or inaccurate information on the
liquid waste disposal coupon required in this section is prohibited.
(1992 Code, § 41-124) (Ord. 51-88, passed 6-20-1988; Ord. 33-90, passed 4-9-
1990; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 19-21,
passed 2-16-2021)
§ 53.066 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (a)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the manager a report which contains the information listed
in division (b) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
manager a report which contains the information listed in division (b) below. A
new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (b)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operation(s). A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         A.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         B.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the manager, of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
53.075; and
         C.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
53.076.
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
53.067; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.054.
(1992 Code, § 41-125) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.067 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
53.066(b)(7).
   (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (these events include, but are not limited
to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation).
   (b)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
   (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the manager no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return to the established schedule.
   (d)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between progress
reports to the manager.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.1) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.068 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to these pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the manager a
report containing the information described in §
53.066(b)(4) through (b)(6). For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.054.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.2)
§ 53.069 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (a)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the manager but in no case less than twice per year (in July and January),
submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.054.
   (b)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (c)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the manager, using the
procedures prescribed in §
53.076, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.3) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.070 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Each user must notify the manager of any planned significant changes
to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
   (b)   The manager may require the user to submit information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under §
53.053.
   (c)   The manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
53.055 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
53.059 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   (d)   For the purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.4) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.071 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (a)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the manager of
the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the user.
   (b)   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the manager submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense,
loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall the notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other
liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter.
   (c)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.5) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.072 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the manager as the manager may require.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.6) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.073 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
The user is not required to resample if the manager monitors at the user’s
facility at least once a month, or if the manager samples between the user’s
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.7) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993)
§ 53.074 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (a)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. part 261. The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification
also shall contain the following information to the extent the information is
known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes; an estimation of the mass and
concentration of the constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month; and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this division (a) need be submitted only once
for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under §
53.070. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
53.066,
53.068 and
53.069.
   (b)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (a) above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires
a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than the quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (c)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the manager, the EPA
regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the effective
date of the regulations.
   (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (e)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this subchapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.8) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.075 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by the EPA.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.9) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.076 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (a)   Except as indicated in division (b) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In
the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the manager may authorize
the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where
the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (b)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.10) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.077 TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.11) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.078 RECORD KEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this subchapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this subchapter and
any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of the requirements. Records
shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name
of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of these analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of
at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the manager.
(1992 Code, § 41-125.12) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.079 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (a)   The manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter
and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
   (b)   Users shall allow the manager ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the manager will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
      (2)   The manager shall have the right to set up on the user’s property,
or require installation of, these devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the user’s operations.
      (3)   The manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least annually or as needed to ensure and maintain their
accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the manager and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing the access shall be borne by the user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the manager access to the user’s
premises shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 41-126) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.080 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the manager has been refused access to a building, structure or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this subchapter, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city
designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from
the circuit court.
(1992 Code, § 41-126.1) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.081 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring
programs, and from the manager’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the manager, that
the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information
or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
the information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
“effluent data,” as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
(1992 Code, § 41-127) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.082 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (a)   The manager shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users
which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (b)   The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation that the manager believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the manager’s exercise
of its emergency authority to halt or prevent a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation(s) which the manager determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(1992 Code, § 41-128) (Ord. 50-91, passed 6-3-1991; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-
1993)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 53.095 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 14 days of the
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the manager. The manager may waive
the written reporting requirement for isolated, minor violations where the user
has complied with the notification requirements in §
53.073. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the manager to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
(1992 Code, § 41-129) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993; Ord. 102-96, passed 9-3-
1996)
§ 53.096 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. The documents will include specific action to be
taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified
by the document. The documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
53.098 and
53.099.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.1) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.097 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before
the manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the
hearing. The notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user.
A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.2) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.098 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come
into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.3) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.099 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   (a)   When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the manager may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all violations and directing
the user to:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      (2)   Take the appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   (b)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.4) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.100 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this subchapter or
requirement imposed pursuant to this subchapter except §
53.025 may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.5) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 107-92, passed 12-
21-1992; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.101 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (a)   The manager may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after informal
notice to the user, whenever the suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The manager
may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity
to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or
which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
manager may take those steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance
of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The manager may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless
the termination proceedings in §
53.102 are initiated against the user.
      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the manager prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under §
53.097 or §
53.102.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.6) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.102 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   (a)   In addition to the provisions in §
53.060, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
53.040.
   (b)   The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
53.097 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by
the manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.7) (Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter,
requirement imposed pursuant to this chapter, and/or any time limit set forth
in the notice provided in this section shall be guilty of a violation of city
ordinances. Each day in which any violation shall continue is a separate
offense.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
53.040 through
53.082 shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of the violation.
   (c)   In addition to any other fine and/or penalty authorized by this
chapter, any industrial user or any significant industrial user who is found to
be violating any provision of §§
53.040 through
53.082, requirement imposed pursuant to §§
53.040 through
53.082 and/or any time limits set forth in the notice provided in this section,
is subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 per violation per day of
violation.
(1992 Code, § 41-129.5) (Ord. 47-81, passed 6-1-1981; Ord. 107-92, passed 12-
21-1992; Ord. 57-93, passed 7-12-1993)
CHAPTER 54: WATER-COOLED AIR CONDITIONERS
Section
   
54.001   Definitions
   
54.002   Permit required
   
54.003   Units of five tons or less
   
54.004   Units over five tons
   
54.005   Right of entry
§ 54.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CONDITIONING. The cooling or dehumidification, or both, of space for
human occupancy.
   AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM or AIR CONDITIONING INSTALLATION. One or more air
conditioning units, the water for which passes through a common meter, whether
or not the units are owned by the property owner, the tenant or a combination
of both. It is intended that separate submetering for any property owner or
tenant occupying different space in the same building could create separate
systems; it is not intended that submetering of individual units serving the
same space or adjacent space under one owner or tenant would create separate
systems.
   INSTALLED CAPACITY. The total number of tons of refrigeration installed on
one air conditioning system.
   SEASON. The period of May 1 to September 30 in the same calendar year.
   TON OF REFRIGERATION. The heat required to melt ice at the rate of one ton
in 24 hours. One compressor horsepower shall be considered equivalent to ONE
TON OF REFRIGERATION.
   WATER CONSERVING DEVICE. A cooling tower, spray pond, evaporative condenser
or other equipment by which water is cooled and recirculated, thereby limiting
the use of water from the mains to that amount lost through evaporation.
   WATER REGULATING DEVICE. A regulating valve or other device, the purpose of
which is to limit the maximum use of water to a predetermined rate.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.601; 1992 Code, § 41-93) (Ord. 1912, passed 4-29-1957;
Ord. 1962, passed 8-4-1958)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 54.002 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every water customer who desires to install water utilizing air
conditioning equipment is hereby required to obtain approval of his or her
equipment and a permit therefor in advance from the water department and is
required to give notice of completion of the installation.
   (b)   The permit charge shall be $3 for up to and including five-ton
capacity of the equipment and $6 for in excess of five tons of capacity of the
equipment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.602; 1992 Code, § 41-95) (Ord. 1912, passed 4-29-1957)
§ 54.003 UNITS OF FIVE TONS OR LESS.
   (a)   All compressor-type refrigeration units having standard rated
capacities of five tons or less may be equipped with water-cooled condensers,
using water from city mains, provided that not more than one unit of capacity
so equipped or group of units of total capacity, whether connected singly, in
series or in parallel, may be used in one air conditioning system.
   (b)   All types of cooling devices employing city water directly as a means
of heat exchange shall be limited to a maximum rate of five gallons per minute,
unless the water is again reused in a manner described in division (a) above,
in which case the regulations provided for in connection with compressor-type
and absorption-type refrigeration shall govern. For this type of system, the
total tons of refrigeration shall be the accumulative capacities of both the
direct water heat exchanges and the compressor-type or absorption-type
collecting components.
   (c)   A person using any system consisting of a unit of five-ton capacity or
less or a group of units totaling five tons or less is prohibited from using
water from mains in excess of two gallons per minute, per ton. Each unit shall
be equipped with an approved automatic water regulating device, so adjusted as
to limit the use of water under maximum summer conditions to not more than two
gallons per minute, per ton.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.602; 1992 Code, § 41-96) (Ord. 1912, passed 4-29-1957)
§ 54.004 UNITS OVER FIVE TONS.
   (a)   A person using any system consisting of a unit of over five-ton
capacity, or group of units totaling over five-ton capacity, is prohibited from
using water from the mains in excess of two-tenths gallons per minute, per ton,
except as provided in division (b) below. The water level control on the bank
or reservoir shall be so adjusted as to prevent waste of water through the
overflow.
   (b)   Each unit over five tons, except when connected to a water conserving
system, shall be assessed an annual demand charge of $20 per season for each
ton of capacity in excess of five tons in addition to regular water charges.
Each unit of any size equipped with water-conserving devices or units connected
to a water-conserving system may take water from the mains at the regular
metered rates. When a conversion is made from the non-water-conserving class to
the water-conserving class during any season, prior to September 1, the demand
charge for the entire season shall be eliminated.
   (c)   Demand charges are payable to the city finance director and bills
shall be rendered September 1, each year, covering the current season. Demand
charges shall be in lieu of increased rates for water.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.602; 1992 Code, § 41-97) (Ord. 1912, passed 4-29-1957)
§ 54.005 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The manager shall at all reasonable hours have free access to premises
supplied with water for air conditioning purposes, to examine the equipment and
to ascertain if there is more water being used than allowed by this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.602; 1992 Code, § 41-98) (Ord. 1912, passed 4-29-1957)
CHAPTER 55: PRIVATELY OWNED BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Section
   
55.001   Administration
   
55.002   Definitions
   
55.003   Regulations
   
55.004   Alterations
   
55.005   Right of entry; inspection and sampling
   
55.006   Enforcement and penalty
§ 55.001 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as herein provided, the department of public works shall be charged
with the administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 9-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 55.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants, directly or indirectly, to
the municipal stormwater system or waters of the state. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage. BMPs include structural BMPs such as permanent detention or retention
ponds constructed to control and minimize stormwater runoff rates and volumes
and to prevent, control, and minimize pollution in the municipal stormwater
system and/or waters of the state.
   DISCHARGE. An addition of any pollutants or combination of pollutants to the
municipal stormwater system or waters of the state.
   MUNICIPAL STORMWATER SYSTEM. The city's conveyance or system of stormwater
conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains.
   OWNER. A person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises real
property on which a structural BMP is located or who is responsible for control
of a facility required to use BMPs.
   POLLUTANT. Substances listed in the definition of pollutant in SDCL 34-2-
2 and which are discharged into the municipal stormwater system or waters of
the state.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Waters within the jurisdiction of the state as defined
in SDCL 34A-2-2.
(Ord. 9-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 55.003 REGULATIONS.
   Permanent structural and/or nonstructural BMPs shall be implemented to
control and minimize stormwater runoff rates and volumes and to prevent,
control, and minimize stormwater pollutants as required in this Chapter.
   (a)   It is a violation for any owner to improperly construct or operate or
fail to maintain the proper function of privately owned structural BMPs.
Maintenance activities include, but are not limited to, removing trash and
debris, reseeding, mowing, pest control, removing sediment accumulation,
removing vegetation, replacing filter media, and repairing eroded areas.
   (b)   It is a violation for any owner to place or deposit debris, yard
waste, garbage, or other materials that are incompatible with BMPs (e.g., toys,
sports equipment, decorative materials) in BMPs, or permit such items to be
deposited in any manner on privately owned structural BMPs.
   (c)   The owner shall immediately notify the public works department of any
discharge of a pollutant, debris, yard waste, garbage, excessive sediment, or
materials incompatible with BMPs, including from a privately owned BMP, into
the municipal storm water drainage system, when such discharge causes or is
likely to cause obstruction of stormwater inlets, impairment of the flow of
stormwater in city conveyances such as streets or gutters, or release of debris
or chemical or biological materials into the municipal stormwater system. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of pollutant,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the owner.
The owner shall document and submit to the public works department all
pertinent information.
   (d)   In the case of any physical failure, including, but not limited to,
structural, equipment, or media failure (e.g., failure of BMP fixtures
including, but not limited to, screens, riprap, aerators, design features, and
fences) of a privately owned structural BMP that may cause pollutants to enter
the municipal stormwater system, the owner shall immediately notify the public
works department of the incident. This notification shall include the location
failure, type and extent of the failure, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the owner. The owner shall document and submit to the public works
department all pertinent information.
   If privately owned BMPs are constructed, operated, and/or maintained in a
manner that results in discharge of pollutants to the city's storm water
drainage system, the director of public works may require the owner to
implement additional structural and/or nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the storm water drainage system.
(Ord. 9-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 55.004 ALTERATIONS.
   Alteration of a BMP could significantly change the treatment capability.
Therefore, the owner shall notify the public works department at least 30 days
in advance of any significant alterations to or breach of privately owned BMPs,
including any removal, replacement, reconstruction, or increase or decrease in
surface area or acre-feet of storage of more than 5 percent.
(Ord. 9-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 55.005 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The facilities, equipment, practices, or operations of privately owned BMPs
are subject to inspection by the city. The inspection may include, but is not
limited to, sampling, photographs, interviewing staff on alleged violations,
and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises with any
effect on the BMPs.
   (a)   The procedures for inspection in §
53.079 and §
53.080 and the state and federal constitutions apply to such inspections.
   (b)   It is a violation of city ordinance to maintain any temporary or
permanent obstruction, preventing the city from obtaining safe and reasonable
access to any BMP.
   (c)   Notice will be provided prior to inspections, except in emergency
circumstances.
(Ord. 9-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 55.006 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   Any person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter or requirement
imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be provided with a written statement
identifying the nature of the violation and provided with a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof not to exceed 90 days. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently
cease or correct all violations. Any person or entity who fails to cease or
correct its violation or who reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of the public or the
environment, will be served with a written Notice of Violation. The procedures
in §
53.096 through §
53.101 shall apply to enforcement when a Notice of Violation is issued.
   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter or requirement imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of city ordinances and
shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law or ordinances, specifically
§
40.999. Each day in which any violations shall continue is a separate offense.
   Any person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter or requirement
imposed pursuant to this chapter shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned to the city by reason of the violation.
(Ord. 9-17, passed 1-10-2017)
CHAPTER 56: OVERHEAD UTILITY WIRING IN URBAN RENEWAL AREA
Section
   
56.001   Area
   
56.002   Removal of overhead lines
   
56.003   General policy
   
56.004   Notice
   
56.005   Designation of area for relocation of utility
   
56.006   Access
§ 56.001 AREA.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the urban renewal area is inclusive of and
bordered by the centerlines of the following streets:
Fourth Street on the north; Minnesota Avenue on the west; 12th Street on the
south; and the Milwaukee Railroad Mainline and the Northwestern Railroad at
Fifth Avenue on the east.
(1992 Code, § 14-130) (Ord. 112-73, passed 12-17-1973)
§ 56.002 REMOVAL OF OVERHEAD LINES.
   (a)   All overhead lines shall be placed underground in the urban renewal
area as set forth in §
56.001.
   (b)   The city will coordinate with the affected public and private utility
companies a practical year-by-year schedule related to the resurfacing of
affected streets and alleys.
(1992 Code, § 14-131) (Ord. 112-73, passed 12-17-1973)
§ 56.003 GENERAL POLICY.
   Inasmuch as the undergrounding of overhead lines in the urban renewal area
will require a large capital outlay by the affected utility companies, it is
reasonable that those utility companies receive at least a partial contribution
for their expenses from the benefitted customers and inasmuch as the customers
must convert or adapt their utility inlets to receive the new underground
service, it is necessary to require them to provide at their own expense new
facilities before overhead service is removed. It is hereby declared that,
except as is otherwise provided by this chapter, the undergrounding and
conversions or adaptations required thereby will be implemented and governed by
a general written policy prepared by the affected utility company, provided
that a written policy and any amendments thereto be first approved by the city.
The written policy, with a resolution attached indicating city approval, will
become effective when accepted by the city finance director for filing.
(1992 Code, § 14-132) (Ord. 112-73, passed 12-17-1973)
§ 56.004 NOTICE.
   At least 90 days prior to construction of any new underground service in the
urban renewal area the city will, by registered mail, notify the owners of
record of all affected properties of that construction, and that if they desire
to continue service or start to receive service from the utility company they
must at their own expense make the necessary modifications to their property to
accept the underground service.
(1992 Code, § 14-133) (Ord. 112-73, passed 12-17-1973)
§ 56.005 DESIGNATION OF AREA FOR RELOCATION OF UTILITY.
   The city shall designate and reserve a definite area within the public ways
for the installation and location of the underground facilities in the urban
renewal area.
(1992 Code, § 14-134) (Ord. 112-73, passed 12-17-1973)
§ 56.006 ACCESS.
   The utility company shall have full access to its facilities installed
underground in the urban renewal area for the purpose of inspection,
maintenance and repair of the facilities, the right of access to include the
right to open streets and alleys. The city shall allow the utility companies
sufficient time to place their facilities beneath the streets and alleys while
the streets and alleys are torn up for resurfacing, and the city shall provide
the utility companies with access to the torn-up streets or alleys during that
period so that the utility companies will have unobstructed use of sufficiently
large sections of the public ways to enable them to install the underground
facilities in an economic manner.
(1992 Code, § 14-135) (Ord. 112-73, passed 12-17-1973)
CHAPTER 57: GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
Section
General Provisions
   
57.001   Definitions
   
57.002   Littering prohibited; generally
   
57.003   Littering prohibited; duty of business owners, occupants
   
57.004   Littering prohibited; duty of person
   
57.005   Littering on premises of another
   
57.006   Removal of litter by city
Collection Regulations
   
57.020   Commercial garbage service required
   
57.021   Preparation for deposit, collection, and transport
   
57.022   Containers
   
57.023   Container placement
   
57.024   Levels of collection service required
   
57.025   [Repealed]
   
57.026   [Repealed]
   
57.027   [Repealed]
   
57.028   Nonresidential recyclable collection
   
57.029   Apartment garbage and recycling service
   
57.030   Standardized recycling collection
   
57.031   Business reporting of recyclable materials
   
57.032   Solid waste containing recyclable materials
   
57.033   Waste disposal site
Sanitary Landfill
   
57.045   Designation
   
57.046   Unlawful deposits
   
57.047   Rates for use
   
57.048   Waiver of landfill fees
   
57.049   Drop-off site for household hazardous waste, large electronics, and
hand-held electronics
   
57.050   Certain materials excluded
   
57.051   Removal restricted
   
57.052   Private landfill unlawful
   
57.053   Refusal to admit certain vehicles
Commercial Haulers
   
57.065   License required
   
57.066   [Repealed]
   
57.067   Identifying name
   
57.068   Transfer
   
57.069   Expiration
   
57.070   Hauling unit permits
   
57.071   Unit inspection required
   
57.072   Display of permit
   
57.073   Minimum design and capacity requirements for vehicles and containers
   
57.074   Loading of vehicles
   
57.075   Collection conditions
   
57.076   Minimum vehicle requirements
   
57.077   Proof of insurance required for license
   
57.078   Solid waste collection rates
   
57.079   Garbage haulers licensed recyclable collectors
   
57.080   Licensed recycling processing facilities
   
57.081   Recycling goal and standard
   
57.082   Filing of reports by recyclable collector
   
57.083   [Repealed]
   
57.084   Filing of reports by recycling facilities
   
57.085   Confidentiality of information
   
57.086   Customer information
Licensed Facilities
   
57.100   Facility license required
   
57.101   Application for facility license
   
57.102   Transfer
   
57.103   Renewal
Licensing Procedure
   
57.104   License fees
   
57.105   Denial or revocation
   
57.106   Solid waste transfer facility operating requirements
   
57.107   Volume reduction permitted
   
57.108   Conduct prohibited
   
57.109   Requirements for disposal of solid waste generated from the treatment
of regulated medical waste
Solid Waste Planning Board
   
57.120   Creation
   
57.121   Composition of board
   
57.122   Purpose
   
57.123   Staff
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Disposal of garbage and waste food by food establishments, see §
112.009
   Examples of nuisances, see §
92.071
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Garbage disposal in mobile home parks, see §
152.068
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Littering in parks, see §
95.009
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Utilities generally, see
ch. 50
Statutory reference:
   Municipal garbage disposal systems, see SDCL 9-32-11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 57.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL WASTE. Any accumulation of manure or straw which has been used for
the transportation, housing or penning of animals.
   APARTMENT. Any building with two or more rental dwelling units.
   CATCH BASIN. A formed holding area for sludges, sediments, screenings or
grit which may include the cleanout and settling tank areas.
   CHIP BOARD. A type of paperboard generally made from reclaimed paper stock
such as cereal boxes.
   COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION COLLECTOR OR HAULER. Any person who
transports construction and demolition debris to the sanitary landfill for
consideration or who holds themselves out as being engaged in the business of
transporting and disposing of construction and demolition debris.
   COMMERCIAL GARBAGE COLLECTOR or COMMERCIAL GARBAGE HAULER. Any person who
transports any garbage, rubbish, or livestock waste to the sanitary landfill
for a consideration or a fee. Also referred to as GARBAGE COLLECTOR or GARBAGE
HAULER.
   CONTAINED. To hold or include within its volume.
   CONTAMINATED. Impure, unclean, dirty, grimy, or infectious.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Carpet, wood, construction plastic,
shingles, glass, metals, wiring, insulation, tile, drywall, furniture,
concrete, and mattresses.
   CURBSIDE. On the public right-of-way, generally between the sidewalk and the
paved portion of the street.
   CORRUGATED CARDBOARD. Heavy paper with alternating ridges and grooves.
   DIRECTOR. The director of public works or his or her designee.
   GARBAGE. All refuse (including litter, rubbish, and municipal solid waste),
containers, or accumulation of animal or vegetable matter which attends the
processing, preparation, transportation, cooking, eating, sale or storage of
meat, fish, vegetables, fruit, and all other food or food products found within
the city which has been condemned by the health department as a nuisance or is
likely to cause or transmit disease, or which may be a hazard to health. This
definition excludes all items defined in § 57.050. Municipal solid waste is a
type of garbage.
   GARBAGE COLLECTOR or GARBAGE HAULER. See COMMERCIAL GARBAGE COLLECTOR or
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE HAULER.
   HAND-HELD ELECTRONICS. Cell phones, pagers, personal digital assistants,
handheld video games, calculators, small MP3 players, small compact disc
players, small cassette players, small radios, small walkie talkies, and
digital and electronic cameras.
   HAULING UNIT. Container used by garbage haulers or construction and
demolition haulers for collecting, transporting, or depositing material at the
sanitary landfill or a transfer station. It may be permanently affixed to a
chassis or may be temporarily attached, such as a roll-off unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material that has a hazardous characteristic, such
as being ignitable, corrosive, reactive or toxic.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste that is on the Environmental Protection Agency’s
hazardous waste list in 40 C.F.R. part 261 or which is known to have a
hazardous characteristic, such as being ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or
toxic.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste generated from industrial activities which is
rendered useless during manufacturing process such as that of factories,
industries, mills, and mining operations and which when reported to the city,
it is not considered municipal solid waste or used in the recycling goal
calculations.
   LARGE ELECTRONICS. Desktop and laptop computers, monitors, servers, battery
backup uninterruptible power supplies, printers, scanners, copy machines, fax
machines, televisions, video cassette recorders, laser disc players, digital
video disc players, and stereo receivers.
   LEAK RESISTANT. Designed, constructed, and maintained to resist leakage.
   LIQUID WASTE. All nonhazardous waste that is mostly water containing no more
than 25% treatable contaminants not directly discharged to the sanitary sewer
system.
   LITTER. Garbage, rubbish, waste material, or animal waste improperly
disposed of by discarding, abandoning, allowing to accumulate, scattering, or
depositing the same outside an approved container.
   MAGAZINES. Multi-page publications, whether published periodically or not,
of coated paper.
   METAL CONTAINERS. Any container made from aluminum, tin or steel which
contained a product for consumption.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. MSW is a type of garbage and consists of everyday
items such as product packaging, grass clippings, furniture, clothing, bottles
and cans, food scraps, newspapers, appliances, consumer electronics, and
batteries. These wastes come from homes; institutions such as schools and
hospitals; and commercial sources such as restaurants and small businesses.
This does not include municipal wastewater treatment sludges, industrial
process wastes, automobile bodies, combustion ash, or construction and
demolition debris.
   NEWSPAPER. Printed ground wood paper commonly referred to as newsprint,
including glossy advertisements delivered with the newspaper.
   PAPER. High grade office paper, offset paper, bond paper, xerographic bond
paper, mimeo paper, duplicator paper, computer paper, and envelopes.
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Magazines, catalogs, advertising supplements, books, and
junk mail. It does not include chip board, items such as juice boxes, milk
cartons, cereal boxes, mix boxes, tissue boxes, shoe boxes, soda and beer
cartons, and similar products.
   PLASTIC CONTAINERS. Any formed or molded container composed predominately of
plastic resin.
   RECYCLABLE COLLECTOR. Any person who collects or receives recyclable
materials from another person or persons for a consideration or a fee and/or
for the purpose of resale.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials or products that may be readily separated
from the municipal solid waste stream and may be used or reused as a substitute
for raw materials or other items, including, but not limited to, aluminum,
glass, paper, plastic, and steel.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A specialized standalone facility that receives,
separates, and prepares recyclable materials as defined or listed by the EPA
for marketing to end user manufacturers. In addition, facilities which handle
hazardous materials or waste petroleum products are included in this
definition. Nothing in this chapter authorizes or permits nuisances.
   RECYCLING CONTAINER. A weather- resistant container which will securely hold
recyclable materials for collection and will prevent recyclables from falling
or being blown from the container.
   RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY. An established facility where recyclable
materials are collected and/or processed by sorting, volume reduction,
containment, or other preparation for shipment off site. Electronics recycling
facilities are included.
   REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE. As defined by §
160.005 of this Code.
   REQUIRED RECYCLABLES.
      (1)   Paper;
      (2)   Corrugated cardboard and chip board;
      (3)   Plastics #1 and #2;
      (4)   Newspaper;
      (5)   Electronics;
      (6)   Magazines;
      (7)   Bulk rate mail; and
      (8)   Aluminum, tin, and steel cans.
   RESIDENTIAL. A dwelling having accommodation for and occupied by one or more
families.
   RUBBISH. All combustible refuse matter, such as contaminated or
nonrecyclable paper, sweepings, rags, contaminated cardboard, and similar
materials.
   SALVAGING. The controlled removal of waste materials for reuse.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. The Sioux Falls Sanitary Landfill, which is the area
provided by the city for the dumping or depositing of municipal solid waste,
garbage, rubbish, animal waste, litter, and waste materials not prohibited by
city ordinance.
   SCAVENGING. The uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of waste materials.
   SINGLE-STREAM. A system in which recyclable fibers (including, but not
limited to, bulk rate mail, chipboard, corrugated cardboard, magazines,
newspaper, and office paper) and recyclable containers (including, but not
limited to, glass, metal, and plastic) are commingled for collection into one
container instead of being sorted into separate commodities and multiple
containers.
   SLUDGES. Any solid, semisolid or liquid waste encountered, collected, and/or
concentrated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment
plant, water supply treatment plant, catch basins, or air pollution control
facility exclusive of the treated effluent from a wastewater treatment plant.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, waste materials, special wastes, and sludges
as defined in this section.
   SOLID WASTE GENERATED FROM THE TREATMENT OF REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE. Waste
generated from the treatment of regulated medical waste in conformance with
city, state, and federal rules and regulations so it no longer poses a threat
to public health.
   SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY. A fixed facility where solid waste from
collection vehicles is consolidated and temporarily stored for subsequent
transport to a permanent disposal site.
   SPECIAL WASTE. Asbestos; gasoline, fuel oil, or waste oil, contaminated
soils, materials, sediments, and the like; co-mingled gasoline and fuel oil
and/or waste oil contaminated soils, materials, sediments, and the like; and
anti-freeze contaminated soils, materials, sediments, and the like.
   SUSTAINABILITY COORDINATOR. Person employed by the director to promote
environmental sustainability throughout the city.
   WASTE MATERIAL. All nonrecyclable and noncombustible inorganic matter such
as ashes, sand, earth, stones, concrete, mortar, metals, and similar material.
   WEATHER-RESISTANT. The ability to withstand the effects of precipitation,
wind, or sun and to retain its appearance and integrity.
   WOOD WASTE. Trees, any size diameter tree branches, brush, wood, wood
shavings, and wood pallets.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, garden waste, and leaves.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.901; 1992 Code, § 18-1) (Ord. 2308, passed 12-14-1964;
Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-1975; Ord. 88-81, passed 11-2-1981; Ord. 93-88, passed
10-24-1988; Ord. 60-92, passed 6-22-1992; Ord. 43-93, passed 5-17-1993; Ord.
149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 43-97, passed 6-2-1997; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-
2001; Ord. 38-04, passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 74-04, passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 53-12, passed 7-17-2012;
Ord. 107-16, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
   Distributing handbills in public places, see §
97.017
§ 57.002 LITTERING PROHIBITED; GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast, or deposit upon
any street, alley, sidewalk, lake, stream, river, pond, body of water, or any
yard or premises, public or private, any garbage, or any form of litter or
waste material.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 9.802, 9.809; 1992 Code, § 18-2) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018) Penalty,
see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Littering prohibited, see SDCL 34A-7-6 et seq.
   Ordinances to regulate litter, see SDCL 34A-7-14
   Refuse in public places and streams, see SDCL 9-32-10
§ 57.003 LITTERING PROHIBITED; DUTY OF BUSINESS OWNERS, OCCUPANTS.
   (a)   Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of
business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all
times to keep his or her premises clean of garbage or any form of litter or
waste material thrown or left on the premises other than in receptacles for
such purpose, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the materials from
drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.
   (b)   Receptacles. Separate garbage and recycling receptacles of sufficient
size and number shall be kept accessible to all persons on the premises where
the articles may be placed.
   (c)   Signs. Every business establishment shall place upon its premises in a
conspicuous place, in close proximity to the receptacles referred to in
division (b) above, a sign which shall convey to all persons a request that
they use the receptacles for the separate disposal of garbage and recyclable
materials.
(1992 Code, § 18-3) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 57.004 LITTERING PROHIBITED; DUTY OF PERSON.
   It shall be unlawful for any person going upon the premises of another to in
any manner dispose of garbage, municipal solid waste, or any form of litter or
waste material except in receptacles provided for those purposes. It shall be
unlawful for any person going upon the premises of another to dispose of
recyclables in a garbage receptacle or to dispose of garbage or any form of
litter or waste material in a recycling receptacle which may cause or permit
recyclables to become contaminated or otherwise unfit or more difficult to
recycle.
(1992 Code, § 18-4) (Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-
2018) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 57.005 LITTERING ON PREMISES OF ANOTHER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person going upon the premises of another to in
any manner dispose of garbage, municipal solid waste, or any form of litter or
waste material except in receptacles provided for those purposes and except
with the permission of the person in possession of the premises.
(1992 Code, § 18-5) (Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-1975; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018) Penalty,
see §
10.999
§ 57.006 REMOVAL OF LITTER BY CITY.
   If the occupant, person in charge, or owner of any real property within 14
days fails to remove garbage, municipal solid waste, or any form of litter or
waste material from real property after notice from the city to do so, the city
may cause the litter to be removed and for that purpose may enter upon any real
property. The cost of the removal may be assessed against the real property.
(1992 Code, § 18-6) (Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-1975; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
COLLECTION REGULATIONS
§ 57.020 COMMERCIAL GARBAGE SERVICE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Garbage and recycling service. Every dwelling unit and every occupied
building within the city shall have commercial garbage service by a licensed
commercial garbage hauler that collects garbage at least once each week and
required recyclables at least twice each month. The occupant, owner, or manager
of the dwelling or other occupied building shall each be responsible for
securing the services required.
   (b)   Yard waste service. Yard waste collected by persons other than
homeowners, landscapers, or other entities generating the yard waste shall be
collected by licensed commercial garbage haulers. The occupant, owner, or
manager of the dwelling or other occupied building shall each be responsible
for securing services or otherwise ensuring yard waste is collected or removed
at a minimum of once each week.
   (c)   Construction and demolition debris service. Construction and
demolition debris collected by persons other than homeowners, occupants, or
other entities generating the construction and demolition debris shall be
collected by licensed commercial construction and demolition haulers. The
occupant, owner, or manager of the dwelling or other occupied building shall
each be responsible for securing services or otherwise ensuring collection or
removal of the construction and demolition debris.
   (d)   Residential rental units. The owner or manager of any dwelling who
rents, leases, or lets residential dwelling unit(s) for human habitation shall
subscribe to and pay for garbage removal and recycling service. For single-
family dwelling units and duplexes, the services may be provided by the tenant,
if a written lease so provides.
(Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 57.021 PREPARATION FOR DEPOSIT, COLLECTION, AND TRANSPORT.
   All household and commercially generated garbage, animal waste, rubbish and
other materials shall be placed in a securely tied bag. Recyclable materials
shall be separated from the waste stream. Required recyclables collected shall
not be deposited at the sanitary landfill. Animal waste from commercial
operations shall be deposited and transported in covered leak-proof hauling
units.
(1992 Code, § 18-16) (Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-1975; Ord. 88-81, passed 11-2-
1981; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11,
passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 57.022 CONTAINERS.
   (a)   Garbage and recycling containers. The occupant, owner, or manager of
every dwelling house, apartment, construction site, place of business, or
building shall provide at least one garbage container and one recycling
container for each premises. Owners, occupants, or managers shall cause all
garbage, animal waste, and rubbish to be deposited into the garbage container,
and all recyclable materials deposited into the recycling container.
   (b)   Yard waste container. The occupant, owner, or manager of every
dwelling house, apartment, construction site, place of business, or building
shall ensure all yard waste is deposited into either a Kraft-type paper bag
designated for yard waste or a rigid, leak-resistant container with a rigid lid
to fit the container.
   (c)   Residential rental units. The owner or manager who rents, leases, or
lets dwelling unit(s) for human habitation shall provide, in a location
accessible to all dwelling units, garbage and recycling containers with
sufficient capacity to prevent the overflow of garbage or recyclables from
occurring. For single-family dwelling units and duplexes, the containers may be
provided by the tenant, if a written lease so provides.
   (d)   Container size, structure, markings, and maintenance.
      (1)   Size and structure. With the exception of Kraft-type paper bags
authorized for yard waste, each container shall be rigid in structure, leak-
resistant, and equipped with a rigid lid that fits the container and is removed
only for the purpose of cleaning the container, depositing materials into the
container, or removing contents from the container. Each container will also be
of suitable size to prevent the overflow of garbage, recyclables, and yard
waste from occurring.
      (2)   Markings. Residential recycling containers shall be plainly marked
for recycling and accommodate single-stream recycling.
      (3)   Maintenance. Every container required by this chapter shall be
maintained in as sanitary condition as possible in view of the use to which it
is put and shall be thoroughly cleaned as needed by washing, sanitizing, or
otherwise.
(1992 Code, § 18-17) (Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-1975; Ord. 88-81, passed 11-2-
1981; Ord. 60-92, passed 6-22-1992; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 53-12, passed 7-17-2012;
Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 57.023 CONTAINER PLACEMENT.
   (a)   Noncollection day placement. Except as authorized herein for
collection day placement, all containers not kept inside the structure or
otherwise screened from public view shall be kept directly adjacent to the
structure in an inconspicuous place by the owner, occupant, or manager of the
dwelling house, apartment, construction site, place of business, or building.
In choosing a suitable location directly adjacent to the structure, owners,
occupants, and managers will balance efficiency and aesthetics with the
inherent limitations of the structure. In all cases, the vicinity of the
garbage container shall be kept free from any garbage, rubbish, animal waste,
litter, yard waste, or any putrescible matter that attracts insects, rodents,
or animals.
   (b)   Collection day placement—location. All containers shall be placed at a
location, other than in the roadway or on the sidewalk, designated for
collection by the commercial garbage hauler contracted to remove the same.
Curbside placement that does not encroach onto the roadway or sidewalk and is
placed with due care to avoid creating a hazard by obstructing the view of
traffic is authorized. The commercial garbage hauler and the owner, occupant,
or manager may agree for collection to be made at the structure in a place
reasonably accessible to the hauler (e.g., valet service).
   (c)   Collection day placement—timing. No owner, occupant, or manager shall
place or permit to be placed any container away from the structure for
collection before noon of the day preceding their scheduled collection day. No
container may be left at the place of collection away from the structure after
11 p.m. on the day of collection or more than two hours after the actual
collection, whichever is later.
   (d)   Absent agreement with the commercial garbage hauler, it is the owner,
occupant, or manager's responsibility to move or cause to be moved all
containers to and from the place designated for collection.
(Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 57.024 LEVELS OF COLLECTION SERVICE REQUIRED.
   All commercial garbage haulers, as a condition of licensure under §
57.065, must offer a minimum of two levels of service, as follows:
   (a)   Curbside service. Under curbside service, collection service occurs at
the place designated for collection in §
57.023(b) above. It is the owner, occupant, or manager's responsibility to move
or cause to be moved all containers to and from this designated place in
accordance with §
57.023.
   (b)   Valet service. Under valet service, collection service occurs at the
structure. The owner, occupant, or manager places all containers directly
adjacent to the structure in a place reasonably accessible to the commercial
garbage hauler. It is the commercial garbage hauler's responsibility to
retrieve the containers from and return the containers to this location on
collection day. At the owner, occupant, or manager's discretion, placement of
containers for collection may be the same as their non-collection day
placement, so long as the containers are adjacent to the structure and
reasonably accessible to the hauler.
(Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 57.025 [REPEALED].
§ 57.026 [REPEALED].
§ 57.027 [REPEALED].
§ 57.028 NONRESIDENTIAL RECYCLABLE COLLECTION.
   Commercial and business establishments, governmental facilities,
entertainment facilities and schools, shall separate from the waste stream all
items excluded from disposal at the landfill as specified in §
57.050 generated by or accruing to the establishments, prior to removal from
the subject premises. The recyclable materials shall not be deposited at the
sanitary landfill. The recyclables shall be removed from the premises at a
minimum of twice a month.
(1992 Code, § 18-22) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 43-97, passed 6-2-
1997; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011)
§ 57.029 APARTMENT GARBAGE AND RECYCLING SERVICE.
   Every owner of an apartment in the city shall do the following to facilitate
recycling in each building:
   (a)   Provide adequate and plainly marked single-stream recycling containers
for recyclable material. Containers shall be stored on the premises in a
screened location that is convenient for the deposit and collection of
recyclables;
   (b)   Provide single-stream recycling service along with garbage service;
   (c)   Distribute written information to the building tenants at the time of
leasing and at least annually thereafter regarding the established recycling
program. If the landlord changes the garbage/recycling hauler, the landlord
shall promptly provide tenants with recycling information relative to the new
provider;
   (d)   Annually post a copy of the recycling information in a conspicuous
place available to all residents, unless the physical structure of the premises
does not allow for a common area which is available to all tenants. Any time
the information is not easily legible, it shall be reposted; and
   (e)   City reserves the right to inspect for compliance. Failure to comply
or provide information to tenants as above stated shall be considered a
violation of the ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 18-23) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 43-97, passed 6-2-
1997; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11,
passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 53-12, passed 7-17-2012; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.030 STANDARDIZED RECYCLING COLLECTION.
   Property owners or tenants shall store recyclable materials separately from
garbage while awaiting collection in accordance with the following standardized
recycling collection methods. Commercial garbage haulers shall collect and
transport recyclable materials in accordance with the following standardized
recycling collection methods:
   (a)   Residential sites within the city shall use a single-stream
methodology for the collection and management of recyclable materials; and
   (b)   Nonresidential sites and sites outside the city may use either single-
stream, dual-stream, or source-separated methodology for the collection and
management of recyclable materials.
(1992 Code, § 18-24) (Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-
2011; Ord. 53-12, passed 7-17-2012; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 147-
21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 57.031 BUSINESS REPORTING OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   Businesses are required to report the weight of any recyclable materials
hauled, transferred or recycled by self or others to their commercial garbage
hauler for use by the commercial garbage hauler to account for recyclable
materials.
(1992 Code, § 18-25) (Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-
2021)
§ 57.032 SOLID WASTE CONTAINING RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   Commercial garbage haulers shall not collect garbage containing visible
required recyclable materials for disposal. Commercial garbage haulers must
leave a note explaining why solid waste was not collected. Residents and
businesses must remove those required recyclable materials before the
commercial garbage hauler can collect solid waste that has been rejected for
this reason.
(1992 Code, § 18-26) (Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 147-21, passed 11-16-
2021)
§ 57.033 WASTE DISPOSAL SITE.
   All garbage generated within the city must be disposed at the sanitary
landfill. Sludges or special waste generated in the city may be transported
elsewhere for land application or to a facility licensed by the state.
(1992 Code, § 18-27) (Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-
2018)
SANITARY LANDFILL
§ 57.045 DESIGNATION.
   The city council shall designate an area to be known as the sanitary
landfill which shall be for the deposit of municipal solid waste, construction
and demolition debris, asbestos, and other categories of waste materials. The
landfill superintendent may designate specific areas within the landfill for
special waste, municipal solid waste, construction debris, or other categories
of materials. It is unlawful for any person to deposit any type of waste in
undesignated areas or in areas not designated for the category of waste
material involved.
(1992 Code, § 18-28) (Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-1975; Ord. 88-81, passed 11-2-
1981; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 43-97, passed 6-2-1997; Ord. 74-04,
passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.046 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any
garbage, rubbish, animal waste, or other waste material in or upon any park,
street, alley, gutter, or in or upon any other private or public property
within city’s jurisdiction, except in a receptacle provided for that purpose or
at locations designated by the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.908; 1992 Code, § 18-29) (Ord. 2308, passed 12-14-1964;
Ord. 88-81, passed 11-2-1981; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 57.047 RATES FOR USE.
   (a)   Municipal solid waste, sludges or solid waste generated from the
treatment of regulated medical waste and other solid waste material not defined
within this section generated in Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner, and Lake
Counties, South Dakota, deposited at Sioux Falls landfill.  
 
Effective Dates
             1-1-2015     1-1-2024     1-1-2025     1-1-2026      1-1-2027
Four-wheel
trailers,    $36 per ton, $38 per ton, $39.50 per   $41 per ton,  $42 per ton,
trucks, and  with a       with a       ton, with a  with a        with a
loads with a minimum      minimum      minimum      minimum       minimum
gross weight charge of    charge of    charge of    charge of $21 charge of $21
greater than $18 per load $19 per load $20 per load per load      per load
8,500 pounds
Municipal
solid waste,
sludges, or
solid waste
generated
from the
treatment of
regulated
medical
waste and    $64 per ton  $76 per ton  $79 per ton  $82 per ton   $84 per ton
other solid  with a       with a       with a       with a        with a
waste        minimum      minimum      minimum      minimum       minimum
material not charge of    charge of    charge of    charge of $42 charge of $42
defined      $18 per load $38 per load $40 per load per load      per load
within this
section
generated
outside of
Minnehaha,
McCook,
Lincoln,
Turner, and
Lake
Counties
Passenger    $9           $10          $10          $11           $11
car
Pickup
trucks,
panel
trucks, or
two-wheel    $18          $19          $20          $21           $21
trailers not
to exceed
three cubic
yards
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall be charged for disposal of these wastes. The additional fee
shall be added onto the per ton rates. The additional fee shall be included
within the listed per vehicle rates.
 
   (b)   Construction and demolition debris and appliances generated in
Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner, and Lake Counties, South Dakota, deposited
at the city landfill.
Effective Dates
 1-1-2015 1-1-2024 1-1-2025 1-1-2026 1-1-2027
Effective Dates
             1-1-2015     1-1-2024     1-1-2025     1-1-2026      1-1-2027
Construction
and
demolition
debris and
appliances   $64 per ton, $72 per ton, $76 per ton, $80 per ton,  $84 per ton,
generated    with a       with a       with a       with a        with a
outside of   minimum      minimum      minimum      minimum       minimum
Minnehaha,   charge of    charge of    charge of    charge of $40 charge of $42
McCook,      $18 per load $36 per load $38 per load per load      per load
Lincoln,
Turner, and
Lake
Counties
Four-wheel
trailers,    $34 per ton  $36 per ton  $38 per ton  $40 per ton   $42 per ton
trucks, and  with a       with a       with a       with a        with a
loads with a minimum      minimum      minimum      minimum       minimum
gross weight charge of    charge of    charge of    charge of $20 charge of $21
greater than $18 per load $18 per load $19 per load per load      per load
8,500 pounds
Passenger    $9           $9           $10          $10           $11
car
Pickup
trucks,
panel
trucks, or   $18          $18          $19          $20           $21
2-wheel
trailers not
to exceed 3
cubic yards
             $9 per cubic $10 per      $10 per      $10 per cubic $11 per cubic
             yard,        cubic yard,  cubic yard,  yard,         yard,
             utilizing 3  utilizing 3  utilizing 3  utilizing 3   utilizing 3
Trailer      feet times   feet times   feet times   feet times    feet times
houses       length times length times length times length times  length times
             width and    width and    width and    width and     width and
             converting   converting   converting   converting to converting to
             to cubic     to cubic     to cubic     cubic yards   cubic yards
             yards        yards        yards
Mattress or  $9 each      $13 each     $14 each     $15 each      $16 each
box spring
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall not be charged for disposal of these wastes.
 
   (c)   Yard and wood waste.
 
Effective Dates
              1-1-2015     1-1-2024     1-1-2025     1-1-2026     1-1-2027
Commercial    $10 per ton  $11 per ton  $11 per ton  $11 per ton  $12 per ton
haulers, 4-   with a       with a       with a       with a       with a
wheel         minimum      minimum      minimum      minimum      minimum
trailers, and charge of $5 charge of $6 charge of $6 charge of $6 charge of $6
trucks        per load     per load     per load     per load     per load
Passenger car $3           $3           $3           $3           $3
Pickup
trucks, panel
trucks, and
2-wheel       $5           $6           $6           $6           $6
trailers not
to exceed 3
cubic yards
Yard and wood
waste
generated
outside of
Minnehaha,    $22 per ton  $22 per ton  $22 per ton  $22 per ton  $24 per ton
McCook,
Lincoln,
Turner, and
Lake Counties
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall not be charged for disposal of these wastes.
 
   (d)   Tires.
 
Effective Dates
               1-1-2015     1-1-2024     1-1-2025     1-1-2026     1-1-2027
All tires 17
inches in      $2 each or   $3 each or   $3 each or   $3 each or   $3 each or
diameter or    $135 per ton $225 per ton $234 per ton $243 per ton $253 per ton
smaller
All tires
larger than 17 $7 each or   $8 each or   $8 each or   $8 each or   $8 each or
inches in      $135 per ton $225 per ton $234 per ton $243 per ton $253 per ton
diameter
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall not be charged for disposal of these wastes.
 
   (e)   Special waste generated in Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner, and
Lake Counties.
 
Effective Dates
             1-1-2013       1-1-2024     1-1-2025     1-1-2026     1-1-2027
             $32 per cubic  $33 per      $34 per      $35 per      $36 per
             yard based on  cubic yard   cubic yard   cubic yard   cubic yard
             the            based on the based on the based on the based on the
             manufacturer's manufactur-  manufactur-  manufactur-  manufactur-
             box rating or  er's box     er's box     er's box     er's box
Asbestos     on box         rating or on rating or on rating or on rating or on
             capacity as    box capacity box capacity box capacity box capacity
             determined     as           as           as           as
             through        determined   determined   determined   determined
             measurement by through      through      through      through
             the city       measurement  measurement  measurement  measurement
                            by the city  by the city  by the city  by the city
Contaminated
soils and
materials,
sediments
containing   $10 per ton    $11 per ton  $11 per ton  $11 per ton  $12 per ton
petroleum
constituents
or
antifreeze,
other soils
The minimum charge under this section is a three-cubic-yard or three-ton
charge.
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall be charged for disposal of these wastes. An additional fee
shall be added to the per ton rates. The additional fee shall be included
within the listed per vehicle rates.      
 
   (f)   Special waste generated outside of Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner,
and Lake Counties.
 
                      Effective Dates
            1-1-2015    1-1-2024       1-1-2025       1-1-2026       1-1-2027
             $70 per
             cubic yard  $73 per cubic  $74 per cubic  $75 per cubic  $76 per cubic
             based on    yard based on  yard based on  yard based on  yard based on
             the         the            the            the            the
             manufactur- manufacturer's manufacturer's manufacturer's manufacturer's
             er's box    box rating or  box rating or  box rating or  box rating or
Asbestos     rating or   on box         on box         on box         on box
             on box      capacity as    capacity as    capacity as    capacity as
             capacity as determined     determined     determined     determined
             determined  through        through        through        through
             through     measurement by measurement by measurement by measurement by
             measurement the city       the city       the city       the city
             by the city
Contaminated
soils and
materials,
sediments
containing   $70 per ton $73 per ton    $74 per ton    $75 per ton    $76 per ton
petroleum
constituents
or
antifreeze,
other soils
The minimum charge under this section is a three-cubic-yard or three-ton charge.
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall be charged for disposal of these wastes. An additional fee shall be
added to the per ton rates. The additional fee shall be included within the listed
per vehicle rates.
 
   (g)   Large electronics. One dollar per pound.
   (h)   Hand-held electronics. No charge for up to ten units; $1 per pound for
over ten units minimum $20 charge.
   (i)   Additional fee for solid waste. In addition to the listed rates for
solid waste, there will be added thereto a solid waste management fee of $1 per
ton pursuant to SDCL 34A-6-81 as noted for each class of solid waste.
   (j)   Loads that are not properly tarped or secured.
 
Effective Dates
                   1-1-2015 1-1-2024 1-1-2025 1-1-2026 1-1-2027
Loads that are not
properly tarped or $25      $30      $31      $32      $33
secured
                   Asphalt, concrete, contaminated soil, steel, white goods,
Exceptions         and tires if loaded in a manner so that the items are not
                   likely to fall or be blown from the vehicle.
 
   (k)   Failure to follow rules and procedures. The city may charge patrons of
the sanitary landfill, compost site, or the rubble site any and all costs
associated with the patrons' failure to follow sanitary landfill, compost site,
or construction and demolition site policies and safety requirements, including
charges for cleanup costs and disposal when garbage, construction and
demolition debris, recyclables, or yard waste is deposited in areas not
designated for the type of material.
   (l)   Deer or elk carcasses.
 
Effective Dates
            1-1-2015     1-1-2024     1-1-2025     1-1-2026     1-1-2027
Businesses  $50 per ton  $52 per ton  $54 per ton  $56 per ton  $58 per ton
Private     No charge up No charge up No charge up No charge up No charge up to
individuals to 10        to 10        to 10        to 10        10 carcasses
            carcasses    carcasses    carcasses    carcasses
The additional fee for solid waste as defined in §
57.047(i) shall be charged for disposal of these wastes. An additional fee
shall be added to the per ton rates. The additional fee shall be included
within the listed per vehicle rates.
 
   (m)   Unloading vehicles. All patrons of the sanitary landfill are expected
to unload waste and recyclables they bring to the landfill. If, however,
landfill employees assist in unloading trucks or hauling units for haulers or
other businesses, the city may charge for the actual cost associated with
unloading vehicles, trucks, or hauling units with a minimum fee listed below.
 
Effective Dates
            1-1-2015 1-1-2024 1-1-2025 1-1-2026 1-1-2027
Minimum Fee $25      $30      $31      $32      $33
 
   (n)   Licensed garbage haulers that exceed the recycling goal. Licensed
garbage haulers that exceed the recycling goal, as set forth in §
57.081, by 50% shall receive a $1-per-municipal-solid-waste-ton rebate that
will be announced by March 31 of the following year. The tonnage of approved
exempt industrial waste is not used to calculate the goal or rebate. Garbage
haulers that receive this rebate are strongly encouraged to use this rebate to
enhance their recycling efforts and/or reward their customers.
   (o)   Tier 1 surcharge. Licensed commercial garbage hauler shall be
surcharged an additional $1 per municipal solid waste ton, except for approved
exempt industrial waste.
   (p)   Tier 2 surcharge. Licensed commercial garbage hauler shall be
surcharged an additional $2 per municipal solid waste ton, except for approved
exempt industrial waste.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.909; 1992 Code, § 18-30) (Ord. 2308, passed 12-14-1964;
Ord. 2655, passed 12-8-1969; Ord. 21-72, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 44-73, passed
5-14-1973; Ord. 50-75, passed 9-2-1975; Ord. 56-76, passed 6-28-1976; Ord. 18-
79, passed 3-12-1979; Ord. 107-86, passed 12-8-1986; Ord. 127-89, passed 12-11-
1989; Ord. 36-90, passed 4-16-1990; Ord. 125-90, passed 12-24-1990; Ord. 35-91,
passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 71-91, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 5-92, passed 1-21-1992;
Ord. 28-92, passed 3-9-1992; Ord. 60-92, passed 6-22-1992; Ord. 105-92, passed
12-7-1992; Ord. 70-93, passed 9-20-1993; Ord. 95-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 73-
94, passed 8-15-1994; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-
2001; Ord. 99-02, passed 11-25-2002; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 38-04,
passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 74-04, passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 12-05, passed 2-14-2005;
Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 89-06, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 93-07, passed
6-18-2007; Ord. 76-08, passed 6-16-2008; Ord. 54-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 46-
11, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 5-12, passed 1-9-2012;
Ord. 51-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 85-12, passed 11-13-2012; Ord. 33-14, passed
6-17-2014; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 45-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 57.048 WAIVER OF LANDFILL FEES.
   (a)   The director may authorize the waiver or reduction of fees established
in §
57.047 if the waste was generated in Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner, or
Lake Counties.
   (b)   The fees may only be waived under the following circumstances, upon
application and pursuant to criteria and procedures as established by the
director.
      (1)   The fees waived will be replaced or substantially replaced by a
grant or other funding source that encourages the removal of a particular waste
item or items from the community to be disposed of at the sanitary landfill;
      (2)   A group, city, or county conducts a single event that benefits a
community or communities within Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner, or Lake
Counties;
      (3)   An annual free landfill pass may be authorized for distribution by
government agencies to residents within the limits of the five- county area
served by the sanitary landfill, subject to limits and restrictions as
determined by the director; or
      (4)   A community enhancement project, approved in advance, that benefits
elderly residents or residents with disabilities.
(1992 Code, § 18-30.1) (Ord. 5-12, passed 1-9-2012; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-
2018; Ord. 45-23, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 57.049 DROP-OFF SITE FOR HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE, LARGE ELECTRONICS, AND
HAND-HELD ELECTRONICS.
   The city’s household hazardous waste facility will serve as collection site
for household or residential hazardous waste, large electronics, and hand-held
electronics. Any fees authorized by §
57.047 shall be waived for any resident of the counties served by the sanitary
landfill bringing their large electronics or hand-held electronics to the
designated drop-off site for disposal. The city may participate in collection
events within the five-county area served by the sanitary landfill.
(1992 Code, § 18-31) (Ord. 38-04, passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.050 CERTAIN MATERIALS EXCLUDED.
   (a)   The following materials shall be excluded from the MSW and C&D
disposal areas at the landfill:
      (1)   Office paper;
      (2)   Corrugated cardboard and chip board;
      (3)   Plastic containers #1 and #2;
      (4)   Metal containers;
      (5)   Automobile bodies or other bulky articles;
      (6)   Wood waste, such as tree branches and logs;
      (7)   Oils, gasoline, and other petroleum products;
      (8)   Hazardous materials;
      (9)   Hazardous waste;
      (10)   Yard waste;
      (11)   Lead acid batteries;
      (12)   Waste tires;
      (13)   White good appliances;
      (14)   Regulated medical waste;
      (15)   Radioactive materials;
      (16)   Large and hand-held electronics;
      (17)   Magazines;
      (18)   Newspaper; and
      (19)   Bulk-rate mail.
   (b)   Any person bringing material for deposit at the landfill, upon entry
onto the landfill premises, authorizes the city to inspect the material before
deposit. If excluded materials are discovered during the inspection, the city
may refuse the entire load and charge the person attempting to deposit the
materials the cost of the inspection.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.910; 1992 Code, § 18-32) (Ord. 2308, passed 12-14-1964;
Ord. 19-72, passed 4-10-1972; Ord. 56-74, passed 10-21-1974; Ord. 73-75, passed
11-17-1975; Ord. 88-81, passed 11-2-1981; Ord. 60-92, passed 6-22-1992; Ord.
56-94, passed 6-20-1994; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 43-97, passed 6-
2-1997; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 38-04,
passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011;
Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.051 REMOVAL RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed from
the rubble sites or the sanitary landfills of this city any articles or
material of any kind after the articles or materials have been deposited there,
with the exception of the following.
   (a)   The city reserves the right to enter into a contract with one or more
person(s) for the right of resource recovery at rubble sites.
   (b)   The city reserves the right to allow the cutting and removal of
firewood from the wood waste area, provided, that persons cutting and removing
firewood must wear protective clothing and abide by the safety regulations
posted at the site.
   (c)   The city reserves the right to allow removal of finished compost and
wood chips.
   (d)   The city reserves the right to recover materials for use at city
facilities and to sell or transfer waste, by-products, recyclable materials,
and scrap materials.
   (e)   Bicycles deposited at the landfill are considered abandoned and may be
donated to a nonprofit organization as provided in SDCL 43-41-11.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.911; 1992 Code, § 18-33) (Ord. 2308, passed 12-14-1964;
Ord. 25-88, passed 4-11-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 57.052 PRIVATE LANDFILL UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a disposal site in the
city for the disposal of garbage, litter, rubbish or animal waste.
(1992 Code, § 18-34) (Ord. 19-72, passed 4-10-1972; Ord. 73-75, passed 11-17-
1975; Ord. 82-79, passed 9-4-1979; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006)
§ 57.053 REFUSAL TO ADMIT CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   The city may refuse the admittance or the unloading at the sanitary landfill
of the following vehicles:
   (a)   Those so loaded or uncovered so that material may fall or be blown off
the vehicle while in transit;
   (b)   Those not having a permit displayed as required by §
57.072;
   (c)   Those containing special wastes not having received prior approval of
the director or his or her designee or not having provided the landfill a
minimum of 24 hours’ notice of intent to deliver special wastes;
   (d)   Those containing materials in a form which when unloaded at the
landfill will blow or are prone to blow from the face of the landfill;
   (e)   Those containing solid waste from the treatment of regulated medical
waste not having documentation of waste sources and third-party testing;
   (f)   Those belonging to or operated by an entity having an unpaid balance
on account with the city sanitary landfill that is 60 days or more past due;
and
   (g)   Those which operate in a manner so as to create air, land, or water
pollution, public health hazards, or nuisances such as allowing repeated leaks
or discharging of waste, fuel, or oil.
(1992 Code, § 18-35) (Ord. 55-74, passed 10-21-1974; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Traffic code, see title VII
COMMERCIAL HAULERS
§ 57.065 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No commercial garbage hauler or construction and demolition hauler shall use
the streets or the sanitary landfill for the collection, removal, or disposal
of any garbage, animal waste, rubbish, construction or demolition debris, or
recyclable materials without first having obtained a license from the city.
(1992 Code, § 18-44) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 98-02, passed 11-18-2002; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-
16, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.066 [REPEALED].
§ 57.067 IDENTIFYING NAME.
   Each vehicle used by a commercial hauler to collect or transport waste shall
permanently display the commercial garbage hauler’s name on both sides of the
vehicle in easily legible letters at least six inches high. The name displayed
must be the same as the name on the hauler’s license, but may also include a
logo or other language. Any container belonging to a licensed commercial
garbage or construction and demolition debris hauler shall bear the hauler’s
name or identifying logo. Residential recyclable containers shall also be
labeled for recyclables or single-stream recyclables. Nonresidential recyclable
containers shall also be labeled for specific materials to be placed therein.
(1992 Code, § 18-46) (Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 53-12, passed 7-17-
2012; Ord. 107-16, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.068 TRANSFER.
   A license issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be transferred
after paying the city a transfer fee as set out in §
110.036 of this Code. The transfer will be approved only to a person meeting
the minimum start-up requirements for garbage or construction and demolition
debris hauling. Any person having a controlling interest in an existing
licensed hauling operation cannot have a monetary interest in other licensed
garbage hauling operations in the city. Licenses transferred upon sale of a
business to a new owner may be reissued in the name of the previous owner upon
payment of a reissuance fee, compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
and proof that the business has been returned.
(1992 Code, § 18-48) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-16, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 57.069 EXPIRATION.
   Every license issued for a commercial garbage hauler or construction and
demolition debris hauler under the provisions of this subchapter, unless
renewed, shall expire on December 31 following its date of issuance. Sale of a
licensed hauling business to an existing licensed hauling business will cause
the seller’s license to expire upon transfer of responsibility for conducting
or managing operations.
(1992 Code, § 18-49) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-
16, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.070 HAULING UNIT PERMITS.
   Permit fee as set out in §
110.036 of this Code shall be charged for each hauling unit used by the
licensee to transport garbage or construction and demolition debris.
(1992 Code, § 18-50) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-16, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 57.071 UNIT INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All hauling units permitted under this subchapter shall be subject to random
inspections by the city. Random inspections include inspections of vehicles,
equipment and contents delivered to the landfill for deposit.
(1992 Code, § 18-51) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 57.072 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   The permits issued for the hauling units under this subchapter shall be
permanently displayed on each permitted unit.
(1992 Code, § 18-52) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-16, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 57.073 MINIMUM DESIGN AND CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES AND CONTAINERS.
   All licensed commercial garbage haulers are required to have watertight
vehicles or containers which shall be permanently covered with no openings on
top that would allow the contents to escape. All metal boxes are required and
shall be equipped with metal doors which shall be in a closed position when the
truck is in motion. Containers must be attached to the frame when in transport.
Vehicles and containers must be manufactured or designed for garbage or
construction and demolition debris hauling. Pickup trucks containing dumpsters,
open-framed boxes, and wood-framed trucks are prohibited. The vehicles or
containers shall be thoroughly washed at those times as may be directed by the
city or as may be necessary to keep the vehicles or containers in proper
sanitary condition. The vehicles or containers transporting garbage and
rubbish, construction and demolition debris, or animal waste shall be so loaded
that all the material shall be carried within the metal containers.
(1992 Code, § 18-53) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-
16, passed 10-17-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles, see
ch. 73
§ 57.074 LOADING OF VEHICLES.
   Vehicles used for transporting rubbish, animal waste, waste materials,
construction and demolition debris, and recyclable materials shall be loaded so
that no materials shall fall off or be blown off the vehicle while in transit.
Loosely loaded vehicles with open boxes must be tarped.
(1992 Code, § 18-54) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 53-12, passed 7-17-2012; Ord. 107-
16, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 57.075 COLLECTION CONDITIONS.
   Every licensed garbage collector or hauler shall collect the garbage,
rubbish, and animal waste from residential and business customers at least once
each week. Garbage, rubbish, and animal waste loaded in a hauling unit must be
in transport to a proper disposal site within 48 hours after pickup, unless the
sanitary landfill has been closed for more than 24 consecutive hours.
(1992 Code, § 18-56) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 43-93, passed 5-17-
1993; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-
18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.076 MINIMUM VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Persons seeking a garbage hauler’s business license shall provide proof of
ownership of a minimum of one packer truck in good working condition. This
requirement shall not apply to persons using roll-off containers exclusively.
(1992 Code, § 18-57) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 57.077 PROOF OF INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued to any commercial garbage hauler or construction
and demolition and debris hauler until proof of insurance is furnished to the
city, showing the following insurance to be in full force and effect during the
entire term of the license. The licensee shall furnish proof of insurance as
follows:
   (a)   Workers’ compensation insurance providing the statutory limits
required by state law. In addition, it shall provide coverage B, employer’s
liability coverage, of not less than $1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000
disease-policy limits. The required limit may be met by excess liability
(umbrella) coverage.
   (b)   Commercial general liability insurance providing occurrence form
contractual, personal injury, bodily injury, and a property damage and
liability coverage with limits of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence,
$2,000,000 general aggregate, and $2,000,000 aggregate products and completed
operations. The required limit may include excess liability (umbrella)
coverage. If “occurrence form” insurance is not available, “claims made”
insurance will be acceptable.
   (c)   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, nonowned, and hired
automobiles, trucks, and trailers. The coverage shall be as broad as that found
in the standard comprehensive automobile liability policy with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence. The required limit
may include excess liability (umbrella) coverage.
   (d)   The city’s approval or acceptance of certificates of insurance does
not constitute city assumption of responsibility for the validity of any
insurance policies nor does the city represent that the above coverages and
limits are adequate to protect any individual/group or business, and assumes no
liability therefor.
(1992 Code, § 18-58) (Ord. 111-89, passed 10-16-1989; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-
20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.078 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION RATES.
   All licensed garbage haulers shall file, as a part of their application for
a license, and within 30 days after any change in such haulers’ rates, a
general statement of their use rate structures and billing systems consistent
with the city’s comprehensive plan of solid waste reduction and recycling
program which shall include the following elements:
   (a)   A pay as you throw (PAYT) rate to reward people who reduce their level
of solid waste collection service based either upon volume or weight. Haulers
must provide at least two levels of service based on volume or weight. For each
volume increase of at least one and four-tenths times over a lower level of
service the rate of each higher level of service must be at least one and one-
fourth times the corresponding lower level of service;
   (b)   A rate to provide customers with adequate options and incentives to
reduce their weekly level of solid waste collection service and the amount of
solid waste collected as a result of their participation in waste reduction and
recycling programs; and
   (c)   A rate that includes the combined cost of solid waste, using the above
elements, and recycling collection services.
(1992 Code, § 18-59) (Ord. 43-93, passed 5-17-1993; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 63-06 passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.079 GARBAGE HAULERS LICENSED RECYCLABLE COLLECTORS.
   A license under §
57.065 permits and requires the holder to collect recyclables, as well as the
items listed in that section.
(1992 Code, § 18-60) (Ord. 43-93, passed 5-17-1993; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 57.080 LICENSED RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to purchase recyclables in the city or use the streets
for the collection of recyclables without first having obtained a recycling
processing license from the city. No separate recycling processing license is
required if the person or entity is licensed as a garbage hauler as provided in
this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 18-61) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018) Penalty,
see §
10.999
§ 57.081 RECYCLING GOAL AND STANDARD.
   All commercial licensed garbage haulers are required to annually achieve the
standard of at least 80% of the city’s established recycling goal.
   (a)   The city annually calculates a recycling goal percentage by dividing
the verified total weight of all recyclable material by the total verified
weight of all municipal solid waste plus all recyclable material approved by
the city. Industrial waste is not included in this calculation when it does not
meet the EPA’s definition of MSW.
   (b)   The sustainability coordinator shall calculate the recycling goal for
each subsequent year by using data from the previous year.
   (c)   Licensed commercial garbage haulers shall be notified of the current
year’s recycling goal by March 31.
(1992 Code, § 18-62) (Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-
2018)
§ 57.082 FILING OF REPORTS BY RECYCLABLE COLLECTOR.
   Every licensed recyclable collector shall file a monthly report on or before
the last calendar day of the following month with the sustainability
coordinator. The report must be made on forms provided by the city and show
recycling tonnage and the total weight by type of recyclables collected and
those delivered to a recycling collection and/or processing facility not
licensed by the city during the previous month. Records relating to recycling
tonnages and recycling types shall be kept confidential, upon written request,
to the extent necessary to protect proprietary information.
(1992 Code, § 18-63) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-
2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.083 [REPEALED].
§ 57.084 FILING OF REPORTS BY RECYCLING FACILITIES.
   Every licensed recycling facility that accepts recycling from commercial
garbage haulers shall file a monthly report before the fifteenth of the
following month with the city. The report must show the total weight of
recyclables purchased and/or processed during the previous month. The report
shall also include the total tonnage of waste or recycling materials accepted
by the facility and the tonnage of that portion of the collected materials that
were returned to the waste stream.
(1992 Code, § 18-66) (Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-
2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.085 CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.
   All information disclosed under§
57.078 and any information for which a written request has been pursuant to §
57.082 may be disclosed by the city only to the following:
   (a)   The licensee who is required to submit the information to the
department, or his or her designee appointed in writing;
   (b)   Officers, employees, or legal representatives of the city for the
purposes of, and only to the extent necessary in, the administration of this
section;
   (c)   Any agency, body, commission, or legal representative of the United
States or the state charged with the administration of solid waste management,
and only to the extent necessary in, the administration of the laws and
regulations; and
   (d)   To the extent required by a proper judicial or administrative order.
(1992 Code, § 18-67) (Ord. 28-96, passed 3-4-1996; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.086 CUSTOMER INFORMATION.
   All licensed commercial garbage haulers shall at least annually provide
customers with written information regarding volume of base-rate structure and
garbage, recycling and yard waste service, and shall provide a copy to the
city. Such information shall also be provided to new customers at time service
is initiated.
(1992 Code, § 18-68) (Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-
2018)
LICENCED FACILITIES
§ 57.100 FACILITY LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate any of the
following facilities within the city’s jurisdiction without a license from the
city:
   (a)   Recycling collection facility or a recycling processing facility;
   (b)   Solid waste transfer or treatment facility; and
   (c)   Regulated medical waste transfer or treatment facility.
(1992 Code, § 18-70) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.101 APPLICATION FOR FACILITY LICENSE.
   A written application for a facility license required by city code §
57.100 shall be filed with the city and shall set forth the following
information:
   (a)   The true name and address of the owner or operator of the facility or
site;
   (b)   Legal description of the place where the facility or site will be
located;
   (c)   A schematic drawing of buildings and other structures, showing layout
and general dimensions for unloading, storage, compacting, processing, parking,
and loading areas;
   (d)   A description of the fire-control equipment and additional emergency
firefighting equipment that will be located at the facility or site;
   (e)   An estimate of the design capacity and current daily capacity of the
facility in tons;
   (f)   Anticipated amount and planned method for final disposal of authorized
collections;
   (g)   (1)   Insurance requirements.
         A.   Workers’ compensation insurance providing the statutory limits
required by state law. In addition, it shall provide coverage B, employer’s
liability coverage, of not less than $1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000
disease-policy limits. The required limit may be met by excess liability
(umbrella) coverage.
         B.   Commercial general liability insurance providing occurrence form
contractual, personal injury, bodily injury, and a property damage and
liability coverage with limits of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence,
$2,000,000 general aggregate, and $2,000,000 aggregate products and completed
operations. The required limit may include excess liability (umbrella)
coverage. If “occurrence form” insurance is not available, “claims made”
insurance will be acceptable.
         C.   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, nonowned, and
hired automobiles, trucks, and trailers. The coverage shall be as broad as that
found in the standard comprehensive automobile liability policy with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence. The required
limit may include excess liability (umbrella) coverage. If the policy expires
or lapses during the license period, the facility must file a copy of a new
certificate of insurance with the city within 30 days in order to maintain its
license.
      (2)   The city’s approval or acceptance of certificates of insurance does
not constitute city assumption of responsibility for the validity of any
insurance policies nor does the city represent that the above coverages and
limits are adequate to protect any individual/group or business, and assumes no
liability therefor.
   (h)   The applicant shall file a corporate surety bond with the city in an
amount of at least $25,000, indemnifying the public against damages sustained
because of any spill, dump, or discharge occurring at the facility or during
transport from the facility to a permanent disposal site. The bond, or bond
continuation certificate, must be issued by a surety company licensed to do
business in the state. The bond shall be filed annually with the application
for facility or site license;
   (i)   A written emergency operational plan to provide for an alternative
waste-handling system during periods of in operation, if applicable; and
   (j)   A statement of the proposed days and hours of operation.
(1992 Code, § 18-71) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.102 TRANSFER.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable.
(1992 Code, § 18-72) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 57.103 RENEWAL.
   The city may, upon reapplication, renew a license issued under this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 18-73) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
LICENSING PROCEDURE
§ 57.104 LICENSE FEES.
   On filing an original application or a renewal application for any license
under this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee as provided for in
chapter 110. The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the chapter may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under any provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 18-74) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.105 DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   A license required by this chapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked by
the city if one or more of the following facts or circumstances are found to
exist:
   (a)   The applicant or licensee fails to obtain or no longer holds the
insurance required by this chapter;
   (b)   The applicant or licensee operating or seeking to operate a facility
license fails to obtain or no longer holds the corporate surety bond required
by this chapter;
   (c)   The applicant or licensee operates any facility, site, or vehicle in a
manner so as to create air, land or water pollution, public health hazards, or
nuisances such as allowing repeated leaks or discharging of waste, fuel, or oil
from facilities or vehicles;
   (d)   The applicant or licensee fails to maintain its facility, site, or
vehicles in as clean and sanitary condition as possible in view of the use to
which it is put;
   (e)   Violation by the licensee of applicable noise and fire ordinances;
   (f)   Violation by the licensee of any applicable provision of this Code,
state law, rule, or regulation;
   (g)   Failure to pay or keep current any account with the sanitary landfill
as required by §
57.053(f); and/or
   (h)   Failure by licensed commercial garbage haulers to comply with the 80%
standard of the recycling goal established in §
57.081.
      (1)   First year not achieving 80% of recycling goal. The city shall
issue a notice of violation. Within 30 days of receipt of city notice, the
licensed commercial garbage hauler is required to evaluate their recycling
program and submit an acceptable corrective action plan to the city describing
efforts that will be taken to achieve the recycling goal established in §
57.081. The licensed commercial garbage hauler shall also be surcharged for the
previous calendar year not achieving this standard in accordance with §
57.047(p).
      (2)   Second consecutive year not achieving 80% of recycling goal. The
city shall issue a notice of violation. Within 60 days of receipt of city
notice, the licensed commercial garbage hauler is required to submit an
acceptable corrective action plan to the city describing efforts that will be
taken to achieve the recycling goal. This corrective action plan must be
developed by a qualified professional approved by the city and must include
specific procedures/processes the hauler will implement to improve recycling.
The hauler will be required to meet with city staff to present the corrective
action plan. The licensed commercial garbage hauler shall also be surcharged
for the previous calendar year not achieving this standard in accordance with §
57.047(q).
      (3)   Third consecutive year not achieving 80% of recycling goal. The
city shall issue a notice of violation and the licensed commercial garbage
hauler’s license shall be formally revoked and the business owners or
responsible party will not be allowed to reapply for a new license for five
years.
      (4)   Failure to submit an acceptable corrective action plan. Failure to
submit an acceptable corrective action plan as required by this section shall
be cause for the revocation of a commercial garbage hauler license.
(1992 Code, § 18-75) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11,
passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.106 SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   General requirements and operation procedures for solid waste transfer
facilities are listed as follows.
   (a)   Storage of salvage. Salvaging and volume reduction operations shall be
restricted to a specified, clearly identified area of the transfer facility.
Salvage materials generated on site or imported shall be stored away from other
activity areas and be limited to a volume as approved by the sanitary landfill.
Stored materials salvaged from solid wastes shall be ancillary to the operation
of the facility, unless the storage is planned as an integral part of the
operation.
   (b)   Drainage control. Surface drainage shall be handled as specified in
the facility design. Storm water drainage leaving the facility shall not
contain pollutants, solids, wash water, or leachate emanating from solid wastes
or any other process wastewater.
   (c)   Housekeeping. A high standard of housekeeping is required in the
maintenance of station equipment. Accumulation of fuel drums, parts, inoperable
equipment, tires, scrap, and similar items must be minimized unless reasonably
screened from outside the station boundary.
   (d)   Odor control. The facility shall not be a source of odor nuisances.
   (e)   Equipment construction. All equipment used for the collection and
transportation of solid wastes shall be durable, easily cleanable, and designed
for safe handling and constructed to prevent loss of waste from the equipment
during collection or transportation. All equipment shall be maintained in a
good condition and cleaned in a frequency and in a manner to prevent the
propagation or attraction of flies, mosquitoes, rodents, birds, and other
vectors.
   (f)   Frequency of removal. Waste can be stored at the transfer facility or
site for no longer than 48 hours. A weekly removal of salvaged waste material
is required. Other frequencies may be acceptable, so long as they do not result
in health or safety problems and are authorized by the sanitary landfill.
(1992 Code, § 18-76) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.107 VOLUME REDUCTION PERMITTED.
   Volume reduction operations, such as baling, shredding, compacting, or
salvaging, are permitted at a solid waste transfer facility, provided they are
conducted in a controlled manner as an integral part of the operation and in
conformance with conditions established by the sanitary landfill. Volume
reduction activities shall not interfere with other aspects of facility
operation and shall be controlled to minimize health, safety, or nuisance
problems.
(1992 Code, § 18-77) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.108 CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   The following conduct is prohibited by any hauler licensed under this
chapter, any member of the public, or any other person or entity, unless the
applicable permit to allow the activity has been obtained, if any applies, and
the operation is in accordance with the appropriate federal, state and local
laws, rules, and regulations:
   (a)   Scavenging at the landfill or any transfer station;
   (b)   Knowingly:
      (1)   Collecting any of the following substances;
      (2)   Concealing or failing to disclose any of them when entering the
landfill or a transfer station; or
      (3)   Depositing any of them at the landfill or a transfer station:
         A.   Hazardous waste;
         B.   Regulated medical waste (except treated medical waste with
documentation of waste sources and third party testing); and
         C.   Special waste (unless the party seeking to dispose of such waste
receives prior approval from the public works environmental division and
provides 24-hour notice prior to deliver to the landfill).
   (c)   Acceptance of liquid wastes; and
   (d)   Concealing or failing to disclose any type of waste to avoid payment
of fees at the landfill.
(1992 Code, § 18-78) (Ord. 93-88, passed 10-24-1988; Ord. 149-95, passed 11-20-
1995; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 107-16,
passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.109 REQUIREMENTS FOR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE GENERATED FROM THE TREATMENT
OF REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE.
   Any person that brings solid waste generated from the treatment of regulated
medical waste to the landfill shall meet the following requirements:
   (a)   Provide documentation that the waste has been properly treated.
Sampling and testing of the solid waste generated from the treatment of
regulated medical waste shall be performed by a method and frequency approved
by the city;
   (b)   Maintain waste manifests containing information regarding the waste
generators and quantities of materials treated from each source;
   (c)   Allow the city to inspect the treatment facility and required records;
and
   (d)   The facility shall maintain all records for a minimum of three years.
(1992 Code, § 18-79) (Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-
2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
SOLID WASTE PLANNING BOARD
§ 57.120 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a solid waste planning board.
(1992 Code, § 18-80) (Ord. 61-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006)
§ 57.121 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   The solid waste planning board shall be appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the council.
   (a)   Fifteen members shall be selected as follows:
      (1)   Three members shall be city employees: the landfill superintendent,
the sustainability coordinator, and the environmental/storm water manager, each
of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor;
      (2)   One member shall be a representative of the garbage hauling
industry;
      (3)   One member shall be a representative of the recycling industry;
      (4)   One member shall be from the Minnehaha County planning office;
      (5)   Three members shall be residents of the city who have no financial
interest in the garbage/recycling industry;
      (6)   One member shall be selected by each of the governing bodies of:
         A.   Lake County;
         B.   Lincoln County;
         C.   McCook County; and
         D.   Turner County.
      (7)   A member of the South Dakota Multi-Housing Association.
      (8)   A member of the business community who generates solid waste within
the five-county region served by the sanitary landfill and who has no financial
interest in the garbage/recycling industry.
   (b)   The terms of members, except the city employees, Minnehaha County
planning office representative, and the five members of the governing bodies of
Lake County, Lincoln County, McCook County, and Turner County shall be for a
period of three years, and members may serve an unlimited number of terms.
   (c)   Members of the solid waste planning board are not required to be
citizens of the city, with the exception of those indicated in division (a)(5)
above.
(1992 Code, § 18-81) (Ord. 61-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 90-15, passed 9-8-2015; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.122 PURPOSE.
   The solid waste planning board may:
   (a)   Review the current waste stream of the users of the city landfill and
investigate how the waste stream may vary in the future and analyze how current
and future recycling efforts may impact on the waste stream;
   (b)   Assess the availability of markets and potential markets for
recyclable materials on the local, regional, and national scale, including
collection sites, actual recycling operations, prices, and any related matters;
   (c)   Develop plans for public education programs for waste reduction and
recycling;
   (d)   Develop plans and pilot projects to achieve waste reduction and
recycling goals and provide economic, environmental, and social cost-benefit
analysis for each project;
   (e)   Assess current ordinances and statutes and recommend appropriate
changes;
   (f)   Review and analyze alternative methods (other than landfilling) for
disposal of “special wastes”; i.e., hazardous wastes generated by households
and small quantity generators, waste oil, tires, batteries, pesticides, and any
other problem wastes; and
   (g)   Make ongoing reports to the mayor of its findings and recommendations.
(1992 Code, § 18-82) (Ord. 61-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 117-18, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 57.123 STAFF.
   The city sustainability coordinator shall serve as chairperson for the
board. The city attorney’s office shall provide legal advice to the board.
(1992 Code, § 18-83) (Ord. 61-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-
2003; Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 76-11, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 117-18,
passed 12-11-2018)
CHAPTER 58: EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Section
   
58.001   Establishment
   
58.002   Definitions
   
58.003   Installation, operation and surcharge
   
58.004   Surcharge use and procedure
   
58.005   Discontinuance
§ 58.001 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A 911 emergency telephone reporting system is hereby established for all of
the area within the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-300) (Ord. 73-89, passed 7-31-1989)
§ 58.002 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in SDCL 34-45-1.
(1992 Code, § 41-301) (Ord. 73-89, passed 7-31-1989)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 58.003 INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND SURCHARGE.
   A monthly 911 system surcharge of $0.75 for each local exchange access line
is hereby established, effective January 1, 1993. The surcharge shall be
collected by service suppliers and remitted to the Minnehaha County treasurer
as required by state law.
(1992 Code, § 41-302) (Ord. 73-89, passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 77-92, passed 8-10-
1992)
§ 58.004 SURCHARGE USE AND PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The surcharge shall be used to pay for nonrecurring and recurring
costs of the 911 system. No surcharge shall be imposed upon more than 100 local
exchange access lines or the equivalent per customer billing.
   (b)   At least once every calendar year, prior to September 1, the city
council shall review the current charge and establish a rate of charge to be
effective on the next January 1.
   (c)   All funds collected from the surcharge shall be credited to a special
fund, apart from the general fund of Minnehaha County, for payment of
nonrecurring and recurring costs and for the general operational expense of the
911 system including, but not limited to, the personnel costs of the
dispatchers and the monthly contract costs billed by the metro communications
center.
   (d)   The funds shall be administered by the Minnehaha area metropolitan
communications council pursuant to intergovernmental agreement approved
December 31, 1980, and as amended.
(1992 Code, § 41-303) (Ord. 73-89, passed 7-31-1989)
§ 58.005 DISCONTINUANCE.
   If the 911 system is discontinued, any money remaining in the fund after all
payments to the service supplier have been made shall be transferred
proportionately to the general fund of each participating public agency.
(1992 Code, § 41-304) (Ord. 73-89, passed 7-31-1989)
CHAPTER 59: WATER DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS
Section
   
59.001   Definitions
   
59.002   Ownership, payment, and maintenance responsibility
   
59.003   Premises service connection
   
59.004   Service lines
   
59.005   Service line shutoff valves
   
59.006   Water meters
   
59.007   Water meter shutoff valves
   
59.008   Backflow prevention assemblies during construction
   
59.009   Water meter and backflow assembly installation
   
59.010   Installation
   
59.011   Water meter testing
   
59.012   Use of water
   
59.013   Water service to annexed areas
§ 59.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   DEDUCT METERS. A water meter used by commercial facilities which separately
accounts for water which does not enter the regional wastewater systems.
   HYDRANT METERS. A water meter used by contractors when a permanent water
meter installation is not in use to account for water used.
   IRRIGATION METERS. A water meter used by commercial facilities which
separately meters water used for outdoor watering and irrigation.
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM. A device or combination of devices having a hose, pipe,
or other conduit installed in or upon the landscape that transmits water
supplied by the city through which device or combination of devices the water
is drawn and applied to lawns, landscapes, or green space.
   MASTER METERS. Single main water meter used in industrial, commercial, and
multifamily residential complexes in lieu of individual water meter systems.
   RAIN SENSOR. A device that measures rainfall and will override the
irrigation cycle of an irrigation system and turn it off when a predetermined
amount of rain has fallen.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.002 OWNERSHIP, PAYMENT, AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   City responsibility.
      (1)   Water service lines shall be owned and maintained by the city from
the city main to, and including, the first curb stop valve or shutoff valve
after the water main connection.
      (2)   Ownership of the water meter will remain with the city.
   (b)   Property owner/customer responsibility. Water service lines shall be
owned by the property owner and maintained by either the property owner or
customer from the first service shutoff closest to the city main to the
premises served including, but not limited to, the water meter shutoff valves
and backflow prevention assembly.
   (c)   Private systems. Private water system lines shall be owned by the
property owner and maintained by the property owner from the first shutoff
valve closest to the city main to the premises served including, but not
limited to, the private main, water supply piping, control valves, hydrants and
other appurtenances, water meter shutoff valves, and backflow prevention
assembly.
   (d)   Maintenance and repair.
      (1)   Property owner or customer maintenance, as required in divisions
(b) and (c) above, shall be at the property owner or customer's sole expense
including, but not limited to, protection from freezing and other hazards.
      (2)   All owners must, at their own expense, keep the customer service
line, water meter shutoff valves, water meter, and backflow prevention assembly
in good working order and properly protected from freezing and other hazards.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.003 PREMISES SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (a)   Each premises with a service line connected to the water supply system
shall be installed with a curb stop valve or shutoff valve, at least one water
meter, and a backflow assembly for that service connection.
   (b)   Each separate account requiring a separate meter shall be installed
with a separate service line from the water supply system.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the above, existing properties with one service
connection, one curb stop, and more than one meter installed prior to November
1, 2016, may continue to receive city water service.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.004 SERVICE LINES.
   (a)   Service lines shall enter through the floor or sidewall of the
basement or the floor or sidewall of the mechanical/utility room if one is
provided. The service line location must provide adequate space to allow for
the installation, repair, or replacement of the meter shutoff valve as required
in §
59.007.
   (b)   Reuse of existing water service lines may be approved by city engineer
if existing service line follows all current applicable codes and
specifications.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.005 SERVICE LINE SHUTOFF VALVES.
   (a)   All water services shall be controlled by a curb stop or shutoff valve
to be located on the property line, or as directed by the city engineer.
   (b)   The city shall not be liable for damage or repair costs for concrete
or asphalt or for damage to fences or structures when shutoff valves are
located within 6 feet of a fence or structure except for situations where the
customer's curb stop installation occurred prior to November 1, 2016.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.006 WATER METERS.
   (a)   Only authorized utility employees are permitted to install and remove
water meters.
   (b)   Only the individual water meter(s) serving a premises can be located
within the private occupancy space of that dwelling unit.
   (c)   The customer shall pay for the water meter(s) according to the current
schedule of fees as approved in §
51.010. Water meters shall not be set, nor the water service turned on, unless
the location and setting comply with the city code and all fees and deposits
have been paid. If any customer requests a water meter installation and has any
unpaid fees or charges, the new water meter will not be set until all unpaid
fees and charges are paid in full.
   (d)   Water meter(s) shall remain at the address in which installed and
shall remain in the same location as first installed unless relocation is
approved by the city. If the building is to be demolished or moved from the
lot, the water meter(s) shall be removed and returned to the city. A resetting
fee at the current rate shall be assessed for removal of a water meter without
authorization.
   (e)   A meter transmitting unit (MTU) must be installed with each water
meter. An MTU must be installed to ensure proper signal strength for
communication with the data collector unit (DCU) and may be attached to the
water meter, branch piping, walls, ceiling, or on the exterior of the building.
If the MTU must be installed away from the water meter location to ensure
proper signal strength and accuracy, the property owner is responsible for all
costs associated with routing, hanging, or drilling to install the MTU.
   (f)   Deduct meters are not permitted without prior written approval from
the city.
   (g)   Hydrant meters will not be allowed without prior approval of the city
engineer or utility employee. All fees and charges, including any damage to the
hydrant, hydrant meter, or associated backflow prevention assembly, will be
billed to the customer when the hydrant meter is removed from service. Fees to
install and remove the hydrant meter will be charged in accordance to §
51.010.
   (h)   Irrigation meters may only be installed in commercial facilities and
only upon prior written approval from the city engineer or utility employee.
Irrigation meters, if approved, must be installed prior to, or separate from,
the domestic water meter.
   (i)   Master meters are not permitted without prior written approval from
the city engineer or utility employee.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.007 WATER METER SHUTOFF VALVES.
   (a)   Water meter shutoff valve connections to the water service line must
be flared, compression, or threaded fittings. Solder connections are not
allowed.
   (b)   An approved shutoff valve is required on every individual line inside
the structure before and after every water meter assembly to allow the water
meter to be repaired or replaced.
   (c)   Water meter shutoff valve style shall be as follows:
      (1)   Shutoff valves 1 inch in diameter or less shall be a ball valve.
      (2)   Shutoff valves 1.5 inches in diameter shall be a full flow gate
valve or ball valve.
      (3)   Shutoff valves 2 inches in diameter and larger shall be a full flow
gate valve.
   (d)   Water meter shutoff valve installation orientation shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The valve may be installed in either a vertical or horizontal
orientation.
      (2)   The valve must be installed between 12 and 60 inches from the
floor.
      (3)   The valve must be accessible for repair and maintenance.
      (4)   The valves shall face outward from walls or other equipment.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.008 BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   A backflow preventer must be installed before a water meter will be
set in all new construction and as determined by city utility employee and/or
code in renovations.
   (b)   A water meter may not be installed if backflow prevention assembly has
not been installed prior to the request for a new water meter installation. A
trip charge may be charged as defined in §
51.010 for a city utility employee to return and install the water meter once
adequate backflow prevention has been installed.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.009 WATER METER AND BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION.
   (a)   Water meter and backflow assembly installation order shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Shutoff valve. Water meter shutoff valve installed immediately
preceding the water meter or as close as installation permits.
      (2)   Water meter. All water meters shall be placed on service lines
horizontally with register facing upwards.
      (3)   Backflow prevention assembly. All city water meters must
immediately be followed by an approved backflow preventer.
      (4)   Pressure reducing valve (PRV). PRV installation is as determined by
city utility employee and/or required by code.
      (5)   Shutoff valve. Water meter shutoff valve installed directly after
the backflow preventer and/or PRV.
   (b)   Water meters installed in locations with nonmetallic supply piping
shall be supported directly from the wall or floor to maintain proper support
and alignment.
   (c)   Water meters shall be placed as follows:
      (1)   Water meters cannot be located above the first or ground floor
level under any conditions.
      (2)   Water meters cannot be installed in confined space locations
including, but not limited to, vaults, manholes, pits, or crawlspaces.
      (3)   Water meters shall be as close to the wall where the service line
enters the building as possible while still providing adequate space to allow
for installation, removal, maintenance, and reading purposes.
      (4)   Water meters must be installed between 12 and 60 inches from the
floor.
      (5)   There shall be a minimum of 12 inches clear space above and below
the water meter.
      (6)   There shall be 30 inches of clear space in front of the water
meter.
      (7)   Water meters shall not be installed behind walls or within
cabinets.
      (8)   Water meters shall not be placed in proximity to any wiring,
device, appliance, equipment, or any other item which obstructs or limits
access to the water meter.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.010 INSTALLATION.
   (a)   No water system installations shall be accepted by the city until the
system has been inspected and passed all city required testing.
   (b)   The initial installation of the city service line from the city main
to the curb stop, and the customer service line from the curb stop to the
premises being served, will be at the property owner's expense.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.011 WATER METER TESTING.
   (a)   In the event that a water meter fails to register the amount of water
passing through it, the quantity of water used shall be estimated based on an
analysis of the account.
   (b)   Upon request, a customer's water meter will be tested at no charge to
determine whether the meter correctly measures water according to the then
current standard as adopted by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).
      (1)   If test results show the water meter overregisters beyond the AWWA
acceptable standard, the city will adjust the customer's water bill for the
last billing period.
      (2)   If the test results show the water meter correctly measures within
the AWWA acceptable standard, the customer will be charged a water meter test
fee for each additional test within the following two years.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.012 USE OF WATER.
   (a)   No customer shall permit any water to be taken from the customer's
service line before the water meter without prior written permission from the
city and an approved backflow preventer.
   (b)   No customer shall permit water to be taken from a fire suppression
system for any purpose other than its intended fire suppression use.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 59.013 WATER SERVICE TO ANNEXED AREAS.
   When a residential rural subdivision is annexed into the city, an adequate
water supply shall be available for fire protection within five years after the
date of official notice to do so or as otherwise established by an annexation
agreement. Administrative procedures for enforcement of this section shall be
established by executive order of the mayor.
(Ord. 21-21, passed 2-16-2021; Ord. 31-22, passed 3-1-2022)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
   
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
71.   ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
   
72.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
   
73.   VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
   
74.   RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS
   
75.   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
   
76.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
77.   PARKING REGULATIONS
   
78.   ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
   
79.   TRUCK ROUTES, SETS AXLE AND TIRE LOAD LIMITS
   
80.   PEDESTRIANS
   
81.   BICYCLES, E-BICYCLES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
   
82.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.001   Definitions
   
70.002   Ordinances saved from repeal
   
70.003   Clinging to moving vehicle
   
70.004   Boarding or alighting from vehicle
   
70.005   Coasters, roller skates and similar devices
   
70.006   Riding on outside of vehicles
   
70.007   Opening doors into traffic
   
70.008   Emergency and experimental regulations
   
70.009   Wheeled motor vehicles prohibited on flood protection levees
   
70.010   Declaration prohibiting travel on city streets
Cross-reference:
   Airports, see
ch. 99
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Application of traffic regulations to bicycles, see §
81.015
   Bicycles, see
ch. 81
   Extraterritorial parking and loading regulations, see §§
159.315 through
159.319
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007
   Noise control, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Permit for parade or assembly required, see §
96.181
   Placing handbills on vehicles, see §
97.018
   Refusal to admit certain vehicles to sanitary landfill, see §
57.053
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Surface ambulance services, see §§
124.080 through
124.082
   Vehicle parking in parks, see §
95.008
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
   Vehicles left in parks after closing hours, see §
95.025
   Zoning regulations pertaining to parking, loading and stacking, see §§
160.550 through
160.556
Statutory reference:
   Motor vehicles, see SDCL title 32
   Regulation of traffic, SDCL 9-30-4, 9-31-1 et seq.
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT TRICYCLE. Every conveyance having three wheels, propelled solely by
human power, upon which any adult may ride, except scooters, children’s
tricycles, and similar devices.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of a fire department, police
vehicles, and ambulances and emergency vehicles of city departments or public
service corporations as are designated or authorized by the department.
   BICYCLE. Every wheeled conveyance having two tandem wheels, propelled solely
by human power, upon which any person may ride, except scooters and similar
devices, but also including adult tricycles.
   BICYCLE LANE. An exclusive space for bicyclists and e-bicyclists through the
use of pavement markings and signage. The bicycle lane is located adjacent to
motor vehicle travel lanes.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or more of
the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.
   CROSSWALK. The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   CURB. The extreme edge or lateral boundary of a roadway, whether marked by
curbing or not so marked.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   CYCLE TRACK. A cycle track is an exclusive bicycle facility that combines
the user experience of a separated path with the on-street infrastructure of a
conventional bicycle lane. A cycle track is physically separated from motor
vehicle traffic and distinct from the sidewalk.
   DELIVERY VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for deliveries in a business district and
displaying a sign on the curb side of the vehicle. The sign must be of a
permanent material, show the company name, indicate that the vehicle is a
delivery vehicle, and have a minimum size of six inches by 12 inches.
   DEPARTMENT. The police department.
   DRIVER. Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   E-BICYCLE. A wheeled conveyance having two tandem wheels or two parallel
wheels and one forward or rearward wheel, and two of which are not less than 12
inches in diameter, with operable pedals for  propulsion, and with an electric
motor of 750 watts or less.
      An e-bicycle is a Class I e-bicycle if the motor provides assistance only
when the person is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance when a speed of 20
miles per hour is achieved.
      An e-bicycle is a Class II e-bicycle if the motor is capable of
propelling the bicycle without the person pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when a speed of 20 miles per hour is achieved.
      An e-bicycle is a Class III e-bicycle if the motor provides assistance
only when the person is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance when a speed
of 28 miles per hour is achieved.
   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. Wireless or cellular phones, PDAs,
BlackBerries, smartphones, MP3 players, laptop or notebook computers utilizing
VoIP (Voice-over Internet Protocol) technology, wireless and cellular phones
utilizing push-to-talk technology, and any other mobile communication device
that uses shortwave analog or digital radio transmission between the device and
a transmitter to permit wireless communications to and from the user of the
device.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE. A self-contained piece of digital communication that is
designed or intended to be transmitted between two physical devices. An
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE includes, but is not limited to, email, a text message, an
instant message, a command or request to access a World Wide Web page, or other
data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communications protocol. An
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE does not include the use of global positioning or navigation
systems or voice or other data transmitted as a result of making a phone call
or data transmitted automatically by a wireless communication device without
direct initiation by a person.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curblines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more
highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one highway crosses
the other. However, the area in the case of the point where an alley and a
street meet within the city is not an INTERSECTION.
   LANED STREET. A street, the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three
wheels in contact with the ground, except any vehicle as may be included within
the term “tractor.”
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled. The term does not
include an electric bicycle.
   OBSTRUCTIONS. Include, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked
or moving vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or
substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand
curb or edge.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. All signals, not inconsistent with this chapter,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS. All signs and markings, other than signals, not
inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by a public body or official
having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning, or
regulating traffic.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   PARKWAY. The paved or unpaved strip of land paralleling the roadway and
located between the roadway and sidewalk area.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES. Walkways, sidewalks, and crosswalks designed for use
by pedestrians.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the city police department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   RECREATION TRAILS. Any publicly owned pathway within the floodplain of the
Big Sioux River and the pathways which lead directly into this pathway system
which are open to the public for recreation or travel and which prohibit
motorists from traveling upon them.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a
business district when the frontage on the highway for a distance of 300 feet
or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use
for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under those
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two
or more separate ROADWAYS, the word ROADWAY shall refer to any ROADWAY
separately but not to all ROADWAYS collectively.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for use of
pedestrians.
   SIDEPATH. A sidepath is a path next to the street, like a sidewalk, except
that the sidepath is 8 to 12 feet in width and designated by signage as a
sidepath. A sidepath allows and is designed for pedestrian, bicycle, and e-
bicycle traffic.
   STANDARD WIDTH LANE. A lane that is wide enough for a bicycle or e-bicycle
and another vehicle to travel safely side by side within the same lane.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel.
   SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE. A lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or e-bicycle
and another vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   THROUGH STREET. Any street or part of a street that has an intersecting
street controlled by traffic control signals or stop or yield signs.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden animals, herded animals, and vehicles while
using any street for purpose of travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device using colored lights, or words, or any
combination thereof, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, including bicycles,
e-bicycles, and ridden animals.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.101; 1992 Code, § 40-1) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 32-93, passed 4-26-1993; Ord. 46-12, passed
7-10-2012; Ord. 73-12, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-2018; Ord.
66-19, passed 6-18-2019; Ord. 18-24, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 19-24, passed 3-5-
2024)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
Statutory reference:
   Traffic definitions, see SDCL 32-14-1
§ 70.002 ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   Nothing contained in this Code, nor in the ordinance adopting this Code,
shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any manner any ordinance
designating one-way streets or alleys, through streets, stop or yield
intersections, intersections at which traffic control signals are to be
installed, areas or spaces in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited or
limited, intersections at which the turning of vehicles is prohibited,
restricted or regulated, speed limits or any other ordinance regulating traffic
on specific streets, alleys or other public ways in the city or portions
thereof or in specific areas of the city and all ordinances are hereby saved
from repeal and recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out at length in this Code.
(1992 Code, § 40-2)
§ 70.003 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE.
   No person traveling upon any bicycle, e-bicycle, coaster, sled, skis, roller
skates, or any other toy vehicle shall cling to or attach himself or herself or
his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.152; 1992 Code, § 40-6 (Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.004 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.150; 1992 Code, § 40-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.005 COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person on roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster or toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street or a sidewalk and when so crossing the person shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply on any street while set aside as a play street.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.151; 1992 Code, § 40-8) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.006 RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated
or intended for the use of passengers, nor shall the operator of the vehicle
permit any person to so ride. This section shall not apply to vehicles in
parades for which a parade permit has been issued nor to persons riding within
truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.153; 1992 Code, § 40-9) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 11-83, passed 2-7-1983) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.007 OPENING DOORS INTO TRAFFIC.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(1992 Code, § 40-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-30-2.5
§ 70.008 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The police chief, by and with the approval of the city engineer, may
make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and
make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions.
   (b)   The city engineer may make temporary rules regulating traffic or test
traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. No experimental
rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.109; 1992 Code, § 40-11)
§ 70.009 WHEELED MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON FLOOD PROTECTION LEVEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motorized or
motor driven, wheeled vehicle except a Class I e-bicycle and Class II e-bicycle
on any of the flood protection levees. This section shall not apply to or limit
authorized vehicles on the levees for maintenance, patrolling, and flood
emergency purposes. The maximum speed allowed on any of the flood protection
levees is found in §
76.003.
(1992 Code, § 40-12) (Ord. 25-72, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-
2018; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019; Ord. 18-24, passed 3-5-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
§ 70.010 DECLARATION PROHIBITING TRAVEL ON CITY STREETS.
   The mayor may declare by executive order, that an emergency exists in the
city because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, snow drifts or other natural
phenomena which create, or are likely to create, hazardous road conditions
resulting in stopped vehicles within the public right-of-way. Upon the issuance
of the order, no person shall travel upon any designated public street for a
period of up to 48 hours. Police, fire, healthcare, snow removal, snowmobiles
and other vehicles responding to emergencies or critical occupations are exempt
from this prohibition. The no travel order, and any termination of it, shall be
given to all broadcast media within the city area for broadcast to the public.
(1992 Code, § 40-13) (Ord. 34-99, passed 3-15-1999)
CHAPTER 71: ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
Section
Enforcement and Obedience
   
71.001   Duty of traffic division
   
71.002   Police direct traffic
   
71.003   Obedience to police
   
71.004   Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic
regulations
   
71.005   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
71.006   Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.007   Application to workers, equipment
Procedures Upon Arrest
   
71.020   Manner of arrest
   
71.021   Notice to appear
   
71.022   Appearance and deposit for fine
   
71.023   Arrest on failure to appear
   
71.024   Clerk to report failure to appear
   
71.025   Dismissal by officer prohibited
   
71.026   Removal of vehicles illegally parked
Statutory reference:
   Apprehension and prosecution of violators, see SDCL ch. 32-33
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
§ 71.001 DUTY OF TRAFFIC DIVISION.
   It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with that aid as may be
rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the traffic
regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the
traffic division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city.
(1992 Code, § 40-22)
§ 71.002 POLICE DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   Police officers shall direct all traffic in conformance with traffic laws
and ordinances provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire
department may direct traffic as conditions may require.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.116; 1992 Code, § 40-23)
§ 71.003 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or
direction of any police officer, or refuse to submit to any lawful inspection
or fail to comply with the provisions or requirements of any warning ticket
issued by the police under this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.114; 1992 Code, § 40-24) (Ord. 2283, passed 9-15-1964)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 71.004 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING ANIMALS TO OBEY TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
(1992 Code, § 40-25) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
§ 71.005 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state,
county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 40-26) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 71.006 EXEMPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Circumstances under which emergency vehicle may disregard traffic
regulations. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in division (b) below, but subject to the
conditions stated in divisions (c) and (d) below.
   (b)   Particular regulations which may be disregarded. The driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of SDCL ch. 32-30;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; and
      (3)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (c)   Use of emergency signals required. The exemptions granted in divisions
(b)(2) and (b)(3) above to an authorized emergency vehicle apply only if the
vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of
law. However, the exemption granted in division (b)(1) above to an authorized
emergency vehicle applies only if the vehicle is making use of visual signals
meeting the requirements of law.
   (d)   Duty of driver to use care; liability for recklessness. The provisions
of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall
the provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his or her reckless
disregard for the safety of others.
   (e)   Speed. The speed of an authorized emergency vehicle shall be governed
by §
76.004.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.115; 1992 Code, § 40-27)
§ 71.007 APPLICATION TO WORKERS, EQUIPMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles
and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of the
street, but shall apply to those persons and vehicles when traveling to and
from work, provided, however, those persons and vehicles shall not
indiscriminately block traffic, but shall allow reasonable room on the traveled
portion of the street for other vehicles to pass.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.126; 1992 Code, § 40-28) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
PROCEDURES UPON ARREST
§ 71.020 MANNER OF ARREST.
   Except in the more serious and aggravated cases of speeding or careless and
reckless driving and except when reasonably necessary to secure appearance, a
person charged with a violation of this chapter or a traffic ordinance of the
city by a police officer need not be arrested in the regular manner but may be
first given an opportunity after notice to appear voluntarily to answer for the
traffic violation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.201; 1992 Code, § 40-38)
§ 71.021 NOTICE TO APPEAR.
   (a)   A person charged with violation of this chapter or a traffic ordinance
by notice shall be given a notice to appear in magistrate court at the time, or
within the time stated in the notice, which shall be at least five days after
the time of the offense, and that, in event of failure to do so, a warrant will
be issued for his or her arrest.
   (b)   The notice shall state the name, description and address of the
offender, if known, the nature and date of the offense and a description of the
vehicle involved in the violation by trade name and license number. The notice
shall be signed by the police officer executing it.
   (c)   A copy of the notice shall be given to the owner or driver charged
with the offense, or to be left in or upon the automobile or vehicle involved
in the violation. A copy of the notice or the information contained on the
notice shall be filed with the police department and a clerk of courts.
   (d)   If the person charged with the offense is available, he or she shall
be given an opportunity to sign an agreement to appear to answer the charge at
the time and place specified in the notice, which form of agreement shall be
part of the notice, and if he or she shall refuse to sign the agreement then he
or she may be placed under arrest for the offense in the manner otherwise
provided by law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.202; 1992 Code, § 40-39)
§ 71.022 APPEARANCE AND DEPOSIT FOR FINE.
   (a)   A person who has received a notice of traffic violation from the
police shall at or within the time specified in the notice not less than five
days after the time of the offense appear before the court or the clerk of
courts to answer to the charges set forth therein according to the procedure of
that court.
   (b)   For those offenses listed as part of the fine and bond schedule issued
by the presiding circuit court judge, a police officer may provide the
opportunity for the person charged to appear at or mail to the office of the
clerk of courts and upon making the deposit for fine as authorized by the court
and a statement authorizing the clerk of the court to enter his or her plea of
guilty to the offense, he or she shall not be required to appear in court.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.203; 1992 Code, § 40-40)
§ 71.023 ARREST ON FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   Failure of a person to appear in response to a notice of traffic violation
is a public offense, and any person so failing to appear shall be subject to
arrest for that offense, and for the underlying offense, in the manner
otherwise provided by law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.204; 1992 Code, § 40-41) (Ord. 118-82, passed 11-29-
1982)
§ 71.024 CLERK TO REPORT FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   If a person fails to appear in response to a notice of traffic violation,
the clerk of courts shall promptly report that fact to the magistrate.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.205; 1992 Code, § 40-42)
§ 71.025 DISMISSAL BY OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   A traffic violation shall not be excused or dismissed by any police officer
or other officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.206; 1992 Code, § 40-43)
§ 71.026 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES ILLEGALLY PARKED.
   Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter or of a traffic or snow
removal ordinance may be removed from a street or public parking facility by
the police department or parking patrol and placed in storage, and the owner
thereof, in addition to the fines and penalties which may be imposed for the
violation, shall pay the charges for towing and storage of the vehicle so
removed.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.141; 1992 Code, § 40-45) (Ord. 89-83, passed 11-21-1983;
Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Storing, parking or leaving an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
motor vehicle, §
93.026
CHAPTER 72: OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
Section
Operation of Vehicles Generally
   
72.001   Starting
   
72.002   Drive on right side of street; vehicles generally; bicycles or e-
bicycles; exceptions
   
72.003   Drive on right side of street; intersections
   
72.004   Meeting of vehicles
   
72.005   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
   
72.006   Designation of traffic lanes
   
72.007   Driving on divided highways
   
72.008   Driving on left of other vehicles
   
72.009   Driving on left at intersections
   
72.010   Driving to left on grade or curve; obstructed view
   
72.011   Overtaking; generally
   
72.012   Overtaking; passing on right; circumstances under which permitted
   
72.013   Overtaking; vision obstructed
   
72.014   Overtaking; no passing zones
   
72.015   Overtaking; duty of overtaken driver
   
72.016   Skateboarding and roller skating prohibited
Accidents
   
72.030   Immediate notice of accident
   
72.031   Driver unable to report
   
72.032   Duty to give information, render aid
   
72.033   Personal injury
   
72.034   Property damage
   
72.035   Duty to stop after accident with unattended vehicle or property;
leaving information; report to police
   
72.036   Duty upon striking animal
   
72.037   Filing of accident reports
   
72.038   Garage keeper to report damaged vehicle
   
72.039   Driver defined for purposes of subchapter
Statutory reference:
   Accidents and accident reports, see SDCL ch. 32-34
OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
§ 72.001 STARTING.
   A standing vehicle about to start shall give all moving vehicles the right-
of-way.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.125; 1992 Code, § 40-76) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 72.002 DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET; VEHICLES GENERALLY; BICYCLES OR E-
BICYCLES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all streets except upon one-way streets, the driver of a vehicle
shall drive the vehicle upon the right half of the street and shall drive a
slow-moving vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of a
street, unless it is impracticable to travel on that side of the street, and
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle subject to the limitations
applicable to overtaking and passing set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   The provisions of division (a) above shall not be deemed to prevent
the marking of lanes for traffic upon any street and the allocation of
designated lanes to traffic moving in a particular direction or at designated
speeds.
   (c)   Any person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle upon a roadway at less than
the normal speed of traffic shall ride in the right-hand lane, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   If the right-hand lane then available for traffic is a standard
lane width and clear of obstructions such that it may be shared with overtaking
vehicles, a bicyclist or e-bicyclist shall ride as far to the right as allows
the bicyclist or e-bicyclist safe operating conditions;
      (2)    If the right-hand lane then available for traffic is a substandard
lane width and/or includes obstructions that it may not be shared with
overtaking vehicles, a bicyclist or e-bicyclist may ride in the middle of the
right-hand lane to indicate to vehicles behind the bicyclist or e-bicyclist
that passing within the same lane is not safe; or
      (3)   When bicycle lanes are included within a street and upon
approaching an intersection where right turns are permitted and there is a
dedicated right-turn lane, a bicyclist or e-bicyclist may ride on the left hand
portion of the dedicated right-turn lane even if the bicyclist or e-bicyclist
does not intend to turn.
   (d)    A person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle upon a one-way roadway with
two or more marked traffic lanes at less than the normal speed of traffic with
two or more marked traffic lanes may ride in the left-hand lane, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)    If the left-hand lane then available for traffic is wide enough
and clear of obstructions that it may be shared with overtaking vehicles, a
bicyclist or e-bicyclist shall ride as far to the left as allows the bicyclist
or e-bicyclist safe operating conditions; and
      (2)   If the left-hand lane then available for traffic is not wide enough
or clear of obstructions that it may not be shared with overtaking vehicles, a
bicyclist or e-bicyclist may ride in the middle of the left-hand lane to
indicate to the vehicle behind the bicyclist or e-bicyclist that passing within
the same lane is not safe.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.121; 1992 Code, § 40-77) (Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
ch. 81
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-1
§ 72.003 DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET; INTERSECTIONS.
   In crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a highway by
a railroad right-of-way, except upon a one-way street, the driver of a vehicle
shall at all times cause the vehicle to travel on the right half of the highway
unless the right half is obstructed or impassable.
(1992 Code, § 40-78) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-2
§ 72.004 MEETING OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half of the main-
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
   (b)    A driver shall not pass a bicyclist or e-bicyclist moving in the same
direction and in the same lane when there is oncoming traffic unless the driver
can simultaneously:
      (1)   Allow oncoming vehicles at least one-half of the main-traveled
portion of the roadway in accordance with division (a) above; and
      (2)   Allow the bicyclist or e-bicyclist at least a 3-foot separation
between the right side of the driver’s vehicle, including all mirrors or other
projections, and the left side of the bicyclist or e-bicyclist at all times.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.169; 1992 Code, § 40-79) (Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-2012;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-3
§ 72.005 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent with this
section shall apply.
   (a)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
   (b)   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every sign.
(1992 Code, § 40-80)
Statutory reference:
   Highways laned for traffic, see SDCL 32-26-5 et seq.
§ 72.006 DESIGNATION OF TRAFFIC LANES.
   The city engineer is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at those places as he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 40-81)
§ 72.007 DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the righthand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across or within any dividing space, barrier or section, except through an
opening in the physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover
or intersection established by public authority.
(1992 Code, § 40-82) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-9
§ 72.008 DRIVING ON LEFT OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to drive or operate his or
her vehicle on the left-hand side of another vehicle moving in the same
direction in a single traffic lane, unless the driver on the left is in the
process of passing or overtaking another vehicle based upon the standards of §
72.011.
(1992 Code, § 40-83) (Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-
2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 72.009 DRIVING ON LEFT AT INTERSECTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway when approaching
within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad crossing, or when
the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct
or tunnel.
(1992 Code, § 40-84) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-36
§ 72.010 DRIVING TO LEFT ON GRADE OR CURVE; OBSTRUCTED VIEW.
   No person may drive any vehicle on the left side of the roadway when
approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the
driver’s view is obstructed within the distance as to create a hazard if
another vehicle is approaching from the opposite direction.
(1992 Code, § 40-85) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-35
§ 72.011 OVERTAKING; GENERALLY.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left of the overtaken
vehicle. The driver of an overtaking vehicle shall pass at a safe distance to
the side of an overtaken vehicle and may not cut in front of the latter until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicyclist or e-bicyclist
proceeding in the same direction shall allow the bicyclist or e-bicyclist at
least a 3-foot separation between the right side of the driver’s vehicle,
including all mirrors or other projections, and the left side of the bicycle or
e-bicycle.
   (c)   The driver of a bicycle or e-bicycle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right, only under conditions permitting the movement in
safety. A bicycle or e-bicycle may drive off the main-traveled portion of the
roadway when making such movement.
   (d)   The driver of a bicycle or e-bicycle shall not overtake another
vehicle on the right when the overtaken vehicle is signaling to make a right
turn.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.122; 1992 Code, § 40-86) (Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
ch. 81
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-26
§ 72.012 OVERTAKING; PASSING ON RIGHT; CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH PERMITTED.
   The driver of a motor vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
   (a)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
   (b)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement, not occupied by
parked vehicles, of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles
in each direction.
   (c)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (d)   The driver of a motor vehicle upon a one-way roadway with two or more
marked traffic lanes, when overtaking a bicyclist or e-bicyclist on the right
proceeding in the same direction and riding on the left-hand side of the road,
shall allow the bicyclist or e-bicyclist at least a 3-foot separation between
the left side of the driver’s vehicle, including all mirrors or other
projections, and the right side of the bicyclist or e-bicyclist at all times.
(1992 Code, § 40-86.1) (Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-
2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-27
§ 72.013 OVERTAKING; VISION OBSTRUCTED.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of a centerline of
the traversable roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and
passing to be made in safety.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.122; 1992 Code, § 40-87) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-34
§ 72.014 OVERTAKING; NO PASSING ZONES.
   The driver of a vehicle may not overtake and pass any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction when traveling in a no passing zone on
highways or bridges when either marked by signs or lines in the roadways. The
city engineer is hereby authorized to designate no passing zones by the
painting or placing of double lines in the center of the street and any zone or
any street in the city where double lines, buttons or lanes have been painted
or placed in the center of the street, shall be and is hereby designated as no
passing zones, and no operator of any vehicle shall pass any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction in the zone.
(1992 Code, § 40-88) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-37
§ 72.015 OVERTAKING; DUTY OF OVERTAKEN DRIVER.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle on a street shall not deviate from his or her
direct line of travel without ascertaining that the movement can be made with
safety to other vehicles approaching from the rear and about to overtake and
pass the first mentioned vehicle.
   (b)   Unless overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of
an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the
overtaking vehicle, and may not increase the speed of his or her vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.124; 1992 Code, § 40-89)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-31
§ 72.016 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER SKATING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The city engineer may designate and maintain by appropriate devices or
by marks or lines upon the surface where the riding of coasters, skateboards,
bicycles, e-bicycles, roller skates, toy vehicles, or similar recreation
devices is prohibited. Areas may be designated where, in his or her opinion,
there is particular danger to pedestrians, and at such other places as he or
she may deem necessary.
   (b)   Owners or occupants of private property may post their property
subject to the approval of the city engineer.
   (c)   No person shall ride any coaster, skateboard, bicycle, e-bicycle,
roller skates, toy vehicles, or similar recreation device upon any portion of
public or private property as may be designated and posted in accordance with
divisions (a) and (b) above.
(1992 Code, § 40-91) (Ord. 86-87, passed 10-5-1987; Ord. 54-89, passed 6-12-
1989; Ord. 32-90, passed 4-2-1990; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
ACCIDENTS
§ 72.030 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF ACCIDENT.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person, or resulting in any property damage, shall immediately by
the quickest means of communication give notice of the accident to the police
department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.163; 1992 Code, § 40-56) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 21-79, passed 3-19-1979)
§ 72.031 DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   An accident report shall not be required from any person who is physically
incapable of making the report during the period of incapacity. Whenever the
driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making the report or is
physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident and there is
another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing
so, the occupant in the vehicle at the time of accident shall cause to be given
the notice not given by the driver.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.163; 1992 Code, § 40-57) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
§ 72.032 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION, RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any
person shall immediately stop and give his or her name and address and the name
and address of the owner and the license number of the vehicle he or she is
driving, and shall upon request and if available exhibit his or her driver’s or
chauffeur’s license to the person struck or the driver or occupants of or
person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person
injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the
making of arrangements for the carrying of the person to a physician, surgeon
or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that the
treatment is necessary or if the carrying is requested by the injured person.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.161; 1992 Code, § 40-58)
§ 72.033 PERSONAL INJURY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the
accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and
in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she has
fulfilled the requirements of §
72.032.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.161; 1992 Code, § 40-59)
§ 72.034 PROPERTY DAMAGE.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
the vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible but
shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the
accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
72.032. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to stop or comply with
this section under the circumstances.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.161; 1992 Code, § 40-60) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 72.035 DUTY TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR PROPERTY;
LEAVING INFORMATION; REPORT TO POLICE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in an accident
with any vehicle or other property which is unattended resulting in any damage
to the other vehicle or property shall immediately stop and shall then and
there either locate and notify the operator or owner of the vehicle or other
property of his or her name, address and the name and address of the owner and
the license number of the vehicle he or she is driving or shall attach securely
in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle or other property a written notice
giving his or her name, address and the name and address of the owner and the
license number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall without
unnecessary delay notify the nearest office of a duly authorized police
authority. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(1972 Code, §§ 40-61, 40-62; 1992 Code, § 40-61)
§ 72.036 DUTY UPON STRIKING ANIMAL.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any dog or domestic animal
causing injury thereto shall stop and attempt to ascertain the owner of the
animal and shall notify the department of the accident and also shall notify
the humane or animal control officer thereof if the injured animal is not
otherwise properly cared for.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.162; 1992 Code, § 40-63)
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
§ 72.037 FILING OF ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. The department may provide copies of the reports to any
person, and may charge a reasonable fee for each copy so furnished. The fee
shall be set from time to time by the police chief and shall not exceed the
amount specified under SDCL 32-34-13.
(1992 Code, § 40-64) (Ord. 69-77, passed 10-10-1977)
§ 72.038 GARAGE KEEPER TO REPORT DAMAGED VEHICLE.
   The person in charge of any garage, repair shop or service station shall not
commence body repair on any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been
involved in an accident reportable under §
72.030, or struck by any bullet, unless the vehicle bears the notice provided
for in SDCL 32-34-10, and shall report any vehicle without the notice to the
police department, within 24 hours after the vehicle is received for body
repair.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.164; 1992 Code, § 40-65) (Ord. 21-79, passed 3-19-1979;
Ord. 49-88, passed 6-20-1988)
§ 72.039 DRIVER DEFINED FOR PURPOSES OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Whenever the word DRIVER is used in sections §§
72.030 and
72.035, that word shall mean and include the actual driver of the vehicle. The
word DRIVER shall also mean and include the owner of the vehicle when the owner
becomes aware of damage to his or her vehicle that has not been reported as
required by law.
(1992 Code, § 40-66) (Ord. 64-88, passed 7-11-1988)
CHAPTER 73: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Section
   
73.001   Warning tickets
   
73.002   Headlights dimmed
   
73.003   Emergency vehicle warning device
   
73.004   Projecting loads
   
73.005   Weight and size of vehicles and loads
   
73.006   Protection of load
   
73.007   Obedience to police
§ 73.001 WARNING TICKETS.
   The police, upon reasonable belief that a vehicle is being operated in
violation of any provision of this chapter, the traffic ordinances of the city
or applicable state law or is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any person,
may require the driver of the vehicle to stop and submit to inspection of the
vehicle and its equipment, license plates and registration card. The police are
hereby authorized to issue a warning ticket to any driver whose vehicle is in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the traffic ordinances of
the city or applicable state law. The warning ticket shall clearly designate
the provisions which are being violated and shall provide for notification to
the police department when the violation is corrected, by the time specified on
the warning ticket. The form and content of the warning ticket shall be at the
discretion of the police chief.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.114; 1992 Code, § 25-17) (Ord. 2283, passed 9-15-1964)
§ 73.002 HEADLIGHTS DIMMED.
   No person shall use headlights upon any vehicle on any street unless the
lights are dimmed in such a way as to prevent the light being dazzling or
glaring to persons using the streets.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.134; 1992 Code, § 25-19) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 73.003 EMERGENCY VEHICLE WARNING DEVICE.
   Every police and fire department and fire patrol vehicle and every ambulance
used for emergency calls shall be equipped with a bell, siren or exhaust
whistle. It shall be unlawful for any other vehicle to be equipped with that
equipment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.911; 1992 Code, § 25-21) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Police, see §§
131.020,
131.021
   Surface ambulance services, see §§
124.080 through
124.082
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-15-12
§ 73.004 PROJECTING LOADS.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street with any load or part of a
load projecting more than four feet beyond the rear end or front end, or more
than two feet beyond the sides of the body, or carrying part of the vehicle,
unless there is attached to the extreme ends and sides of the projecting load
some warning sign or signal plainly discernible to other drivers and clearly
indicating the projecting parts of the load.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.137; 1992 Code, § 25-25) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 73.005 WEIGHT AND SIZE OF VEHICLES AND LOADS.
   A vehicle may not be driven or operated upon any street or highway within
the city if the vehicle’s gross weight, load or size does not comply with the
requirements of the state law governing the vehicles or this Code. The city
engineer may issue temporary permits for trucks that do not comply with this
section to operate on city streets. The fee for this permit is $15.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.136; 1992 Code, § 25-27) (Ord. 39-85, passed 5-6-1985;
Ord. 7-02, passed 2-11-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Weight, size and load restrictions, see SDCL ch. 32-22
§ 73.006 PROTECTION OF LOAD.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway in the
city unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its
load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping there from, except
that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or
other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   (b)   No person shall operate on any street or highway in the city any
vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering is securely fastened to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a
hazard to other users of the highway.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.137; 1992 Code, § 25-29) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-15-18
§ 73.007 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or
direction of any police officer, or refuse to submit to any lawful inspection
or fail to comply with the provisions or requirements of any warning ticket
issued by the police under this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 25-30) (Ord. 85-73, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 74: RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS
Section
   
74.001   Intersections; unlawful speed as forfeiting right-of-way
   
74.002   Left turning vehicles; right-of-way of oncoming vehicle; signals
   
74.003   Emergency vehicles
   
74.004   Drivers to exercise due care
§ 74.001 INTERSECTIONS; UNLAWFUL SPEED AS FORFEITING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the
same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way
to the vehicle on the right except as otherwise provided in SDCL 32-26-14
through 32-26-16. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed
shall forfeit any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have under this
section.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.126; 1992 Code, § 40-100) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-13
§ 74.002 LEFT TURNING VEHICLES; RIGHT-OF-WAY OF ONCOMING VEHICLE; SIGNALS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left into an alley,
private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction which is within the area in which the
alley, private road or driveway meets the highway or is so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.126; 1992 Code, § 40-101) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 7-96, passed 1-2-1996) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-19
§ 74.003 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to authorized
emergency vehicles when the authorized emergency vehicles are operated upon
official business and the operators thereof sound audible signal by bell, siren
or exhaust whistle. This section shall not relieve the operator of an emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons,
nor shall it protect the operator of any vehicle from the consequence of an
arbitrary exercise of the right-of-way.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.126; 1992 Code, § 40-102) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-15
§ 74.004 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any
local ordinance, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian or any person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously
confused or incapacitated person.
(1992 Code, § 40-103) (Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-
2019)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
Section
   
75.001   Authority to install
   
75.002   Manual and specifications
   
75.003   Obedience
   
75.004   Necessity of signs
   
75.005   Interference with official devices; unauthorized signs, signals or
markings
   
75.006   Traffic control signal legend
   
75.007   Flashing signals
   
75.008   Signal preemption system
   
75.009   Designation of crosswalks, establishing safety zones
   
75.010   Signs for reserved parking spaces
Statutory reference:
   Traffic control devices, see SDCL ch. 32-28
§ 75.001 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   The city engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals
and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to
make effective the provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain the
additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law or to
guide or warn traffic.
(1992 Code, § 40-114) (Ord. 64-75, passed 9-29-1975)
§ 75.002 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   All traffic control signs, signals, markings and other devices shall
conform to the current edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the national standard
for all highways open to public travel, in accordance with 23 U.S.C. §§ 109(b),
109(d) and 402(a) and 23 C.F.R. § 1204.4, which is hereby incorporated and
adopted in this section by the city.
   (b)   All signs, signals, markings and other devices required under this
section for a particular purpose shall, so far as is practicable, be uniform as
to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter
shall be official traffic control devices.
(1992 Code, § 40-115) (Ord. 64-75, passed 9-29-1975; Ord. 134-82, passed 12-27-
1982; Ord. 57-90, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 6-02, passed 2-11-2002)
§ 75.003 OBEDIENCE.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed or held in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.113; 1992 Code, § 40-116) (Ord. 31-76, passed 5-10-1976)
§ 75.004 NECESSITY OF SIGNS.
   No section of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, the section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place.
(1992 Code, § 40-117)
§ 75.005 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL DEVICES; UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR
MARKINGS.
   (a)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, twist, deface, injure, knock down, remove or interfere with the
effective operation of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign
or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part
thereof.
   (b)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (c)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (d)   Every prohibited sign, signal or device is declared to be a public
nuisance and the police chief is empowered to cause it to be removed without
notice.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.902; 1992 Code, § 40-118) (Ord. 31-76, passed 5-10-1976)
§ 75.006 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   (a)   Traffic controlled by go, caution or stop lights; signal at place
other than intersection. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control
signals exhibiting the words “go,” “caution” or “stop,” or exhibiting different
colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, only the colors
mentioned in divisions (b) through (e) below shall be used and those terms and
lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as
provided by divisions (b) through (e) below. If an official traffic control
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions
which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made
at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made,
but in the absence of any sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (b)   Meaning of green or go signal; vehicular traffic; pedestrians. A green
light alone or go shall indicate that:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either turn. But
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited; and
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (c)   Meaning of steady yellow light; vehicular traffic; pedestrians. A
steady yellow light alone shall indicate that:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or stop signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and the vehicular
traffic shall not enter the intersection when the red or stop signal is
exhibited; and
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (d)   Meaning of steady red light or stop signal; vehicular traffic; right
turn on red. A steady red light alone or stop shall indicate that:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or go is shown
alone, except as provided in this section; and
      (2)   The driver of any vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at the entrance to the crosswalk and to the far right side of the roadway, then
at the entrance to the intersection in obedience to a red or stop signal, may
make a right turn but shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and other
traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection. This division
(d) permitting a right turn after a stop when facing a steady red light alone
or stop signal shall not be effective if any local ordinance prohibits the turn
and if a sign is erected at the intersection giving notice thereof.
   (e)   Meaning of steady red light with green arrow; vehicular traffic;
pedestrians. A steady red light with green arrow shall indicate that:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection; and
      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (f)   Pedestrian control signals. Whenever special pedestrian control
signals exhibit the words “walk” or “don’t walk” or the lighted international
“walk” or “don’t walk” symbols, the signals shall indicate as follows.
      (1)   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibit the words
“walk” or “don’t walk” or the lighted international “walk” or “don’t walk”
symbols, the signals shall indicate as follows.
         A.   Flashing or steady “walk.” Any pedestrian facing the signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and every driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to them.
         B.   Flashing or steady “don’t walk.” No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his or her crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety island while the don’t walk signal is showing.
      (2)   Whenever a signal system provides for the stopping of all vehicular
traffic and the exclusive moment of pedestrians and “Walk” and “Don’t Walk”
signal indications control such pedestrian movement, pedestrians may cross in
any direction between corners of the intersection offering the shortest route
within the boundaries of the intersection while the “Walk” indication is
exhibited, if signals and other official devices direct pedestrian movement in
such manner.
(1975 Rev. Ords., § 3.112; 1992 Code, § 40-119) (Ord. 1991, passed 7-27-1959;
Ord. 70-73, passed 9-4-1973; Ord. 31-76, passed 5-10-1976; Ord. 97-04, passed
9-13-2004; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-28-1 et seq.
§ 75.007 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (a)   Red or yellow signal. If an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal
is used in a traffic sign or signal, vehicular traffic shall obey the signal as
provided by divisions (b) and (c) below.
   (b)   Meaning of red signal. If a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed is
subject to the laws applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (c)   Meaning of yellow signal. If a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or past the signal only with caution.
   (d)   Railroad crossings. This section shall not apply at railroad grade
crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings
shall be governed by the rules as set forth in §§
76.063 and
76.064.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 3.112; 1992 Code, § 40-120) (Ord. 1991, passed 7-27-1959;
Ord. 31-76, passed 5-10-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-28-6 et seq.
§ 75.008 SIGNAL PREEMPTION SYSTEM.
   No person shall use or interfere with the traffic signal preemption system
of the city designed for use by emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement
by temporarily controlling signalized intersections, unless the person is an
authorized emergency response employee who is using the system pursuant to that
employment and an emergency exists and there is a threat of immediate danger to
life or property that reasonably requires the use of the system in order to
protect the life, safety, health or property of one or more persons. This
section shall not apply to persons who are performing inspection, maintenance
or repair work on the system authorized by the city.
(1992 Code, § 40-121) (Ord. 07-04, passed 1-12-2004)
§ 75.009 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISHING SAFETY ZONES.
   (a)   The city engineer may designate and maintain, by appropriate devices,
marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks, where, in his or
her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at those other places as he or she may deem necessary.
   (b)   The city engineer may establish safety zones of the kind and character
at the places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.103; 1992 Code, § 40-124)
§ 75.010 SIGNS FOR RESERVED PARKING SPACES.
   (a)   Whenever off-street parking spaces have been provided exclusively for
use by persons with disabilities, signs shall be erected indicating that the
spaces are reserved for vehicles which have on display special license plates
issued under SDCL 32-5-76 or a serially numbered certificate issued under SDCL
32-5-76.1 or 32-5-76.2.
   (b)   All signs erected under this section shall conform to the requirements
of §
75.002. The city engineer shall be authorized to determine the number, location
and legend of each sign erected.
   (c)   Parking spaces designated and posted as indicated in this section,
which are installed or modified after adoption of this chapter, shall meet the
specifications set forth in the most recent edition of the American National
Standard Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to and
Usable by Physically Handicapped People and the Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities.
(1992 Code, § 40-127) (Ord. 135-82, passed 12-27-1982; Ord. 94-92, passed 10-
26-1992)
Cross-reference:
   Requirements for barrier-free curbs and sidewalks, see § 96.057
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Speed
   
76.001   General restrictions
   
76.002   Establishment of speed zones
   
76.003   Maximum limits generally
   
76.004   Emergency vehicles
   
76.005   Slow speed
Turns
   
76.020   Position of vehicle; safety
   
76.021   Right-turning vehicle required to keep right
   
76.022   Turning left
   
76.023   Limitations on turning around
   
76.024   Authority to modify method of turning; posting signs
   
76.025   Prohibited turns at intersections
Turning and Stopping Signals
   
76.040   Signals
   
76.041   Required
   
76.042   Arm signals, mechanical signals and electrical signals
   
76.043   Method of giving hand and arm signals
Required Stop, Yield Intersections
   
76.055   Designation of through streets
   
76.056   Signs required at through streets
   
76.057   Other intersections where stop or yield required
   
76.058   Obedience to signs
   
76.059   Vehicle entering stop intersection
   
76.060   Duty when approaching yield sign; pedestrians; collision prima facie
evidence of failure to yield
   
76.061   Alley, private driveway
   
76.062   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
76.063   Stop required when grade crossing signal operating
   
76.064   Vehicles required to stop at all grade crossings; shifting gears while
crossing
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
   
76.075   Reckless driving
   
76.076   Careless driving
   
76.077   Exhibition driving
   
76.078   Unsafe backing
   
76.079   Maximum passengers
   
76.080   Interference with view, mechanism
   
76.081   Following too closely
   
76.082   Vehicles on parkways, cycle tracks, sidepaths, or sidewalks
   
76.083   Following fire apparatus; minimum following or parking distance
   
76.084   Driving over fire hose prohibited
   
76.085   Driving through procession
   
76.086   Corner cutting
   
76.087   Backing into intersections or around corners prohibited
   
76.088   Unsealed containers of alcoholic beverage in vehicle
   
76.089   Parking on private property
   
76.090   Obstructed windows
   
76.091   Prohibition on use of electronic message
   
76.092   Exceptions on use of electronic communication devices and electronic
message
Cruising
   
76.105   Declaration of purpose
   
76.106   Definitions
   
76.107   Cruising prohibited
   
76.108   Exceptions
Statutory reference:
   Required stops, see SDCL ch. 32-29
SPEED
§ 76.001 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on a street or
highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing or at a speed in excess of those fixed by this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.157; 1992 Code, § 40-137) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.002 ESTABLISHMENT OF SPEED ZONES.
   (a)    The city traffic engineer, unless otherwise determined by the city
council, is authorized and empowered to determine and establish upon any street
or highway within the city, or any part thereof, limited speed zones which
speed limit shall constitute the maximum speed at which any person may drive or
operate any vehicle upon the zoned street or highway or portion thereof so
zoned, and on which street or highway the maximum speed permissible in the zone
has been conspicuously posted by signs adopted by the city council.
   (b)   The beginning of the limited speed zones shall be indicated by signs
showing the speed limits.
   (c)    The city traffic engineer may establish limited speed zones through
street or highway work areas. The beginning and end of the immediate work area
shall be conspicuously posted with signs showing the maximum speed permissible.
Any fine for a violation of these speed limits while workers are present shall
be double the usual fine for speeding, but may not exceed the maximum fine for
violation of a city ordinance. Signs showing that any fine will be double the
usual speeding fine shall be erected in advance of the regulatory speed limit
signs.
(1992 Code, § 40-138) (Ord. 64-75, passed 9-29-1975; Ord. 69-96, passed 6-3-
1996; Ord. 73-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 76.003 MAXIMUM LIMITS GENERALLY.
   Except as may otherwise be provided by this subchapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a rate of speed greater than
the following:
   (a)   Fifteen miles per hour when approaching within 50 feet of a grade
crossing of any railway when the driver’s view is obstructed. A driver’s view
shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last 200 feet of
his or her approach to the crossing, he or she does not have a clear and
uninterrupted view of any traffic on the railway for a distance of 400 feet in
each direction;
   (b)   Fifteen miles per hour when approaching within 50 feet and in
traversing an uncontrolled intersection of highways when the driver’s view is
obstructed. A driver’s view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time
during the last 50 feet of his or her approach to the intersection, he or she
does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of the intersection and of the
traffic upon all of the highways entering the intersection for a distance of
200 feet from the intersection;
   (c)   Fifteen miles per hour when passing a school during school recess or
while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours
for the school;
   (d)   Fifteen miles per hour on streets adjacent to schools while children
are present on school property, streets adjacent to school property or in zones
near school property established and posted by the city engineer;
   (e)   Fifteen miles per hour when approaching within 50 feet and in
traversing a school crossing when the school crossing is properly established
and posted by the city engineer;
   (f)   Twenty miles per hour on any highway in a business district, unless a
different speed is posted by the city engineer;
   (g)   Fifteen miles per hour in public parks, on any of the flood protection
levees, and on recreation trails unless a different speed is posted by the city
engineer;
   (h)   Twenty-five miles per hour in a residential district unless a
different speed is posted by the city engineer;
   (i)   Thirty miles per hour on all highways and through streets in a
residential district unless a different speed is posted by the city engineer
and except as provided in division (c) above; and
   (j)   Fifteen miles per hour in any public alley.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.157; 1992 Code, § 40-139) (Ord. 2255, passed 3-23-1964;
Ord. 2303, passed 12-7-1964; Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966; Ord. 2668, passed 2-
24-1970; Ord. 64-75, passed 9-29-1975; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-2018; Ord. 18-
24, passed 3-5-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Related subject matter, see SDCL 32-25-13, 32-25-15
§ 76.004 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The speed limit set out in this subchapter does not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls provided the drivers
thereof sound audible signals by siren or horn and two lighted red lights are
displayed to the front, or one beacon light visible 360 degrees, or to
authorized emergency vehicles operated by peace officers who are measuring the
speed of other vehicles by use of the emergency vehicle speedometer. This
section shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to driver with due regard for the safety of all persons using the
street nor shall it protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequence of a
reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.158; 1992 Code, § 40-142)
§ 76.005 SLOW SPEED.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.124; 1992 Code, § 40-143)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-25-5.1
TURNS
§ 76.020 POSITION OF VEHICLE; SAFETY.
   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in
proper position upon the roadway, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or
driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left
upon a roadway, unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable
safety.
(1992 Code, § 40-166)
§ 76.021 RIGHT-TURNING VEHICLE REQUIRED TO KEEP RIGHT.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
76.024, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an
intersection or into any alley or driveway shall approach the intersection or
alley or driveway in the lane for traffic nearest to the righthand side of the
highway, and in turning shall keep as closely as practicable to the righthand
curb or edge of the highway.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.119; 1992 Code, § 40-167) (Ord. 1991, passed 7-27-1959;
Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-17
§ 76.022 TURNING LEFT.
   Except when otherwise directed by turning markers, the driver of a vehicle,
including those driving bicycles or e-bicycles, intending to turn left shall
approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. Whenever practicable, the
left turn shall be made to the left of the center of the intersection and so as
to leave the intersection or other location in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction as the vehicle on
the roadway being entered.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.119; 1992 Code, § 40-168) (Ord. 1991, passed 7-27-1959;
Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966; Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-
18-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-18
§ 76.023 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any one-way street, or upon any bridge or viaduct, or
on any street in a business or commercial area, or at any intersection
controlled by traffic control signals, and shall not upon any other street so
turn a vehicle except at an intersection and unless the movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.120; 1992 Code, § 40-169)
§ 76.024 AUTHORITY TO MODIFY METHOD OF TURNING; POSTING SIGNS.
   The city engineer may modify the method of turning at intersections provided
by §§
76.021 and
76.022 by clearly indicating by buttons, markers or other direction signs
installed within an intersection the course to be followed by vehicles turning
thereat. It shall be unlawful for any driver to fail to turn in a manner as so
directed. No signs or buttons shall be placed upon any state highway without
the approval of the state department of transportation. When an intersection is
so constructed and laid out that different and clearly defined courses of
travel are provided for vehicles turning to the left or right, as the case may
be, it shall be lawful for any driver in making any turn to follow the course
thereby indicated.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 13.104, 13.119; 1992 Code, § 40-170) (Ord. 1991, passed 7-
27-1959; Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-20
§ 76.025 PROHIBITED TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   Except where permitted by signage approved by the city engineer, at any
intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by a
police officer, or where warned by an official traffic control sign displaying
the words “no U-turn,” or “no left turn” or “no right turn,” it shall be
unlawful for the driver of the vehicle to turn the vehicle at the intersection
in a complete circle, or so as to proceed in the opposite direction or to make
a left turn or right turn as may be regulated by the sign.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 13.104, 13.119; 1992 Code, § 40-171) (Ord. 1991, passed 7-
27-1959; Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966; Ord. 131-95, passed 10-2-1995) Penalty,
see §
10.999
TURNING AND STOPPING SIGNALS
§ 76.040 SIGNALS.
   No person shall turn any vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal
if any other traffic may be affected by the movement.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.118; 1992 Code, § 40-182) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.041 REQUIRED.
   (a)   A signal of intention to turn a vehicle right or left, when required,
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet of travel by
the vehicle before turning.
   (b)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal, in the manner provided in this
subchapter, to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give the signal.
   (c)   Except as provided in this section, a person driving a bicycle or e-
bicycle shall comply with divisions (a) and (b) above. A signal of intention to
turn right or left, when required, shall be given continuously during not less
than the last 100 feet traveled by the bicycle or e-bicycle before turning and
shall be given while the bicycle or e-bicycle is stopped waiting to turn. A
signal by hand and arm need only be given intermittently if the hand is needed
in the control or operation of the bicycle or e-bicycle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.118; 1992 Code, § 40-183) (Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.042 ARM SIGNALS, MECHANICAL SIGNALS AND ELECTRICAL SIGNALS.
   The signal required in §
76.040 shall be given either by means of the hand and arm in the manner
specified in §
76.043, or by an approved mechanical or electrical signal device. However, for
a vehicle so constructed or loaded as to prevent the hand and arm signal from
being visible both to the front and rear, the signal shall be given by device
of a type which has been approved by the state department of commerce and
regulation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.118; 1992 Code, § 40-184)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-23
§ 76.043 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   All signals required by this subchapter to be given by hand and arm
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative, bicyclists or e-bicyclists may use the right hand
and arm extended horizontally to signal a right turn.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.118; 1992 Code, § 40-185) (Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-2012;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
REQUIRED STOP, YIELD INTERSECTIONS
§ 76.055 DESIGNATION OF THROUGH STREETS.
   The city council shall, by resolution, designate streets and highways within
the city as through streets. The city engineering department shall keep and
maintain accurate maps setting out the through street system. The maps shall be
available to the public.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.138; 1992 Code, § 40-196) (Ord. 64-75, passed 9-29-1975;
Ord. 18-77, passed 3-14-1977; Ord. 40-79, passed 5-21-1979; Ord. 68-83, passed
10-3-1983; Ord. 34-85, passed 4-22-1985; Ord. 32-93, passed 4-26-1993)
§ 76.056 SIGNS REQUIRED AT THROUGH STREETS.
   The city engineer shall place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of
an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection a yield sign, on
each and every street intersecting a through street unless traffic at any
intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals, provided,
however, that at the intersection of two through streets or at the intersection
of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs
shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be
determined by the city engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
study.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.108; 1992 Code, § 40-197) (Ord. 2449, passed 9-26-1966;
Ord. 32-93, passed 4-26-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-29-2
§ 76.057 OTHER INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED.
   The city engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets
and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any
intersection, in which event he or she shall cause to be erected a stop sign at
every place where a stop is required, or whether vehicles shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at the intersection as
prescribed in §
76.058(a), in which event he or she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at
every place where obedience thereto is required.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.108; 1992 Code, § 40-198) (Ord. 2449, passed 9-26-1966;
Ord. 26-76, passed 4-12-1976)
§ 76.058 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
   (b)   Unless directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall come to a full stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.108; 1992 Code, § 40-199) (Ord. 2449, passed 9-26-1966)
§ 76.059 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop as required by §
76.058(b), and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching
so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
when the driver is moving across or within the intersection
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.108; 1992 Code, § 40-200) (Ord. 2449, passed 9-26-1966)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-29-2.1
§ 76.060 DUTY WHEN APPROACHING YIELD SIGN; PEDESTRIANS; COLLISION PRIMA FACIE
EVIDENCE OF FAILURE TO YIELD.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to the
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop
if necessary in a similar manner as provided in §
76.059, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the
roadway on which he or she is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard. The driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding.
However, if the driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a
crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign
without stopping, the collision is prima facie evidence of his or her failure
to yield the right-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 40-201)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-29-3
§ 76.061 ALLEY, PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, private driveway or building
into or onto a street shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto
a crosswalk or crosswalk area extending across the approach and shall not
proceed into or onto the street in a manner as to interfere with or block
traffic on the street.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 13.127, 13.128; 1992 Code, § 40-202)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-14
§ 76.062 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
(1992 Code, § 40-203)
§ 76.063 STOP REQUIRED WHEN GRADE CROSSING SIGNAL OPERATING.
   If any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and a
clearly visible or audible signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a
railway train or car, he or she shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad
and may not proceed until he or she can do so safely.
(1992 Code, § 40-204)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-29-4
§ 76.064 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT ALL GRADE CROSSINGS; SHIFTING GEARS WHILE
CROSSING.
   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school
bus carrying any school child, or any vehicle carrying explosive substances or
combustible or flammable liquid as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing
at grade any track of a railroad, except where a police officer or traffic
control signal directs traffic to proceed or the track is nonoperational and is
marked with a supplemental sign as provided in SDCL 31-28-7, shall stop the
vehicle within 50 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not
proceed until he or she has ascertained that he or she can do so safely. After
stopping as required in this section and upon proceeding, the driver of any
vehicle shall cross only in the gear of the vehicle that there will be no
necessity of changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall not shift
gears while crossing the tracks.
(1992 Code, § 40-205)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-29-5
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
§ 76.075 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a vehicle within the limits of the city carelessly or
heedlessly or in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due
caution and circumspection, or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or
be likely to endanger any person or property, shall be guilty of reckless
driving.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.159; 1992 Code, § 40-219) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Reckless and unsafe driving, see SDCL 32-24-1 et seq.
§ 76.076 CARELESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a vehicle within the limits of the city carelessly in
disregard to the width, grade, curves, corners, condition or customary usage of
the streets, highways or any other property within the city, or whose temporary
inadvertence to the operation of the vehicle causes or is likely to cause
damage to any person or property, shall be guilty of careless driving.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.159; 1992 Code, § 40-220) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.077 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a vehicle within the limits of the city in a manner
that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise, or tire squeal, skid or slide
upon acceleration or stopping; or that simulates a temporary race; or that
causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway, shall be guilty of
exhibition driving. Exemption: Nothing in this section shall prohibit
participation in a restricted exhibition driving event that is permitted
pursuant to §
96.181(c). A restricted exhibition driving event shall be prohibited on any
public right-of-way, including any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or
easement.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.159; 1992 Code, § 40-221) (Ord. 2451, passed 10-3-1966;
Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.078 UNSAFE BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the movement can
be made with safety.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.123; 1992 Code, § 40-222) (Ord. 143-95, passed 11-20-
1995) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-30-20
§ 76.079 MAXIMUM PASSENGERS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in
the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with
the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 40-223) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-43
§ 76.080 INTERFERENCE WITH VIEW, MECHANISM.
   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere with the
driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his or her control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 40-224) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-44
§ 76.081 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway, but this shall not be
construed to prevent one vehicle overtaking and passing another.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.122; 1992 Code, § 40-225) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-40
§ 76.082 VEHICLES ON PARKWAYS, CYCLE TRACKS, SIDEPATHS, OR SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Generally. No person shall drive any vehicle or motor vehicle other
than a bicycle, Class I e-bicycle, Class II e-bicycle, or wheelchair upon the
sidewalks or parkways or permit any vehicle to be driven or remain on any
sidewalk or parkway. The following vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section: vehicles authorized by the city to be used to perform an
authorized public service or carry out any authorized city function, including
vehicles used by public parking, parks and recreation, and public safety
personnel.
   (b)   Bicycles on sidewalks or in crosswalks.
      (1)   A person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle upon and along a sidewalk,
or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing
the pedestrian.
      (2)   A person shall not drive a bicycle or e-bicycle upon and along a
sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where the use of
bicycles or e-bicycles is prohibited by official traffic control devices.
      (3)   A person driving a bicycle, Class I e-bicycle, or a Class II e-
bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a
crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian
under the same circumstances, except that a bicyclist, Class I e-bicyclist, or
Class II e-bicyclist must stop before entering a crosswalk or highway from a
sidewalk or sidewalk area and must yield to all traffic on the highway.
   (c)   Use of cycle tracks and bicycle lanes limitation on conveyances:
      (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle or motor vehicle other than a
bicycle or e-bicycle upon a cycle track.
   (d)   Bicycles and e-bicycles on sidepaths.
      (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle or motor vehicle other than a
bicycle, e-bicycle, or wheelchair upon a sidepath or permit any vehicle other
than a bicycle, e-bicycle, or wheelchair to be driven or remain on any
sidepath. The following vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section: vehicles authorized by the city to be used to perform an authorized
public service or carry out any authorized city function, including vehicles
used by public parking, parks and recreation, and public safety personnel.
      (2)   A person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle on a sidepath or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing the
pedestrian.
      (3)   A person shall not drive a bicycle or e-bicycle upon and along a
sidepath or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk where the use of a
bicycle or e-bicycle on the sidepath is prohibited by official traffic control
devices.
      (4)   A person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle upon and along a sidepath
or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk shall have all the rights and
responsibilities applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances,
except that a bicyclist or e-bicyclist must stop before entering a crosswalk or
highway from a sidepath area and must yield to all traffic on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall drive any vehicle or motor vehicle other than a
bicycle or e-bicycle upon a bicycle lane unless the vehicle is making a legal
turn, entering or leaving an alley, private road, or driveway, or when
necessary to legally park near a curb. Drivers using the bicycle lane for this
purpose must yield the right-of-way to any bicycle or e-bicycle using the
designated bicycle lane.
      (6)   Bicycle lanes and cycle tracks shall be used exclusively for the
operation of bicycles or e-bicycles unless signage specifies joint use with
pedestrians.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.806; 1992 Code, § 40-226) (Ord. 40-79, passed 5-21-1979;
Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 20-99, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 46-09, passed
5-18-2009; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-2018; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019; Ord.
18-24, passed 3-5-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
ch. 81
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-26-21.1
§ 76.083 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; MINIMUM FOLLOWING OR PARKING DISTANCE.
   If shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than one on
official business to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm closer than 500 feet or to drive into or park the vehicle within the
block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.154; 1992 Code, § 40-227) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, SDCL 32-31-7
§ 76.084 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle may be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when
laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.155; 1992 Code, § 40-228) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-31-8
§ 76.085 DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSION.
   No driver of any vehicle shall drive through or otherwise interfere with any
funeral or other authorized procession in any of the streets, and it shall be
the duty of the driver of any vehicle to stop when reaching a street on which a
procession is passing and wait until the procession has entirely passed.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.156; 1992 Code, § 40-229) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Permit for parade or assembly required, § 96.181
§ 76.086 CORNER CUTTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon or
across any sidewalk, driveway, filling station or other commercial driveway or
other similar surface located at the corner of any intersection protected by a
traffic light or other traffic signal or sign, for the purpose of evading the
regulations governing the turning of motor vehicles at intersections.
(1992 Code, § 40-230) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.087 BACKING INTO INTERSECTIONS OR AROUND CORNERS PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be backed around the corner at an intersection or into an
intersection.
(1992 Code, § 40-232) (Ord. 84-73, passed 10-8-1973; Res. 257-73, passed 12-3-
1973) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.088 UNSEALED CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN VEHICLE.
   It is a public offense for the driver of a motor vehicle to permit the
presence of, or for any person to possess, in a motor vehicle, a package or any
receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, unless the seal of the original
package remains unbroken or the alcoholic beverage is so removed that no
occupant of the vehicle shall have access to it while the vehicle is in motion.
(1992 Code, § 40-233) (Ord. 12-83, passed 2-7-1983) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
§ 76.089 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Owners of private property may post their property as a no parking
zone, subject to approval of the city engineer.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be parked in violation of the notice posted in
accordance with division (a) above; nor shall any person be an occupant in any
vehicle so parked.
(1992 Code, § 40-234) (Ord. 61-90, passed 6-25-1990; Ord. 21-91, passed 3-11-
1991) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.090 OBSTRUCTED WINDOWS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle within the city
with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material, including snow, ice,
frost or any similar substance, upon the front windshield, side wing vents or
side windows on either side forward of or adjacent to the operator’s seat of
the motor vehicle other than a certificate or a paper required to be so
displayed by law or temporary driving instructions placed thereon by the
manufacturer unless the same shall not obstruct the driver’s clear view.
(1992 Code, § 40-235) (Ord. 19-96, passed 2-5-1996) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 76.091 PROHIBITION ON USE OF ELECTRONIC MESSAGE.
   No person may operate or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while using a handheld electronic communication device to compose, read or send
an electronic message when the vehicle is in motion or a part of traffic.
(Ord. 73-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 76.092 EXCEPTIONS ON USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES AND ELECTRONIC
MESSAGE.
   Section
76.091 shall not apply if the electronic communication device is being used:
   (a)   In the reasonable belief that a person’s life or safety is in
immediate danger; or
   (b)   In an emergency vehicle while in the performance of official duties.
(Ord. 73-12, passed 9-4-2012)
CRUISING
§ 76.105 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to achieve the city’s objective of
preventing unnecessary non-destination driving past designated traffic control
points throughout the city. This purpose has been determined as a result of a
finding by the city that a public nuisance is created by non-destination
driving either in the “downtown loop” or at other locations throughout the
city. Unnecessary driving activity creates a legitimate concern for the
public’s health, safety and welfare. Repetitive driving and congregating of
motor vehicles has increasingly caused areas of concern for citizens, including
excessive noise, traffic congestion and hazards, business disruption and
vandalism.
(1992 Code, § 40-370) (Ord. 56-03, passed 6-23-2003)
§ 76.106 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRUISING. The operation of a motor vehicle on a street past a traffic
control point, three times in any two-hour period, 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in a
no cruising area.
   NO CRUISING AREA (FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SUBCHAPTER).
      (1)   The central business district which is that area of the city
bounded by the west side of Minnesota Avenue to Fourth Street to the Big Sioux
River to Second Avenue to Fourteenth Street to Minnesota Avenue; and
      (2)   The area bordered by the west side of Minnesota Avenue to Menlo
Avenue between Tenth Street and Eleventh Street, inclusive.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT. Any point which has been established by the police
department for the purpose of monitoring cruising.
(1992 Code, § 40-371) (Ord. 56-03, passed 6-23-2003)
§ 76.107 CRUISING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in cruising, as defined in this subchapter, in an
area which has been designated as a no cruising zone.
(1992 Code, § 40-372) (Ord. 56-03, passed 6-23-2003)
§ 76.108 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following uses of vehicles are exempt from this subchapter:
   (a)   Authorized emergency vehicles; and
   (b)   Taxicabs, buses or other transit vehicles being driven for business
purposes.
(1992 Code, § 40-373) (Ord. 56-03, passed 6-23-2003)
CHAPTER 77: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
77.001   Safeguarding unattended vehicle
   
77.002   Places where restricted
   
77.003   Places where stopping, standing or parking prohibited
   
77.004   Relative rights of vehicles to single parking space
   
77.005   Manner of parking generally
   
77.006   Angle parking
   
77.007   Parking within markings
   
77.008   Obstructing snow removal and street cleaning
   
77.009   Parking of commercial vehicles or materials prohibited
   
77.010   Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places
   
77.011   Length of vehicle
   
77.012   Report of violation
   
77.013   Parking for persons with physical disability
Public Parking Advisory Board
   
77.025   Created
   
77.026   Composition
   
77.027   Meetings
   
77.028   Terms of office
   
77.029   Compensation
   
77.030   Officers
   
77.031   Quorum
   
77.032   Bylaws
   
77.033   Minutes; records
Parking Restricted or Limited
   
77.045    Designation of prohibited parking
   
77.046    Designation of limited parking
   
77.047    Emergency snow routes
Loading and Unloading
   
77.060   Parking in and blocking alleys prohibited
   
77.061   Designation of loading/delivery zones
   
77.062   Stopping, standing and parking in loading/delivery zones
   
77.063   Designation of public carrier stops and stands
   
77.064   Use of public carrier stands
   
77.065   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands
Parking Meters
   
77.080   Designation of zones
   
77.081   Maintenance and regulation
   
77.082   City engineer establishes time limitations
   
77.083   Placing and indicating parking time
   
77.084   Marking of parking spaces
   
77.085   Parallel parking spaces
   
77.086   Purchase of time; overparking
   
77.087   Violations
   
77.088   Temporary loading permits
   
77.089   Outstanding parking violations
   
77.090   Courtesy tickets
Parking Ticket Appeals
   
77.105   Parking ticket appeals; time for payment or appeal
   
77.106   Administrative appeals procedures apply; separate processing fee
authorized
 
   
77.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Parking vehicles in parks, §§
95.008,
95.025
Statutory reference:
   Stopping and parking restrictions, see SDCL ch. 32-30
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 77.001 SAFEGUARDING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle may permit it to stand
unattended without effectively setting the brake thereon and, if standing upon
any grade, turning the front wheel to the curb or side of the street or
highway.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.130; 1992 Code, § 40-241) Penalty, see §
77.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-30-5
§ 77.002 PLACES WHERE RESTRICTED.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
   (a)   In front of a public or private driveway approach;
   (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signals, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance when properly signposted; and
   (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.139; 1992 Code, § 40-242) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 40-79, passed 5-21-1979; Ord. 41-93, passed 5-3-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-30-6
§ 77.003 PLACES WHERE STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a law enforcement officer, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle:
   (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (b)   On a sidewalk; unless the vehicle is attended and is being loaded or
unloaded and the area adjacent to the sidewalk has been designated by
appropriate signs as a sidewalk loading zone by the city engineer or unless the
vehicle is properly identified as a vehicle for transporting of disabled
persons, it is necessary for the vehicle to be located on the sidewalk for
loading and unloading purposes, and only two wheels on the loading/unloading
side are on the sidewalk;
   (c)   Within an intersection;
   (d)   On a crosswalk;
   (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
   (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel;
   (h)   On any railroad tracks;
   (i)   Upon any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or
offering the same for sale or rent. Any vehicle that is parked or placed within
50 feet of the property of the residence of the owner of the vehicle is exempt
from the provisions of this section; and
   (j)   In such a manner as to leave available less than ten feet of the
roadway from the portion of the vehicle nearest to the center line of the road
for the free movement of vehicular traffic in their lane of travel on Phillips
Avenue between Ninth and 13th Streets. A violation of this division (j) shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of § 77.999. The effective date of this
division shall be May 1, 2025.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.139; 1992 Code, § 40-243) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 122-82, passed 12-13-1982; Ord. 28-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 46-92, passed
5-18-1992; Ord. 47-92, passed 5-18-1992; Ord. 41-93, passed 5-3-1993; Ord. 20-
96, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 103-24, passed 12-3-
2024)
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
ch. 81
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-30-6.1
§ 77.004 RELATIVE RIGHTS OF VEHICLES TO SINGLE PARKING SPACE.
   (a)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is desirous of occupying a parallel
parking space which is about to be vacated, he or she shall place his or her
vehicle in a position in the lane nearest to the space he or she wishes to
occupy with the front of his or her vehicle to the rear of the vehicle vacating
the parking space. He or she shall hold this position until the parking space
is vacated, after which, remaining in the same lane, the driver of the vehicle
shall drive forward a sufficient distance to enable him or her to occupy the
parking space by backing into the space. While backing in the process of
parking, the driver of the vehicle shall have the right-of-way to the parking
space.
   (b)   The right-of-way and procedure for occupying a single space which is
already vacant shall be the same as that prescribed in division (a) above,
except that it shall not be necessary for the driver to bring his or her
vehicle to a halt in the rear of the space to be occupied.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.126; 1992 Code, § 40-244) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966)
§ 77.005 MANNER OF PARKING GENERALLY.
   Except where angle parking shall be permitted, it shall be unlawful for the
driver or owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or implement to park or leave the
vehicle, trailer or implement standing, attended or unattended, on any street
or avenue of the city unless the vehicle, trailer or implement is parked
parallel to the curb headed in the direction of traffic, with the curbside
wheels of the vehicle, trailer or implement within 12 inches of the curb and no
closer than four feet to any other vehicle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.140; 1992 Code, § 40-245) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.006 ANGLE PARKING.
   (a)   The city engineer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall
determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or
sign the streets. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any
place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon
the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks.
   (b)   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking,
no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to, and with
the hood or front end of the vehicle next to the curb.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.140; 1992 Code, § 40-246) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.007 PARKING WITHIN MARKINGS.
   Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for
parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines
of the parking space.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.140; 1992 Code, § 40-247)
§ 77.008 OBSTRUCTING SNOW REMOVAL AND STREET CLEANING.
   No vehicle shall be parked in a manner or for a period of time as to
unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the removal of snow from, or the
cleaning of the streets in the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.142; 1992 Code, § 40-248)
Cross-reference:
   Snow and ice removal, see §§
96.100 through
96.105
   Parking on city streets during snow removal, see §§
96.120 through
96.126
§ 77.009 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES OR MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is adapted, designed, equipped and
used to perform a specific commercial function and which does not meet the
definition of personal passenger vehicle.
      MOBILE FOOD TRUCK. A licensed and operable vehicle or concession trailer,
which is enclosed and self-contained, independent with respect to water, sewer,
and power utilities, that contains equipment for the preparation and sale or
service of food or beverages with or without charge that are designed for
immediate consumption in compliance with
Chapter 117 of this Code.
      PERSONAL PASSENGER VEHICLE. Any car, pickup truck or van which is
designed for and facilitates personal and passenger travel and has not been
externally altered with features not customary to personal usage.
      SERVICE VEHICLE. Any vehicle built or assembled for personal passenger
use that incorporates attachments in order to support service functions. A
SERVICE VEHICLE is utilized as support for service and is not utilized to
perform a specific commercial function.
   (b)   Prohibitions. Parking and storage of commercial vehicles or materials
upon city streets is prohibited as follows.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to park, store,
leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any commercial or
construction vehicle, equipment or materials upon any city street.
      (2)   The transferring of refuse from smaller satellite vehicles to
larger packer garbage trucks is prohibited on all city rights-of-way.
   (c)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles;
      (2)   Personal passenger vehicles;
      (3)   Vehicles that are disabled, provided that they are not left on
public rights-of-way longer than 24 hours;
      (4)   Light delivery trucks delivering goods from place to place;
      (5)   Garbage trucks in the site-to-site collection of refuse;
      (6)   Vehicles in the process of loading or unloading;
      (7)   Vehicles, immobile equipment or materials parked in connection with
a construction site for longer than 24 hours for which the owner or lessor has
obtained and posted a permit from the office of city engineer and are in
compliance with the rules and regulations for parking, storing or leaving
construction vehicle(s), equipment or materials on city streets issued by the
city engineer. The fee for this permit is $15;
      (8)   Vehicles parked in connection with a construction site, provided
they are not left there longer than 24 hours;
      (9)   Vehicles or equipment which are properly signed and parked
temporarily in connection with the performance of a construction or maintenance
service to property on or under the city right-of-way;
      (10)   Service vehicles; and
      (11)   Mobile food trucks in compliance with
Chapter 117 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 40-249) (Ord. 43-89, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 5-99, passed 1-4-
1999; Ord. 91-06, passed 7-24-2006; Ord. 9-11, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 118-15,
passed 12-1-2015)
§ 77.010 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.
   (a)   The city engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by
proper signs places not exceeding 1,000 feet in length in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition
or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
   (b)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park the vehicle in
any place.
(1992 Code, § 40-250) (Ord. 56-90, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.011 LENGTH OF VEHICLE.
   All vehicles and appurtenances thereto, exceeding in length 22 feet, shall
be parked at the places only as have been marked and designated for that use by
the city engineer and shall be parked parallel with the curb. Mobile food
trucks in compliance with
Chapter 117 of this Code are exempt from §
77.011.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.144; 1992 Code, § 40-251) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 43-89, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 77.012 REPORT OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   If any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter, it shall be the duty of any police officer or parking
patrol to issue a citation or parking ticket.
   (b)   Any vehicle in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and may be removed as provided in §
77.089.
(1992 Code, § 40-252) (Ord. 12-76, passed 3-8-1976; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-
2004)
§ 77.013 PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITY.
   Any vehicle not displaying a serially-numbered certificate or special
license plate parked in a parking space on public or private property
designated as reserved for the physically disabled shall be ticketed, and the
owner of the vehicle shall be punished under the general penalty provisions of
this Code.
(1992 Code, § 40-254) (Ord. 47-92, passed 5-18-1992; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-
2004)
PUBLIC PARKING ADVISORY BOARD
§ 77.025 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a public parking advisory board. The board shall act
as an advisory body to the mayor in executive and administrative matters, and
to the city council in policy making and legislative matters affecting on-
street parking, city-owned parking lots and ramps within the business
improvement district defined in §
37.106 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 40-256) (Ord. 57-73, passed 7-16-1973; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-
2004; Ord. 53- 21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.026 COMPOSITION.
   The public parking advisory board shall be composed of seven members. The
members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor with advice and consent of
the city council. Each member of the board shall be a registered voter of the
city.
(1992 Code, § 40-257) (Ord. 57-73, passed 7-16-1973; Ord. 69-75, passed 10-6-
1975; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 53-21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.027 MEETINGS.
   The public parking advisory board shall meet at least once each quarter.
(Ord. 53-21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.028 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The members of the public parking advisory board shall serve for three-year
staggered terms, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Any
vacancies in the membership of the public parking advisory board shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for original appointment.
(1992 Code, § 40-257.3) (Ord. 57-73, passed 7-16-1973; Ord. 69-75, passed 10-6-
1975; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 53-21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.029 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the public parking advisory board shall serve without
compensation.
(1992 Code, § 40-257.5) (Ord. 57-73, passed 7-16-1973; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-
2004)
§ 77.030 OFFICERS.
   The board shall annually hold an election of officers and elect a president,
vice-president, and a secretary. The terms of office shall be for a period of
one year. No member shall be elected to the same office for more than two
consecutive terms. The vice-president shall act in the absence or disability of
the president. In case of death or retirement of an officer, a successor shall
be elected immediately.
(1992 Code, § 40-257.6) (Ord. 57-73, passed 7-16-1973; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-
2004; Ord. 53- 21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.031 QUORUM.
   Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for transaction of
business.
(Ord. 53-21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.032 BYLAWS.
   The board shall adopt bylaws consistent with this chapter and the Code of
Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
(Ord. 53-21, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 77.033 MINUTES; RECORDS.
   The secretary of the board shall ensure that the minutes of the meetings are
kept and provided to board members.
(Ord. 53-21, passed 5-4-2021)
PARKING RESTRICTED OR LIMITED
§ 77.045 DESIGNATION OF PROHIBITED PARKING.
   Wherever on any public property the curb is painted, the parking surface has
strips, or an appropriate sign has been erected, by or under the direction of
the city the marking or sign shall indicate a no parking zone, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle adjacent to the curb(s) or on the
pavement marking.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.107; 1992 Code, § 40-258) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.046 DESIGNATION OF LIMITED PARKING.
   No vehicle shall be parked for a longer period of time than that designated
by appropriate signs. Moving a vehicle within a contiguous regulated area shall
constitute a violation of this section.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.141; 1992 Code, § 40-259) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.047 EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES.
   (a)   The city engineer may determine and establish emergency snow routes
upon any street or highway within the city or any part thereof. When signs have
been erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to
stop, stand, park or leave unattended any motor vehicle upon the snow route
immediately after two inches of snow has accumulated and until the snow has
been plowed to the curblines.
   (b)   Any vehicle in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and may be removed as provided in §
71.026.
(1992 Code, § 40-260) (Ord. 15-76, passed 3-8-1976) Penalty, see §
77.999
LOADING AND UNLOADING
§ 77.060 PARKING IN AND BLOCKING ALLEYS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park any vehicle in any alley except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually taking on or letting off passengers or loading or
unloading or delivering goods, merchandise or other personal property, and
shall not so park or shall not drive any vehicle in an alley at any time in a
manner as to block the alley for traffic.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.145; 1992 Code, § 40-265) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.061 DESIGNATION OF LOADING/DELIVERY ZONES.
   The city engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading/
delivery zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section and §
77.062 are applicable.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.167; 1992 Code, § 40-266) (Ord. 105-05, passed 10-17-
2005)
§ 77.062 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING IN LOADING/DELIVERY ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time except during expeditious delivery or pickup of items in any place marked
as a loading/delivery zone during the time that the parking is regulated per §
77.061, unless the vehicle bears commercial license plates.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.168; 1992 Code, § 40-267) (Ord. 105-05, passed 10-17-
2005) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.063 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.
   The city engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops,
bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor
vehicles on the public streets in those places and in a number as he or she
shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public,
and every bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated
by appropriate signs.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.106; 1992 Code, § 40-268)
Cross-reference:
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
§ 77.064 USE OF PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to stand or park
the vehicle upon any street in the business district at any place other than at
a designated bus or taxicab stand, except that the vehicle may be temporarily
stopped in accordance with other parking regulations at any place for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.148; 1992 Code, § 40-269) Penalty, see §
77.999
§ 77.065 RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of
a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.168; 1992 Code, § 40-270) Penalty, see §
77.999
PARKING METERS
§ 77.080 DESIGNATION OF ZONES.
   The director of public parking facilities is hereby authorized to establish
zones to be known as parking zones on all city-owned parking lots and ramps.
The zones shall be posted or metered, or both, to designate the allowed parking
time in the zones.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.402; 1992 Code, § 40-276) (Ord. 1937, passed 1-6-1958;
Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.081 MAINTENANCE AND REGULATION.
   The director of public parking facilities is hereby authorized to provide
for the installation, operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation and use
of the parking meters provided for in this subchapter. The director of public
parking facilities shall establish the hours during the day and night when
parking meters or gates must be used and when the time limitations shall be
effective, in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter; and shall
indicate the time limitations by designating the time on the parking meters or
gates or by appropriate signs posted in proximity to the meters in those zones.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.404; 1992 Code, § 40-277) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.082 CITY ENGINEER ESTABLISHES TIME LIMITATIONS.
   The city engineer shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in
parking zones on public streets.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.405; 1992 Code, § 40-278) (Ord. 1938, passed 1-6-1958;
Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.083 PLACING AND INDICATING PARKING TIME.
   Parking meters or gates installed in the parking zones established shall be
placed immediately adjacent to the individual parking places or parking lots
described in this section. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in a
manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to the
meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter or gate installed shall
indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the city and
each parking meter when operated shall indicate the duration of the period of
legal parking, and on expiration of the period shall indicate illegal or
overtime parking.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.405; 1992 Code, § 40-279) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.084 MARKING OF PARKING SPACES.
   The city engineer shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon the
curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
designating the parking space for which the parking meter is to be used and
each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within
the lines or markings when so designated.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.406; 1992 Code, § 40-280)
§ 77.085 PARALLEL PARKING SPACES.
   When a parking space in any parking zone is parallel with the adjacent curb
or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in the parking space shall be parked with the
foremost part of the vehicle nearest to the meter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.407; 1992 Code, § 40-281)
§ 77.086 PURCHASE OF TIME; OVERPARKING.
   When a vehicle is parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is
located or in a parking lot, the driver of the vehicle shall, upon entering the
parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited the proper fee in
the parking meter or gate and put the meter or gate in operation. Failure to
deposit the proper fee and put the meter or gate in operation shall constitute
a violation of this subchapter. Upon the deposit of the fee and placing the
meter or gate in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed for the
part of the street or parking lot in which the parking space is located.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.408; 1992 Code, § 40-282) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.087 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for
any person to:
   (a)   Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of
or operated by that person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal
parking time established for any parking zone as described in this subchapter;
   (b)   Permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal indicating
that the vehicle occupying the parking space has already been parked beyond the
period of time prescribed for the parking space, unless the vehicle displays a
temporary loading permit. Public parking facilities shall issue temporary
loading permits per §
41.006 of this Code;
   (c)   Park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space or in a
position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by
the lines or markings;
   (d)   Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking equipment installed under the provisions
of this subchapter; and
   (e)   Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or gate, any
slugs, device or metallic substance, or any other substitute, for the fee.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.409; 1992 Code, § 40-283) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004;
Ord. 105-05, passed 10-17-2005) Penalty, see § 77.999
§ 77.088 TEMPORARY LOADING PERMITS.
   A temporary loading permit shall allow the holder of a permit to park a
vehicle at a parking meter for 15 minutes at a time, once between 8:00 a.m. and
noon and once between noon and 6:00 p.m., each day, without being cited for a
violation of §
77.087(b). The temporary loading permit shall be displayed on the front dash,
driver’s side, and be easily legible from outside the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 40-284) (Ord. 105-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 77.089 OUTSTANDING PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   Any vehicle which has accumulated five or more outstanding parking
violations may be removed by the city from any public property and placed in
storage, and the owner thereof, in addition to the outstanding fines and
penalties, shall pay the charges for towing and storage of the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 40-286) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 77.090 COURTESY TICKETS.
   (a)   In lieu of issuing a parking ticket for a vehicle parked in violation
of §
77.087(a) or (b), a parking patrol may issue a courtesy (warning) ticket, if:
      (1)   The vehicle is licensed somewhere other than Minnehaha, Lincoln,
Turner or McCook Counties; or
      (2)   The vehicle has not received a courtesy ticket in the prior 60
days.
   (b)   LICENSED as used in this section means bearing a license plate which
bears markings which designate the county in which that license plate was
issued.
(1992 Code, § 40-287) (Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004)
PARKING TICKET APPEALS
§ 77.105 PARKING TICKET APPEALS; TIME FOR PAYMENT OR APPEAL.
   The responsible party shall pay any parking ticket or citation issued under
the authority of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD, within 15 days from
the date of issuance. However, any party may, in lieu of payment, appeal a
parking ticket within that time period pursuant to the administrative appeals
procedures as provided in
Chapter 30 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 2-122) (Ord. 82-02, passed 10-21-2002; Ord. 66-13, passed 11-5-
2013)
§ 77.106 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS PROCEDURES APPLY; SEPARATE PROCESSING FEE
AUTHORIZED.
   All terms and conditions for administrative appeals as provided in
Chapter 30 of this Code shall apply except that the processing fee shall be $5
for appeal of a parking ticket or citation.
(1992 Code, § 2-123) (Ord. 82-02, passed 10-21-2002; Ord. 66-13, passed 11-5-
2013)
§ 77.999 PENALTY.
   The penalties for violations of §§
77.001 through
77.013,
77.025 through
77.031,
77.045 through
77.047,
77.060 through
77.065 and
77.080 through
77.090 shall be as follows:
 
           Paid                                                                    After After
           within After seven days without filing an appeal under §               30    60
           seven  77.106 or more than 48 hours after a hearing officer’s decisiondays  days
           days
Improper,
double     $15    $30                                                              $60
parking
Overtime   $10    $15                                                              $30   $60
Parking on $35    $70                                                              $100
snow route
Prohibited $15    $30                                                              $60
parking
Snow alert $35    $70                                                              $100
 
(1992 Code, § 40-253) (Ord. 44-78, passed 5-15-1978; Ord. 82-02, passed 10-21-
2002; Ord. 12-04, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 176-07, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 122-15,
passed 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 78: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Section
   
78.001   Designation
   
78.002   Obedience
Cross-reference:
   One-way streets and alleys, see
 ch. 82, sch. I
§ 78.001 DESIGNATION.
   All streets and alleys in the city shall permit traffic in two directions.
However, the city may by ordinance designate one-way streets and the mayor may
designate one-way alleys by executive order. The city shall place and maintain
signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless the
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.165; 1992 Code, § 40-154) (Ord. 109-98, passed 10-19-
1998)
§ 78.002 OBEDIENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of
the markings, signs, barriers or other devices placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 40-155) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 79: TRUCK ROUTES, SETS AXLE AND TIRE LOAD LIMITS
Section
   
79.001   Definitions
   
79.002   Driver and owner responsibility
   
79.003   Maximum weight of vehicle or combination of vehicles and axles
   
79.004   Combination vehicles deemed single for weight purposes
   
79.005   Formula for weight on group of consecutive axles
   
79.006   Limited exemption for certain vehicles hauling agricultural products
or livestock from a farm
   
79.007   Maximum weight per tire-spacing of axles
   
79.008   Solid waste hauling vehicle weight restrictions-fee on excess only
   
79.009   Municipal sludge vehicles-permits for oversize and overweight-tires-
speed limit
   
79.010   Liability for damages not affected by issuance of permit
   
79.011   Removal of overweight portions of load-risk of loss of unloaded cargo
   
79.012   Livestock not to be unloaded from overweight vehicle
   
79.013   Lift axle control requirements-permits
   
79.014   Administrative fees for operation of overweight vehicles
   
79.015   Disposition of proceeds
   
79.016   Use of truck routes
   
79.017   Operation of trucks carrying nondivisible loads
   
79.018   Exception to use of truck route emergency vehicles
   
79.019   Posting of truck routes
   
79.020   Posted weight limits
   
79.021   Truck route detours
   
79.022   Overweight permits
   
79.023   Truck route maps
   
79.024   Police authority
§ 79.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every machine propelled by any power other than muscular
used upon the streets or highways for the transportation of property.
      NONDIVISIBLE LOAD. Cargo that cannot be reasonably divided into more than
one shipment.
      OWNER. The person who holds the legal title to a motor vehicle or trailer
or who is the lessee of the vehicle or trailer.
      PRIMARY TRUCK ROUTE. Any street or highway designated as a PRIMARY TRUCK
ROUTE by the city council by resolution.
      SECONDARY TRUCK ROUTE. Any street or highway designated as a SECONDARY
TRUCK ROUTE by the city council by resolution.
      TIRE WIDTH. When applied to pneumatic tires, shall mean the dimension of
the cross section of the tires as customarily measured and rated by the
manufacturers of motor vehicles and tires.
      TRUCK. Any motor vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of
property, including a vehicle directly connected to a trailer, of a gross
weight of more than 10,000 pounds.
   (b)   Any terms used in this chapter which are not defined by §§
10.002,
70.001 or this section but which are defined in SDCL 32-14-1, shall have the
meaning as defined in SDCL 32-14-1.
(1992 Code, § 40-349) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.002 DRIVER AND OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Either the driver or the owner of any truck being operated with the owner’s
consent are liable for any violation of this chapter by that truck.
(1992 Code, § 40-350) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.003 MAXIMUM WEIGHT OF VEHICLE OR COMBINATION OF VEHICLES AND AXLES.
   (a)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles operating on the streets, alleys
and highways of the city may weigh:
      (1)   In excess of 20,000 pounds on any one axle, or in excess of the
tire weight per inch of tire width prescribed by §
79.007, including all enforcement tolerances;
      (2)   In excess of 34,000 pounds on any tandem axle, or in excess of the
tire weight per inch of tire width prescribed by §
79.007, including all enforcement tolerances; or
      (3)   In excess of the maximum weight on two or more consecutive axles as
determined by the formula detailed in §
79.005, or in excess of the tire weight per inch of tire width prescribed by §
79.007.
   (b)   Two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000
pounds each provided the overall distance between the first and last axles of
the consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
(1992 Code, § 40-351) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.004 COMBINATION VEHICLES DEEMED SINGLE FOR WEIGHT PURPOSES.
   Any combination of vehicles being operated upon the streets and highways
shall, for the purposes of §
79.003, be deemed to be a single vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 40-352) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.005 FORMULA FOR WEIGHT ON GROUP OF CONSECUTIVE AXLES.
   (a)   For the purposes of §
79.003 the maximum gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
allowable on a street or highway shall be determined by the following formula:
   W = 500 [LN/(N-1) + 12N + 36]
   (b)   In applying the above formula, “W” equals the overall gross weight on
any group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, “L”
equals the distance measured longitudinally to the nearest foot from the
foremost axles to the rearmost axle in a group of two or more consecutive axles
and “N” equals the number of axles in group under consideration.
(1992 Code, § 40-353) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.006 LIMITED EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES HAULING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
OR LIVESTOCK FROM A FARM.
   No vehicle hauling agricultural products from farm storage or livestock from
a farm is subject to enforcement action for violations not exceeding the legal
limits imposed pursuant to §
79.003 or §
79.019 by more than 5%. However, the vehicle may not exceed the speed of 50 mph
and is only exempt pursuant to this section within a range of 50 miles of the
farm. The vehicle may not exceed the posted weight of any bridge or road. The
weight tolerance authorized in this section is not applicable during spring
load restrictions as set forth in SDCL 32-22-24 or §
79.020. If enforcement action is taken pursuant to this section, the fine or
penalty shall apply to that portion of the load that is above the legal limit.
(1992 Code, § 40-354) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.007 MAXIMUM WEIGHT PER TIRE-SPACING OF AXLES.
   (a)   No vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires may be operated or moved upon
any street or highway in this city, if the weight of the vehicle and the load
thereon resting upon the surface of the street or highway exceeds:
      (1)   Six hundred pounds on any inch of the tire width on:
         A.   An axle equipped with dual tires;
         B.   A steering axle;
         C.   An axle of an oversize or overweight vehicle that cannot be
readily reduced in size or weight and is operating with a permit issued under
SDCL 32-22-42 or §
79.022; or
         D.   An axle of a trailer being towed by a vehicle with a gross
vehicle weight rating (as defined in SDCL 32-3-1) of 11,000 pounds or less.
      (2)   Five hundred pounds on any inch of the tire width on any other type
of axle.
   (b)   In no instance may the weight on any axle or combination of axles
exceed the maximum weight limits specified in §
79.003.
(1992 Code, § 40-355) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.008 SOLID WASTE HAULING VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS-FEE ON EXCESS ONLY.
   The limitations of §
79.003 do not apply to the maximum gross weight per axle of any vehicle hauling
solid waste. However, the maximum gross weight of that vehicle may not exceed
the total weight limitation of all the axles combined as provided by §
79.003, nor may any vehicle hauling solid waste exceed the maximum gross weight
allowable per axle by 5% on any axle. If enforcement action is taken, the
administrative fee shall apply to that portion of the load more than 5% above
the legal limit.
(1992 Code, § 40-356) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.009 MUNICIPAL SLUDGE VEHICLES-PERMITS FOR OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT-TIRES-
SPEED LIMIT.
   The city may issue annual or seasonal permits for the movement of oversize
and overweight sludge vehicles owned and operated by a municipality. The city
engineer may establish permit conditions to ensure the safety of the public and
the protection of the highway surface and structures. Any municipal sludge
vehicle shall be equipped with large flotation type tires which have an
inflation pressure of 25 pounds per square inch or less. The vehicle may not
operate on a public roadway at a speed in excess of 15 mph.
(1992 Code, § 40-357) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.010 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES NOT AFFECTED BY ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The issuance of any permit provided for in this chapter will in no manner
relieve the holder of the permit from liability for damages caused to a street
or highway by any movement under the permit.
(1992 Code, § 40-358) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.011 REMOVAL OF OVERWEIGHT PORTIONS OF LOAD-RISK OF LOSS OF UNLOADED CARGO.
   If an officer upon weighing a vehicle and load determines that the vehicle’s
weight is unlawful, the officer shall require the driver to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place adjacent to the place of weighing. The vehicle shall there
remain until the portion of the load is removed or adjusted to reduce the gross
weight, axle weight, or tire weight of the vehicle to meet the weight limits
specified in this chapter or until the city issues the vehicle an overweight
permit. The overweight permit shall only authorize movement of the vehicle from
the weighing site to a location, as determined by the city, where the excess
portion of the load can be removed or adjusted to cause the vehicle to meet the
weight limits specified in this article. The unloading of any required portion
of a load is the duty of and at the sole risk of the owner or operator of the
vehicle. Any material unloaded shall be cared for by and continue to be at the
sole risk of the owner or operator.
(1992 Code, § 40-359) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.012 LIVESTOCK NOT TO BE UNLOADED FROM OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE.
   The unloading of livestock as defined by SDCL 39-5-6(11) is prohibited for
the enforcement of violations of §§
79.003 and
79.007. The city shall issue to the driver of the vehicle at the point of
violation of special overweight permit for the amount of the overload if the
load cannot be adjusted to the legal limits without unloading. The permit
authorized pursuant to this section is issued at the flat rate of $100 for an
overweight permit. The flat rate shall include the cost of issuing the permit.
This permit authorizes the driver to operate the overweight vehicle to the
point of destination within the city or the point of exit from the city. This
permit does not, however, exempt the operator from any other enforcement
actions.
(1992 Code, § 40-360) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.013 LIFT AXLE CONTROL REQUIREMENTS-PERMITS.
   Unless specifically authorized by permit, a variable load axle may not be
raised if, when it is raised it causes any other axle to be overloaded. The
city hereby recognizes the validity of permits issued under SDCL 32-22-57 and
ARSD 70:03:01:85, and adopts the terms and conditions of the permits. A
violation of the permit subjects the violator to an administrative fee of $500
for each violation, in addition to any other applicable penalties and fees
under §§
10.999 and
79.014, for violations of other provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 40-361) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 79.014 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES FOR OPERATION OF OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any person who is convicted of operating a motor vehicle upon the
street and highways of the city with weight upon any wheel, axle or groups of
axles or upon more than one thereof greater than the maximum permitted by §§
79.003 through
79.014, inclusive, shall pay in addition to, and not in substitution for,
penalties under §
10.999, an administrative fee calculated as follows:
      (1)   In an amount equal to $0.05 per pound for each pound of an excess
or combined excess weight over 1,000 pounds if the excess is 3,000 pounds or
less;
      (2)   In an amount equal to $0.15 per pound for each pound of the excess
or combined excess weight if the excess exceeds 3,000 pounds and is 4,000
pounds or less;
      (3)   In an amount equal to $0.225 cents per pound for each pound of the
excess or combined excess weight if the excess exceeds 4,000 pounds and is
5,000 pounds or less;
      (4)   In an amount equal to $0.375 per pound for each pound of the excess
or combined excess weight if the excess exceeds 5,000 pounds and is 10,000
pounds or less; and
      (5)   In an amount equal to $0.75 per pound for each pound of the excess
or combined excess weight if the excess is more than 10,000 pounds.
   (b)   The schedule in this section is assessed at a single rate according to
the cents per pound rate for the highest weight violation.
(1992 Code, § 40-362) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.015 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   Administrative fees collected under this chapter shall be remitted to the
fund that pays for street maintenance and repair.
(1992 Code, § 40-363) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.016 USE OF TRUCK ROUTES.
   (a)   Each truck shall travel as close as practicable to its destination by
primary truck route. Thereafter, it shall travel by secondary truck route to
its destination, or as close as practicable to its destination.
   (b)   From the nearest practicable location on a truck route, the truck may
travel by other streets to its destination.
(1992 Code, § 40-364) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.017 OPERATION OF TRUCKS CARRYING NONDIVISIBLE LOADS.
   Any truck carrying a nondivisible load that weighs more than permitted by §
79.003, §
79.004 or §
79.005, but which meets the requirements of §§
79.007(a)(1) and (a)(2), which has traveled by primary truck route, or a
combination of primary and secondary truck routes, to a location as close as
practicable to its destination, may travel by the shortest practicable route
from the location to a destination that is not on a primary or secondary truck
route.
(1992 Code, § 40-365) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.018 EXCEPTION TO USE OF TRUCK ROUTE EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The operation of emergency vehicles, including, but not limited to,
ambulances and law enforcement, fire department and health department vehicles,
may operate upon any street or highway in the city. Tow trucks and utility
vehicles when either is engaged in the performance of emergency duties are
included in this exception.
(1992 Code, § 40-366) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.019 POSTING OF TRUCK ROUTES.
   All primary and secondary truck routes shall be posted accordingly.
(1992 Code, § 40-367)
§ 79.020 POSTED WEIGHT LIMITS.
   The city’s public works department may, by order, prohibit the operation of
trucks upon any street or highway within the city or impose any weight
restriction deemed necessary by the department. The prohibition or restriction
shall be based upon a reasonable belief that normal use of the streets or
highways is not in the public’s interest or may damage the streets or highways.
The order will become effective when signs are erected and maintained at each
end of the affected portion of the street or highway. Vehicles with permits per
§
79.022 must comply with posted weight limits.
(1992 Code, § 40-368) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.021 TRUCK ROUTE DETOURS.
   Any truck may operate on any officially established detour of a primary or
secondary truck route, unless the detours are posted prohibiting or limiting
the operation by trucks.
(1992 Code, § 40-369) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.022 OVERWEIGHT PERMITS.
   (a)   The city engineer may issue temporary overweight permits for trucks
carrying nondivisible loads that cannot otherwise meet the provisions of this
chapter, for periods of up to 30 days. The fee for these permits shall be $20.
   (b)   A truck which has been issued an overweight permit by the state
highway patrol is permitted to operate on city streets and highways without a
city overweight permit. The vehicles shall use primary truck routes whenever
possible, secondary truck routes, when no primary truck route is possible, and
other streets only when no truck route to the truck’s destination exists.
(1992 Code, § 40-369.1) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003; Ord. 91-06, passed 7-
24-2006)
§ 79.023 TRUCK ROUTE MAPS.
   The city engineering department shall keep and maintain accurate maps
setting out the primary and secondary truck routes. The maps shall be available
to the public.
(1992 Code, § 40-369.2) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
§ 79.024 POLICE AUTHORITY.
   Any law enforcement officer may require any person driving or in control of
any truck to proceed to any public, private or portable scale within a five-
mile radius to determine whether the truck is in violation of this chapter or
any other provision of the revised ordinances of the city.
(1992 Code, § 40-369.3) (Ord. 118-03, passed 12-8-2003)
CHAPTER 80: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
80.001   Designation of crosswalks
   
80.002   Designation of safety zones
   
80.003   Pedestrian’s right-of-way
   
80.004   Pedestrians’ rights and duties at controlled intersections
   
80.005   Jaywalking
   
80.006   Pedestrians to obey traffic signals
   
80.007   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
   
80.008   Soliciting rides
   
80.009   Pedestrian safety, use of medians
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrians’ rights and duties, see SDCL ch. 32-27
§ 80.001 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS.
   The city engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and to
designate and shall thereafter maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks approximately equal in width to the
adjacent sidewalk at all intersections where in his or her opinion, there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
(1992 Code, § 40-296)
§ 80.002 DESIGNATION OF SAFETY ZONES.
   The city engineer is hereby empowered to establish safety zones of the kind
and character and at those places as he or she may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(1992 Code, § 40-297)
§ 80.003 PEDESTRIAN’S RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle upon a highway within a business or
residence district shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the
highway within any clearly marked crosswalk or any regular pedestrian crossing
included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent
sidewalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of
traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices.
   (b)   Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, it shall be unlawful
for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and
pass the stopped vehicle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.111; 1992 Code, § 40-298) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-27-1
§ 80.004 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES AT CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall
have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles, and at the marked places,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk, and any
pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall
have the right-of-way over any vehicle so stopped.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when
any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at the crosswalk for
the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
(1992 Code, § 40-299) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 32-27-2
§ 80.005 JAYWALKING.
   Every pedestrian crossing a highway within a business or residential
district at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the highway.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.110; 1992 Code, § 40-300)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, SDCL 32-27-4
§ 80.006 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   Except as authorized by a pedestrian control signal as defined in §
75.006(f), at intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or
stop-and-go signals, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the
roadway other than with released traffic.
(1992 Code, § 40-301) (Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-2018) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 80.007 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the
crosswalks.
(1964 Rev. Ords., § 13.0805; 1992 Code, § 40-302)
§ 80.008 SOLICITING RIDES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 40-303) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 80.009 PEDESTRIAN SAFETY, USE OF MEDIANS.
   (a)   The city council makes the following findings and adopts the following
statement of purposes of this section:
      (1)   Pedestrian fatalities increased in the United States by 66% from
2011 to 2021 according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
      (2)   According to the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety (2011), the
average risk of severe injury for a pedestrian struck by a vehicle reaches 50%
at 31 mph and 75% at 39 mph.
      (3)   A driver traveling at 30 mph who hits a pedestrian has a 45% chance
of killing or seriously injuring the individual according to the US Department
of Transportation Federal Highway Administration (2021).
      (4)   The National Association of City Transportation Officials Urban
Street Design Guide (2013) states that a median or island should be at least
six feet wide where pedestrians are present.
   (b)   For any intersection listed herein, where the speed limit is 30 miles
per hour or higher and lacks pedestrian facilities; and the width of the top
surface of the median is less than six feet wide excluding the curb,
pedestrians are prohibited from standing, sitting, or staying on a median for
any purpose. While not an exhaustive list, this section prohibits, at a
minimum, pedestrians from standing, sitting, or staying on a median at the
following intersections in the city:
      (1)   Marion Rd. at I-90.
      (2)   Cliff Ave. at I-90.
      (3)   Veterans Pkwy. at I-90.
      (4)   Rice St. and Veterans Pkwy.
      (5)   Benson Rd. at I-29.
      (6)   Maple St. at I-29.
      (7)   Algonquin St. and Minnesota Ave.
      (8)   Russell St. and Westport Ave.
      (9)   Russell St. and Western Ave.
      (10)   Russell St. and Prairie Ave.
      (11)   Rice St. at I-229.
      (12)   Madison St. at I-29.
      (13)   Madison St. and Veterans Pkwy.
      (14)   12th St. at I-29.
      (15)   10th St. at I-229.
      (16)   26th St. at I-29.
   (c)   The previous section does not apply to:
      (1)   Public safety employees while performing their official duties.
      (2)   Employees or contractors for the city or state or other individuals
authorized by the said entities to perform construction or maintenance work on
streets or rights-of-way, while performing construction or maintenance work on
the street provided that proper street signage is used and streets are blocked
off as required by the city.
      (3)   Any individual responding to an emergency in the street.
(Ord. 19-24, passed 3-5-2024)
CHAPTER 81: BICYCLES, E-BICYCLES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles/E-Bicycles; In General
   
81.001   Lights
   
81.002   Brakes
Bicycles/E-Bicycle;  Operation Regulations
   
81.015   Traffic regulations generally
   
81.016   Manner of riding
   
81.017   Passengers prohibited; exception
   
81.018   Clinging to vehicles
   
81.019   Driving abreast
   
81.020   Carrying articles
   
81.021   Acrobatic riding
   
81.022   Speed; contests
   
81.023   Interfering with pedestrians
Snowmobiles
   
81.035   Definitions
   
81.036   Authorized operation
   
81.037   Emergency use
   
81.038   Equipment required
   
81.039   Unattended vehicles
   
81.040   Sidewalk operation prohibited
   
81.041   Operation under the influence
   
81.042   Towing
   
81.043   Exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Bicycling in parks, see §
95.031
   Driver of bicycle driving on sidewalk, across roadway or along crosswalk,
see §
76.082
   Driver of bicycle overtaking other vehicle, see §
72.011
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
   Parking bicycles, see §
77.003
   Police, see §§
131.020,
131.021
   Riding bicycle on street, see §
72.002
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate the use of bicycles, see SDCL 9-31-1
BICYCLES/E-BICYCLES; IN GENERAL
§ 81.001 LIGHTS.
   Every bicycle or e-bicycle driven upon any street, recreation trail, or
sidewalk during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to
render clearly discernible any person at a distance of 200 feet ahead shall be
equipped with a lighted lamp on the front thereof visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet in front of the
bicycle or e-bicycle and shall also be equipped with a reflex mirror or lamp on
the rear exhibiting a yellow or red light visible under like conditions from a
distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the bicycle or e-bicycle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.306; 1992 Code, § 10-1) (Ord. 27-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.002 BRAKES.
   Every bicycle or e-bicycle, when operated in the city, shall be equipped
with a brake adequate to control the movement and to stop the bicycle or e-
bicycle whenever necessary.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.306; 1992 Code, § 10-2) (Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
BICYCLES/E-BICYCLE; OPERATION REGULATIONS
§ 81.015 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   Every person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle shall have all of the rights and
all the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle by this Code,
except as to special regulations in §§
81.015 through
81.023 and except as to those provisions of this Code which by their nature can
have no application.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.301; 1992 Code, § 10-34) (Ord. 27-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Traffic regulations, see
ch. 76
§ 81.016 MANNER OF RIDING.
   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle or e-bicycle upon any street except
in a careful or prudent manner and unless the person shall be capable of
efficient control and operation of the bicycle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-35) (Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.017 PASSENGERS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No bicycle or e-bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than
the number for which it is designed or equipped, except that an adult driver
may carry an infant securely attached to his or her person in a backpack or
sling or in an infant carrier designed for bicycles or e-bicycles with a safety
belt firmly attached.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-36) (Ord. 27-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 50-88, passed 6-20-1988; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.018 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle or e-bicycle shall not attach the bicycle
or e-bicycle or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a street.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-37) (Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.019 DRIVING ABREAST.
   Persons driving bicycles or e-bicycles upon a roadway shall not drive more
than two abreast and within a roadway’s outside single-lane at any time except
while in the process of passing. When persons riding bicycles or e-bicycles two
abreast are riding at less than the normal speed of traffic and are approached
from behind by a motor vehicle, the persons shall then ride single file in
accordance with the provisions of §
72.002(c).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-38) (Ord. 2423, passed 6-13-1966;
Ord. 27-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 46-12, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 66-19, passed
6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.020 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of
the bicycle or e-bicycle. A person driving a bicycle or e-bicycle shall keep at
least one hand on the handlebars at all times.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-39) (Ord. 27-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.021 ACROBATIC RIDING.
   No rider of a bicycle or e-bicycle shall remove both hands from the handle
or feet from the pedals or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any
street.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-40) (Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.022 SPEED; CONTESTS.
   (a)   No person shall, while driving a bicycle or e-bicycle upon a street,
recreation trail, cycle track, or sidewalk participate in any race for speed
with any other vehicle, except under permit from, and under the supervision of,
the police department.
   (b)   By agreement with the police department, participants in an approved
bicycle or e-bicycle racing event may be exempted from compliance with any
traffic laws otherwise applicable thereto, provided that traffic control is
adequate to assure the safety of all highway users.
   (c)   Tests of endurance are not considered bicycle or e-bicycle racing.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.308; 1992 Code, § 10-41) (Ord. 27-83, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-2018; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle races, see SDCL 32-20B-7 et seq.
§ 81.023 INTERFERING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
   No person shall ride or propel any bicycle or e-bicycle upon any street in a
manner as to interfere with any pedestrian thereon.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.307; 1992 Code, § 10-42) (Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.999
SNOWMOBILES
§ 81.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. Every person who operates or who is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OPERATE. To control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OWNER. Any person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title
to a snowmobile and entitled to the use or possession thereof.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Includes any and all real property or land within the city
which has not been opened or dedicated for public use or as a public
thoroughfare.
   SIDEWALK. The portion between the curb-line and adjacent property lines set
aside for the use of pedestrians.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any engine-driven vehicle of a type which utilizes sled-type
runners, wheels or skis with an endless belt tread or similar means of contact
with the surface upon which it is operated.
   STREET. The part of the street set apart for the use of vehicles or motor
vehicles and including streets, avenues, alleys and public highways.
(1992 Code, § 40-315) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971)
§ 81.036 AUTHORIZED OPERATION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a snowmobile within or upon any street except
under road and weather conditions as declared by the police chief or civil
defense director to constitute emergency travel conditions authorizing use of a
snowmobile, or when the vehicle is necessary as an emergency vehicle to protect
the health, safety and welfare of any individual. This does not prohibit a
snowmobile from crossing a street at right angles to the street only after
stopping and yielding the right-of-way to all approaching traffic and crossing
as closely as possible to an intersection or approach.
   (b)   No person shall operate a snowmobile on private property of another
without the express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the
property, and no person shall operate a snowmobile on private property of his
or her own or another between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day.
   (c)   No person shall operate a snowmobile on any public property,
including, but not limited to public school grounds, park property,
playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses, parking lots and lakes.
(1992 Code, § 40-316) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.037 EMERGENCY USE.
   The driver of a snowmobile under emergency conditions shall be subject to
all existing traffic ordinances of the city and traffic laws of the state, and
in addition, the driver shall:
   (a)   Display a lighted headlight and taillight at all times during the
operation;
   (b)   Slow the speed of the snowmobile to 15 mph or less when entering any
uncontrolled intersection; and
   (c)   Have a valid state driver’s license in his or her possession.
(1992 Code, § 40-317) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.038 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   All snowmobiles operated within the city shall have the following equipment:
   (a)   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on
the vehicle;
   (b)   Adequate brakes in good working condition;
   (c)   A safety or deadman throttle in operating condition, such being a
device which when pressure is removed from the accelerator, the throttle causes
the motor to disengage from the driving track; and
   (d)   At least one headlight and one taillight in good working condition.
(1992 Code, § 40-318) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.039 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   No owner or driver of a snowmobile shall leave or allow the snowmobile to be
or remain unattended on public property or streets while the motor is running
or where the keys for starting the vehicle are left in the ignition.
(1992 Code, § 40-319) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.040 SIDEWALK OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public sidewalk in the city.
(1992 Code, § 40-320) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.041 OPERATION UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   The driver of a snowmobile shall be deemed the driver of a motor vehicle
within the meaning of chapter 76 of this Code and is subject to all of the
provisions of chapter 76 and SDCL ch. 32-23 relating to driving while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor, drugs or otherwise therein provided and the
operation shall be punishable for any violation of the ordinance and state law.
(1992 Code, § 40-321) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.042 TOWING.
   No person operating a snowmobile shall tow any person or object behind the
snowmobile except when the person or object is situated upon a conveyance which
is attached to the snowmobile by means of a rigid hitch or towbar.
(1992 Code, § 40-322) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 81.043 EXCEPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section, any governmental
official in charge of public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, public
golf courses, parking lots or lakes shall have authority to supervise and
regulate events or programs conducted thereon or to designate areas under his
or her charge and supervision as recreation areas that he or she shall deem
available for use of snowmobiles, and the hours of that use.
(1992 Code, § 40-323) (Ord. 2801, passed 12-27-1971)
CHAPTER 82: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I    One-way streets and alleys
SCHEDULE I. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (a)   Dakota Avenue. Dakota Avenue shall be a one-way street from Eleventh
Street to Main Avenue effective upon the placement and maintenance of signs
giving notice thereof.
(1992 Code, § 40-154.1)
   (b)   Main Avenue. Main Avenue shall be a one-way street from Sixth Street
to Fourteenth Street effective upon the placement and maintenance of signs
giving notice thereof.
(1992 Code, § 40-154.2)
(Ord. 70-98, passed 8-3-1998; Ord. 136-98, passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 18-99,
passed 2-16-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   One-way streets and alleys, see
ch. 78
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
   
90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
   
91.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
   
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
   
93.   NUISANCES
   
94.   FORESTRY
   
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
   
96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   
97.   ADVERTISING
   
98.   HUMAN RELATIONS
   
99.   AIRPORTS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Running at large prohibited
   
90.003   Restricted animals
   
90.003.1   Vicious animals
   
90.003.2   Dunbar aggression assessment scale
   
90.003.3   Immediate notice of bite
   
90.003.4   Duty to give information, render aid
   
90.004   Disturbing the peace
   
90.005   Cruelty to animals; right of entry
   
90.006   Stray or abandoned animals
   
90.007   Poisoning
   
90.008   Keeping of animals
   
90.009   Responsibility
   
90.010   Abandoning of animal
   
90.011   Enforcement
   
90.012   Failure to comply with warning ticket
   
90.013   Trapping of animals
   
90.014   Hunting prohibited
   
90.015   Number of pets limited
   
90.016   Deer feeding prohibited
   
90.017   Exemption for police dogs
   
90.018   Community cat initiative
   
90.019   Sioux Falls Area Humane Society approval
Rabies Control
   
90.030   Cooperation of joint agencies
   
90.031   Vaccination required
   
90.032   Impounded animals
   
90.033   Impounding for observation
   
90.034   Keeping rabid animals
   
90.035   Report of suspected case; generally
   
90.036   Report of suspected case; veterinarians
   
90.037   Report of suspected case; physicians
   
90.038   Destruction of rabid animals
   
90.039   Muzzling proclamation
Impounding
   
90.050   Enforcement
   
90.051   Interference with performance of duties
   
90.052   Animal shelter
   
90.053   Authority
   
90.054   Costs
   
90.055   Notice to owner
   
90.056   Redemption by person other than owner
   
90.057   Disposition of unredeemed animals
   
90.058   Impounding by private persons
   
90.059   Records generally
   
90.060   Record of bites
   
90.061   Injured animals
   
90.062   Each violation a separate offense
Licensing
   
90.075   Licensing of dogs and cats required
   
90.076   Application for license certificate and tag
   
90.077   License fee schedule
   
90.078   Licensing of animals and fowl
Guard Dogs
   
90.090   Permits; required
   
90.091   Permits; application; transfers; inspections; fee; tags; term
   
90.092   Housing, facilities and handling
   
90.093   Exclusions
Hobby Beekeeping
   
90.100   Permit required
   
90.101   Standards of practice
   
90.102   Location of hives
   
90.103   Colony densities
   
90.104   Nuisance prohibited
   
90.105   Compliance with all applicable laws
   
90.106   Penalties
   
90.107   Spraying
Cross-reference:
   Application of traffic regulations to persons riding animals, see §
71.004
   Diseases of animals, see §
92.123
   Duty of driver of vehicle upon striking animal, see §
72.036
   Examples of nuisances, see § 
92.071
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Noise control, see
ch. 93
   Pest control, see
ch. 120
   Protection of animals in parks, see
95.013 through
95.015
   Rendering of animal matter, see §
92.008
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  A person designated by the chief of police to work
with law enforcement officials in the enforcement of this chapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER.  A building and facilities therein approved by the chief of
police and the health authority for the impounding of animals.
   ANTI-ESCAPE.  Any housing, fencing, or device that a guard dog cannot go
over, under, through, or around.
   APIARY. Any place where one or more colonies of honeybees are kept.
   APPARENT ATTITUDE OF ATTACK. Threatening and overtly aggressive actions of
an animal that places a reasonable person in imminent fear of bodily injury,
including, but not limited to, snarling, growling, elevated or exaggerated
noise, combined with an attack-ready body position when the animal is
approached.
   AT LARGE.
      (1)   An animal when off or away from the premises and not under the
control of the owner, possessor, keeper, agent, servant, or a member of his or
her immediate family by a leash.
      (2)   An animal when on the premises of the owner, possessor, keeper,
agent, or servant if not attended by a competent person unless the animal is
chained, restrained, enclosed, or confined in a manner preventing it from
leaving the premises.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honeybees.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The chief officer of the city police department or his or
her designee.
   COLONY. The honeybees in any hive, including queens, workers, and drones.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.
      (1)   A portion of land or building zoned for or utilized for commercial
or business uses, within the city, including temporary sites.
      (2)   Any vehicle utilized for commercial or business purposes within the
city.
   COMMUNITY CAT. A cat that is feral.
   COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER. A person who, in accordance with this section, is
approved by the Sioux Falls Area Humane Society, and provides care to a
community cat, including, food, shelter and/or medical care, while not being
considered the owner, harborer, controller, or keeper of the community cat.
   CONTRIBUTING PACK BEHAVIOR. Actions of an animal, including but not limited
to biting, that aid, aggravate, or incite other animals to bite, and the
behavior, when considered on its own, would place a reasonable person in fear
of serious injury or death.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal that through long association with man has been
bred to a degree that has resulted in genetic changes affecting the
temperament, color, conformation, or other attributes of the species to an
extent that makes it unique and different from wild individuals of its kind.
   EARTIPPING. The removal of the one-quarter-inch tip of a community cat’s
ear, performed while the cat is under anesthesia, to identify the community cat
as being sterilized and vaccinated for rabies.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal not occurring naturally in the United States
either currently or historically. Alleged domestication of any exotic animal
shall not affect its status under this definition.
   FERAL ANIMAL. Any domestic animal that has gone wild.
   FLYWAY BARRIER. A solid fence, wall, dense vegetation, or combination
thereof that is at least six feet in height that requires the bees to fly over,
rather than through the barrier.
   FOWL.  Chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pheasants, quail, partridge,
guineas, or other like domestic birds.
   GUARD DOG.  Any dog that is utilized to protect commercial property, or is
housed unattended on commercial property at any time other than normal business
hours, except that the definition shall not apply to pet stores, boarding
kennels, veterinary offices, and animal shelters.
   HANDLER.  A person who is responsible for and capable of controlling the
operations of a guard dog.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY.  The health officer of the city or his or her authorized
representative.
   HIVE. Any frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log gum, skep, or any other
container that may be used as a domicile for honeybees.
   HOBBY BEEKEEPER. A person who engages in hobby beekeeping.
   HONEYBEES. Any insect stage of the common honeybee, Apis mellifera L. This
definition excludes African subspecies and Africanized hybrids.
   HOUSING.  Any location where the guard dog is kept when not being utilized
for protection purposes.
   LEASH.  A cord, thong, or chain, not to exceed six feet in length, by which
an animal is controlled by the person accompanying it.
   LIVESTOCK.  Any species of animal other than fowl commonly used for food,
fiber, or draft purposes.
   NONDOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal that is not domestic.
   OWNER.  Any person harboring or keeping an animal and who is the head of the
household of the residence or any adult residing thereat if any head of
household is not present, or the person, owner, or manager in charge of the
establishment or premises at which an animal remains or returns to.
   PET.  Any domestic animal kept in or near a household for the primary
purpose of companionship for member(s) of the household and/or companionship
for other such animals. This includes dogs, cats, guinea pigs, hamsters, rats,
mice, ferrets, birds other than fowl, reptiles, amphibians, invertebrates, and
species that a reasonable person would consider a pet. Fowl, rabbits, and
livestock are not pets. The keeping of fowl, rabbits, or livestock including,
but not limited to, swine, cattle, cows, sheep, horses, mules, or goats shall
not be governed by this section of the code but shall be governed by other
applicable sections of this code.
   SERIOUS INJURY. Physical injury, which creates a substantial risk of death,
causes serious and prolonged disfigurement, prolonged impairment of health, or
prolonged loss or impairment of the function of any bodily organ.
   SLAUGHTER.  The act of killing fowl, rabbits, livestock, or any other animal
for the purpose of food.
   STRAY OR ABANDONED ANIMAL. A domestic animal which, for the time being, has
no identified owner. A feral animal is not a stray animal.
   TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN. The process of humanely trapping, sterilizing,
vaccinating for rabies, eartipping, microchipping a community cat, and
returning them to their original location.
   UNNATURAL FOOD SOURCE.  Any amount of grain, fruit, vegetables, nuts, hay,
salt, mineral, food blocks, or other similar edible material which has the
effect of attracting deer for the purpose of eating the material. UNNATURAL
FOOD SOURCE  does not include growing plants or the natural remainders of the
growing plants.
(1992 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980;
Ord. 78-86, passed 8-25-1986; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 16-13, passed
4-2-2013; Ord. 80-14, passed 11-4-2014; Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019; Ord. 99-
22, passed 8-16-2022; Ord. 105-24, passed 12-17-2024; Ord. 106-24, passed 12-
17-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 90.002 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Except on property designated by the city as an animal off-leash area,
it shall be unlawful for any person to have any animal which is owned, kept,
harbored, or allowed to be habitually in or upon the premises occupied by him
or her or under his or her control to be at large and to go in or upon the
private premises of others or upon any public property.
   (b)   Any person convicted of subsection (a) more than two times in a 12-
month period shall be considered a reckless owner. Any fine for a reckless
owner shall, at a minimum, be double the usual fine for animal running at
large. For purposes of this section, each prior conviction must occur on a
separate date than the present charge and any other prior conviction.
   (c)   Community cats shall not be impounded for solely being at large.
(1992 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 40-03, passed 5-12-2003;
Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017; Ord. 106, passed 12-17-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate or prohibit the running at large of animals, see SDCL 9-
29-12
§ 90.003 RESTRICTED ANIMALS.
   (a)   An animal may be declared restricted by the chief of police or the
attending physician of the victim of an animal bite or scratch may request the
declaration, under the following guidelines:
      (1)   An animal which in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches in an
apparent attitude of attack, or bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise
attacks a person or other animal, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or
private grounds or places.
      (2)   No animal may be declared restricted if the injury or damage is
sustained to any person or animal who is committing a willful trespass or other
tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or who was
teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
      (3)   An animal that has been previously declared by another jurisdiction
if the circumstances leading to the declaration in the other jurisdiction would
have been sufficient for a restricted declaration had the events occurred
within the city of Sioux Falls.
   (b)   When the chief of police declares an animal restricted, the chief of
police shall notify the owner of the declaration in writing that the animal
must be registered as a restricted animal within 15 days after the receipt of
the written notice. The notice shall be served either in person or by mailing
the notice by certified mail.
   (c)   The owner of an animal that has been declared restricted shall make
application to the animal control office to register the restricted animal and
shall comply with the following:
      (1)   The owner of the animal shall notify animal control of any changes
in the following:
         A.   Ownership of the animal;
         B.   Name, address, and telephone number of a new owner;
         C.   Address change of the owner or any change in where the animal is
housed;
         D.   Any change in the health status of the animal; and
         E.   Death of the animal.
      (2)   If the animal is indoors, the animal shall be under the control of
a person over 18 years old;
      (3)   If the animal is outdoors and attended, the animal shall be muzzled
on a leash no longer than 6' and under the control of a person over 18 years of
age;
      (4)   If the animal is outdoors and unattended, the animal must be locked
in an escape- proof kennel approved by animal control. Minimum standards shall
include the following:
         A.    Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of
more than 2". In the case of a wooden fence, the gaps shall not be more than
2".
         B.   Any gates within the pen or structure shall be lockable and of a
design to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the animal;
         C.    The required pen or structure shall have secure sides and a
secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the
sides shall be imbedded into the ground or concrete;
         D.   The pen or structure shall protect the animal from the elements;
and
         E.   The pen or structure may be required to have double exterior
walls to prevent the insertion of fingers, hands, or other objects.
      (5)   The animal shall be permanently identified by injecting an
identification microchip into the animal using standard veterinarian procedures
and practices. The number and the veterinarian who injected the microchip are
to be reported to animal control;
      (6)    A sign provided by or approved by animal control denoting a
restricted animal shall be displayed on the kennel or enclosure and on a place
visible from the sidewalk or road adjacent to the property where the animal is
kept. Said sign must warn the public as follows:
WARNING. RESTRICTED DOG ON THIS PROPERTY. DOG IS ONLY ALLOWED OUT OF HOUSE OR
PEN WITH LEASH AND MUZZLE. THIS DOG HAS BEEN DECLARED RESTRICTED UNDER CITY OF
SIOUX FALLS ORDINANCE 90.003. REPORT VIOLATIONS TO SIOUX FALLS ANIMAL CONTROL
(367-7000).
The sign must also include a picture or symbol that conveys the idea of a
vicious dog to small children who cannot read;
      (7)    The owner shall carry $100,000 animal liability insurance covering
the medical and/or veterinary costs resulting from the vicious actions or any
other damage the animal may do or cause to be done. Proof of insurance shall be
filed with animal control;
      (8)    The owner shall present proof of current rabies vaccination and
current city license of the animal to animal control; and
      (9)   The owner shall present proof the animal has been altered to
prevent reproduction to animal control.
   (d)   The restricted animal shall be impounded by animal control at the
owner's expense until a time as all provisions of division (c) above are
complied with.
   (e)    If the conditions in division (c) above are not complied with, the
animal shall be euthanized in a humane manner and proof of euthanasia filed
with animal control.
   (f)   Any restricted animal not in compliance with this article shall be
seized by the animal control officer or any police officer and impounded. If
the animal cannot be captured, it may be destroyed. An animal control officer
or any police officer may order the owner to deliver the animal to the animal
shelter within 24 hours and the owner ordered to appear in court to show cause
why this animal shall not be destroyed. If the owner of the animal fails to
deliver the animal as ordered, the animal control officer or any police officer
shall use those means as are necessary to impound the animal.
(1992 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 78-86, passed 8-25-1986;
Ord. 124-95, passed 9-18-1995; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 95-12, passed
12-4-2012; Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017; Ord. 105-24, passed 12-17-2024)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.003.1 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (a)   An animal may be declared vicious by the chief of police under the
following minimum guidelines:
      (1)   An animal that in a vicious or terrorizing manner, engages in
contributing pack behavior or bites, inflicts injury to, assaults, or otherwise
attacks a person or other animal upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or
private grounds or places, resulting in the death of the person or other
animal.
      (2)   An animal that, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, engages in
contributing pack behavior or bites, inflicts injury to, assaults, or otherwise
attacks a person or other animal resulting in:
         A.   A bite wound with one to four punctures from a single bite with
at least puncture of which estimates indicate that more than 50% of the length
of the canine teeth entered the victim’s body;
         B.   Serious injury to the person or animal; or
         C.   A Level 4 or higher aggression incident on the Dunbar scale as
set forth in §
90.003.2.
      (3)   An animal that has been previously declared in another jurisdiction
if the circumstances leading to the declaration in the other jurisdiction would
have been sufficient for a vicious declaration had the events occurred within
the city of Sioux Falls.
      (4)   No animal may be declared vicious if the injury or damage is
sustained to any person or animal who is committing a willful trespass or
othertort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or who
was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime.
   (b)   When the chief of police declares an animal vicious, the chief of
police shall notify the owner of the declaration in writing. The notice shall
be served either in person or by mailing the notice by certified mail.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to own, harbor, or possess a vicious
animal.
   (d)   Any animal declared vicious shall be euthanized in a humane manner and
proof of euthanasia filed with animal control.
   (e)   Any animal declared vicious shall also have been deemed declared
restricted for purposes of any administrative appeal.
(Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017; Ord. 105-24, passed 12-17-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Vicious dogs, see SDCL 40-34-13 et seq.
§ 90.003.2 DUNBAR AGGRESSION ASSESSMENT SCALE.
   (a)   Level 1. Animal growls, lunges, or snarls, but no teeth touch skin.
Mostly intimidation or threatening behavior.
   (b)   Level 2. Teeth touch skin but no puncture. May have red mark or minor
bruise from the dog’s head or snout, may have minor scratches from paws/nails.
Minor surface abrasions or lacerations.
   (c)    Level 3. Punctures one to three holes, single bite. No tearing or
slashes. Victim not shaken side to side, bruising.
   (d)   Level 3.5. Multiple Level 3 bites.
   (e)   Level 4. Two to four holes from a single bite, typically contact/
puncture from more than canines, which may have considerable bruising, black
bruising, tears or slashing wounds indicating animal clamped down and held or
shook head from side to side.
   (f)   Level 5. Multiple bites at Level 4 or above. A concerted, repeated
attack causing severe injury.
   (g)   Level 6. Victim dead.
(Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017; Ord. 105-24, passed 12-17-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.003.3 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF BITE.
   The owner, keeper, possessor, caretaker, or attendant of an animal that
bites, inflicts injury to, assaults, or otherwise attacks a person or other
animal shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of
such incident to animal control or the police department and remain on the
scene until the responding animal control officer or police officer has
indicated the person may leave.
(Ord. 95-12, passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 90.003.4 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION, RENDER AID.
   The owner, keeper, possessor, caretaker, or attendant of an animal that
bites, inflicts injury to, assaults, or otherwise attacks a person or other
animal shall immediately stop and give his or her name and address and shall
render to any person injured reasonable assistance.
(Ord. 95-12, passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 90.004 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (a)   The owner or custodian of an animal shall not allow the animal to
create a disturbance by making loud noises any time of the night or day.
   (b)   Any animal control officer or police officer may remove and impound
any animal which is disturbing the peace when the owner of the animal cannot be
located. A notice advising the owner of the impoundment shall be left on the
premises.
   (c)   Any person having custody or control of any female dog or cat in heat
shall be required to keep the dog or cat confined in a building, secure
enclosure, veterinary hospital or boarding kennel so that it cannot attract or
come into contact with another animal on public or private property except for
controlled breeding purposes.
(1992 Code, § 7-4) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 78-86, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 90.005 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   No person shall maltreat or abuse or neglect any animal or fowl. Any animal
control officer finding an animal or fowl mistreated as described in this
section shall have the power to lawfully enter the premises where the animal is
kept and demand to examine the animal and to take possession of the animal,
when in his or her opinion, the animal requires humane treatment.
(1992 Code, § 7-5) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 78-86, passed 8-25-1986)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals, see SDCL ch. 40-1
   Municipal authority to prohibit and punish cruelty to animals, see SDCL 9-
29-11
§ 90.006 STRAY OR ABANDONED ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall harbor or keep any stray animals. Animals known to be
strays shall be immediately reported to the animal control officer.
   (b)   No person shall put out any food for the purpose of feeding or
attracting any stray or abandoned animal. The placing of food to capture stray
or abandoned animals by animal control officers or for the purpose of turning
the animal over to animal control is not prohibited.
(1992 Code, § 7-6) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017;
Ord. 106-24, passed 12-17-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.007 POISONING.
   Unless recommended by the chief of police or health authority, it shall be
unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously administer or cause to be
administered poison of any sort whatsoever to any animal on the property of
another, with the intent to injure or destroy the animal, or to willfully or
maliciously place any poison or poisoned food where such is accessible to any
animal.
(1992 Code, § 7-7) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.008 KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
   (a)   The keeping of animals on any personal land in the city shall not be
on a scale creating a nuisance.
   (b)   Domestic fowl of the order Galliformes in the genus of Gallus
(chickens) and animals of the order Lagomorpha in the family of Leporidae
(rabbits and hares):
      (1)    A maximum of six animals may be kept on personal land in the city.
      (2)   The maximum number may be increased by obtaining a license issued
by the city pursuant to §
90.078.
      (3)    Roosters are prohibited.
   (c)    Domestic fowl of the order of Gallinaceous birds (fowl-like birds
that are not chickens) and the order Anseriformes (water fowl):
      (1)   Every owner or keeper of domestic fowl other than chickens shall
obtain a license issued by the city pursuant to §
90.078.
      (2)   Roosters are prohibited.
   (d)   It is considered a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to
keep and maintain (other than the care and treatment of injured or abandoned
birds and animals by people licensed for that purpose) or to sell native fur
bearers, bears, mountain lions, bobcats, lynx, panthers, endangered species,
exotic animals, or venomous snakes.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the keeping of
(Felis catus) the domestic cat, (Mustela putorius furo) the European polecat
otherwise known as the ferret, or (Canis familiaris) the domestic dog, as long
as all provisions of ordinance are followed.
   (f)    It shall be unlawful for livestock to be kept within the city limits,
except that such livestock may be kept on property that is classified as AG,
Agricultural District under the zoning ordinance of the city of Sioux Falls.
This section shall not apply to livestock kept as a part of any research,
educational institution, stockyard, or temporarily exhibited.
   (g)   Slaughter of animals is prohibited. This prohibition shall not include
slaughter as part of any research, educational instruction, stockyard, or
slaughterhouse.
   (h)   This section shall not apply to any circus or menagerie property
licensed by the city or to the Great Plains Zoo.
(1992 Code, § 7-8) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 22-80, passed 3-31-1980;
Ord. 122-95, passed 9-18-1995; Ord. 16-13, passed 4-2-2013; Ord. 90-17, passed
9-19-2017) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.009 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   No person shall create or maintain any condition or operate any
equipment or keep any animal, fowl, pet or insect under his or her jurisdiction
in a way that the condition or operation causes or is likely to cause the
transmission of diseases from animals or insects to man.
   (b)   The Great Plains Zoo shall not be governed by this chapter.
   (c)   No owner, keeper, caretaker or attendant of an animal shall allow an
animal to defecate on public or private property other than his or her own. If
the animal does defecate upon public or private property, the owner, keeper,
caretaker or attendant must immediately and thoroughly clean the fecal matter
from the property.
   (d)   Anyone walking an animal on public or private property other than his
or her own must carry with him or her visible means of cleaning up any fecal
matter left by the animal. Animals used in parades or involved in law
enforcement are exempt from this section.
(1992 Code, § 7-9) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 121-95, passed 9-18-1995)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.010 ABANDONING OF ANIMAL.
   No person shall abandon an animal in the city. Authorized trap-neuter-return
in accordance with this chapter is not abandoning an animal.
(1992 Code, § 7-10) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 106-24, passed 12-17-
2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.011 ENFORCEMENT.
   The animal control officer is authorized to enforce all the provisions of
this chapter as well as §§
95.013 through
95.015, inclusive, and §
95.032 for any prohibitions related to animals and may issue citations for
violations of any section or may issue warning tickets requiring correction of
a violation.
(1992 Code, § 7-11) (Ord. 101-80, passed 10-27-1980; Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-
2017) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.012 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH WARNING TICKET.
   It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the
provisions or requirements of a warning ticket lawfully issued under this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-12) (Ord. 101-80, passed 10-27-1980) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.013 TRAPPING OF ANIMALS.
   Without permission of the chief of police, no person shall set, allow to be
set, or use any trap for the purpose of catching any animal, which trap could
injure or kill any animal, except rodent traps in the interior of a building,
and except by persons employed by or agents of the chief of police or city
parks department for purposes of the city’s health and welfare.
(1992 Code, § 7-13) (Ord. 68-84, passed 4-16-1984; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-
2007) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.014 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hunt game in the city. GAME means any wild bird or animal
hunted for sport or for use as food. HUNT means to pursue game while in
possession of a firearm or weapon for sport, food or to kill. This section does
not apply to peace officers or city animal control officers in the discharge of
their official duties, or to persons who are authorized by the chief of police
and have been issued a special access permit by the state department of game,
fish and parks for a specific area being hunted.
(1992 Code, § 7-14) (Ord. 32-91, passed 4-1-1991; Ord. 67-10, passed 8-16-2010)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.015 NUMBER OF PETS LIMITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to have or to keep more than four domestic
pets over the age of six months, except birds and fish, on any lot or premises
in the city, unless the person residing on or in the lot or premises has a
valid kennel conditional use permit issued by the city. The animal shelters,
veterinarian offices and retail pet stores are exempt from the provisions of
this section.
(1992 Code, § 7-15) (Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.016 DEER FEEDING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person being the owner or occupant of any parcel of real property
within the corporate limits of the city shall place thereon, or allow to remain
thereon, any unnatural food source, nor shall any person place such unnatural
food source upon the real property of another or upon any public property. It
shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution hereunder that the unnatural
food source was placed not less than five feet above the ground and was not
accessible to deer, or that the unnatural food source was placed in good faith
for the purpose of feeding domestic livestock or pets by or at the request of a
person owning or having responsibility for the domestic livestock or pets, or
that the unnatural food source was placed in good faith for a purpose other
than attracting deer and that the attraction of deer is only an incidental
result.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any act by a
governmental agency or to any employee or authorized agent thereof in the
course of his or her employment or agency. Specifically, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the baiting of deer by authorized
government agents in furtherance of an approved plan to reduce deer population
or in furtherance of an approved plan to entice deer out of the urban
environment into a less urban and more natural environment.
(Ord. 80-14, passed 11-4-2014) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.017 EXEMPTION FOR POLICE DOGS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any federal, state, or
local law enforcement agency or dog used by or belonging to such agency,
provided that such dog shall be vaccinated for rabies as required by this
chapter, and a dog's handler shall have proof of such vaccination for display
as may be required. Also, at any time such dog is off leash or otherwise at
large, it shall be under the control of or in the performance of functions or
duties for a law enforcement officer or handler acting on behalf of a law
enforcement agency.
(Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017)
§ 90.018 COMMUNITY CAT INITIATIVE.
   (a)   A community cat that has undergone the process of trap-neuter-return
and was trapped or received by a local shelter or animal control shall be
returned by the community cat caregiver to the location where the cat was
trapped unless veterinary care is necessary; exhibits symptoms of rabies; is
declared a restricted or vicious animal pursuant to §§
90.003 or
90.003.1; the community cat caregiver fails to pick up the eartipped cat within
a reasonable period of time; or the location of where the community cat was
trapped is unknown.
   (b)   A community cat caregiver, who is approved by the Sioux Falls Area
Humane Society, is empowered to reclaim impounded community cats without proof
of ownership.
   (c)   Any community cat that has undergone the process of trap-neuter-return
shall be permanently identified by injecting an identification microchip into
the animal using standard veterinarian procedures and practices.
(Ord. 106-24, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 90.019 SIOUX FALLS AREA HUMANE SOCIETY APPROVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN without
first being approved by the Sioux Falls Area Humane Society as a community cat
caregiver.
(Ord. 106-24, passed 12-17-2024)
RABIES CONTROL
§ 90.030 COOPERATION OF JOINT AGENCIES.
   The chief of police shall cooperate with the state department of health, the
state livestock sanitary board, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service,
the United States Public Health Service, the United States Department of
Agriculture, state and local veterinary associations, and any other appropriate
city, county, state or federal agency to reduce rabies in wildlife and domestic
animals. The chief of police or health authority may institute those additional
measures for the control of rabies as may be deemed necessary by the board of
health and the city council.
(1992 Code, § 7-20) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 90.031 VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies, held as a
domestic pet in the city, six months of age or older, is hereby required to be
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian or other qualified person
designated by the board of health. Any rabies vaccination that is not
administered by a licensed veterinarian or other qualified person designated by
the board of health shall not be recognized as the required vaccination.
Vaccination against rabies shall be given at those intervals as designated by
the board of health by resolution.
   (b)   Any owner acquiring a dog, cat or other animal by purchase, gift,
birth or otherwise shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies within one
month following acquisition or when the animal reaches the age of six months.
(1992 Code, § 7-21) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 90.032 IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   Any impounded animal shall not be released by the animal control officer to
any person until the animal has been vaccinated against rabies, provided,
however, no animal so impounded shall be vaccinated if the owner can present a
certificate of a current vaccination.
(1992 Code, § 7-22) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.033 IMPOUNDING FOR OBSERVATION.
   (a)   When any person owning or harboring a dog, cat or other animal has
been notified that the animal has bitten or attacked any person, the owner must
within 24 hours place the animal under the care and observation of the animal
control officer or a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than ten
days. However, if the owner has a current rabies vaccination for the animal,
the animal control officer may, if the officer feels the facilities are
adequate and if the owner is a responsible person, quarantine the animal on the
owner’s premises. In this case, the owner must sign a statement and understand
the responsibility and assume the liability that is involved with the
quarantine of an animal that has bitten. The quarantined animal must at all
times be available for inspection during the quarantine.
   (b)   At the end of the ten-day observation period, the animal shall be
examined by the animal control officer and, if cleared, may be reclaimed by the
owner and the owner must pay the expense incurred incident thereto.
   (c)   Any animal impounded or placed for observation, showing active signs
of rabies, suspected of having rabies or known to have been exposed to rabies
shall be confined under competent observation for a time as may be deemed
necessary to determine a diagnosis.
   (d)   Any animal that has bitten or attacked that cannot be captured may be
destroyed in a manner that the head is not damaged and can be submitted for a
rabies examination to a laboratory.
   (e)   Any animal that has bitten any person may be euthanized by order of
the chief of police or a physician or a veterinarian from the board of health
unless proof of a current rabies vaccination effected not less than 30 days
prior to the bite is provided within 24 hours of the bite. Any animal that has
bitten any person may be euthanized by order of the chief of police with the
advice of the health authority if, based on sound medical judgments, a greater
risk to human life exists by not so doing. In making a determination, the chief
of police and health authority shall take into consideration the following
factors:
      (1)   The history of the animal including the possibility of its exposure
to rabies;
      (2)   The vaccination record of the animal;
      (3)   The health of the animal;
      (4)   The nature, location and seriousness of the bite;
      (5)   The circumstances surrounding the bite including whether or not the
bite was provoked; and
      (6)   The tolerance of the person bitten to the vaccines used for
treatment.
   (f)   The city shall, in the case of an animal bite, follow the procedures
stated in the current Compendium of Animal Rabies Control published by the
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc., and endorsed
by the Center for Disease Control.
(1992 Code, § 7-24) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 7-78, passed 1-30-1978;
Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 90.034 KEEPING RABID ANIMALS.
   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal infected with rabies or
any animal known to have come in contact with an animal known to have been
infected with rabies unless the animal has current rabies shots. In that case
the procedure stated in the current Compendium of Animal Rabies Control shall
be followed.
(1992 Code, § 7-25) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.035 REPORT OF SUSPECTED CASE; GENERALLY.
   Any person who shall suspect that any animal in the city is infected with
rabies shall report the animal to the animal control officer, describing the
animal and giving the name and address of the owner if known.
(1992 Code, § 7-26) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.036 REPORT OF SUSPECTED CASE; VETERINARIANS.
   Veterinarians within the city receiving information or reports of suspected
rabies in wild animals or domestic animals shall report the information to the
animal control officer.
(1992 Code, § 7-27) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.037 REPORT OF SUSPECTED CASE; PHYSICIANS.
   Physicians within the city, immediately upon treatment of any person bitten
by an animal, shall report the information to the animal control officer.
(1992 Code, § 7-28) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.038 DESTRUCTION OF RABID ANIMALS.
   Any animal displaying symptoms or characteristics of rabies may be destroyed
by the animal control officer or a veterinarian upon authorization of the chief
of police.
(1992 Code, § 7-29) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 90.039 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.
   Whenever the health authority shall have determined that there is danger of
the existence or spread of rabies in the city, he or she shall make the facts
known to the mayor in writing. The mayor, upon receipt of the facts, may, by
proclamation in the interest of public safety and general welfare of the
citizenry, order all animals muzzled when off the premises of the owner. Forty-
eight hours after the publication of the proclamation, all animals found off
the premises of the owner unmuzzled shall be seized and impounded or may be
immediately destroyed if all reasonable efforts to seize the animals fail. All
animals seized and impounded shall be held for observation for ten days, and if
cleared by a licensed veterinarian, may be claimed by the owner and the owner
must pay the expenses incidental thereto. Any animal not claimed may be
disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-30) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
IMPOUNDING
§ 90.050 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to carry out and enforce
all the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-41) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.051 INTERFERENCE WITH PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES.
   No person shall hinder, delay, or obstruct the animal control officer, his
or her assistant, or any law enforcement officer while in performance of any
duty of his or her office or when engaged in capturing, securing, or impounding
any animal.
(1992 Code, § 7-42) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 90-17, passed 9-19-2017)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.052 ANIMAL SHELTER.
   The animal control officer shall establish an animal shelter in some
convenient location which shall be sanitary, heated, ventilated and lighted.
The hours of operation shall be posted on the main entrance. The animal control
officer shall establish emergency service to properly enforce the regulations
set forth in this chapter, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
(1992 Code, § 7-43) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 90.053 AUTHORITY.
   Any animal control officer or police officer may impound any animal found
within the city in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-44) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007)
§ 90.054 COSTS.
   (a)   Any animal held or impounded shall be released to the owner thereof
upon payment of the daily boarding cost of $8 per day, any veterinarian
services rendered and the impoundment fee as set out below:
 
First violation                                          $30
Second violation within a 12-month period                $50
Third and subsequent violations within a 12-month period $75
 
   (b)   The daily boarding costs, veterinary services and impoundment fee are
in addition to any penalties which may be imposed for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 7-45) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 123-95, passed 9-18-
1995; Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 90.055 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this subchapter,
if his or her identity and location can be obtained by reasonable means, shall
be notified within 24 hours that his or her animal has been impounded.
(1992 Code, § 7-46) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.056 REDEMPTION BY PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER.
   If the owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this subchapter
shall fail to redeem the animal, after the impoundment period, any other person
may, upon complying with the provisions of this subchapter, redeem the animal
from the animal shelter and be the lawful owner thereof.
(1992 Code, § 7-47) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980)
§ 90.057 DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   (a)   If an impounded animal is wearing a license or other means of
identification, the animal shall be confined at the shelter for a period of
five days, excluding Sundays and holidays.
   (b)   If an impounded animal is not wearing a license or other means of
identification, the animal will be impounded for no more than three days,
excluding Sundays and holidays. The chief animal control officer or a designee
may dispose of animals impounded under this subchapter after the impoundment
period by any humane means.
(1992 Code, § 7-48) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980)
§ 90.058 IMPOUNDING BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   An animal control officer shall not receive any animal into the animal
shelter from any person unless the person shall leave his or her full name and
place of residence, which shall be registered in a proper book kept by the
animal control officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false
information or statement concerning the owner, keeper or harborer of any animal
or concerning any animal brought into the animal control shelter or impounded
therein.
(1992 Code, § 7-49) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.059 RECORDS GENERALLY.
   The animal control officer shall keep accurate records of all animals
received at the shelter and released including the date and from whom received,
the description of the animal and the name and address of the person receiving
the animal. He or she shall also keep an accurate count and description of
animals destroyed.
(1992 Code, § 7-50) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.060 RECORD OF BITES.
   The animal control officer shall keep an accurate record of all animal
bites.
(1992 Code, § 7-51) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
§ 90.061 INJURED ANIMALS.
   (a)   If an animal without identification is suffering, injured or otherwise
diseased and the owner cannot be found, it will be the duty of the animal
control officer to determine if that animal for humane reasons, due to the
extent of the injury and/or the suffering, shall be destroyed. The city and
animal control officer shall not be held liable in any way for this humane act.
   (b)   If an injured animal with a license tag issued by the city is picked
up, it shall, if possible, be delivered to a licensed veterinarian. All
expenses of the city and the veterinarian charges and fees must be paid by the
animal owner.
(1992 Code, § 7-52) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-
2011)
§ 90.062 EACH VIOLATION A SEPARATE OFFENSE.
   Each violation of each section of this subchapter is a separate offense.
(1992 Code, § 7-53) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975)
LICENSING
§ 90.075 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Each owner or keeper of a dog or cat of the age of six months or older
shall, within 30 days of the acquisition of the animal or within 30 days of the
time the animal becomes six months old, cause the animal to be licensed by the
city. All applications for license certificates must be accompanied by a rabies
immunization certificate and the appropriate fee. The term of the license is as
follows:
 
Cats 1 year or 3 years from date of issue depending on the rabies vaccination
     given
Dogs 1 year or 3 years from date of issue depending on the rabies vaccination
     given
 
   (b)   The license shall take effect when issued. Each owner or keeper of a
dog or cat must make application to renew the license prior to the expiration
of the license, accompanied by a fee as set forth in §
90.077.
   (c)   This section shall be effective January 1, 2012.
(1992 Code, § 7-60) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 7-78, passed 1-30-1978;
Ord. 59-07, passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 90.076 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE CERTIFICATE AND TAG.
   (a)   Every owner or keeper of a dog or cat within the city must submit an
application for an animal license for each animal owned that is six months old
or older and a renewal application on or before the expiration of the previous
animal license.
   (b)   A certificate and tag shall be issued upon receipt of proper
application or license. The certificate shall at all times be in the possession
of the owner. The tag shall be affixed to the licensed animal in a secure
manner at all times. The owner shall contact animal control to report change of
ownership, loss or death of a licensed animal.
   (c)   If a tag or certificate is lost, either may be replaced for a fee of
$1 by applying to the records section of the city police department.
(1992 Code, § 7-61) (Ord. 7-78, passed 1-30-1978; Ord. 78-86, passed 8-25-1986;
Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 90.077 LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE.
   (a)   (1)   The fee for an original and a renewal dog or cat license shall
be as follows:
Dogs Cats
Dogs                Cats
Neutered male dog   Neutered male cat
1 year $5           1 year $5
3 year $15          3 year $15
Spayed female dog   Spayed female cat
1 year $5           1 year $5
3 year $15          3 year $15
Unneutered male dog Unneutered male cat
1 year $25          1 year $25
3 year $75          3 year $75
Unspayed female dog Unspayed female cat
1 year $25          1 year $25
3 year $75          3 year $75
 
      (2)   These rates shall be effective January 1, 2012.
   (b)   The fee for designated licensing agencies shall be as follows. Places
of business designated by the city police department to make available animal
licenses to owners as a convenience may charge up to $5 for each new or renewal
license in order to defray the costs of providing the licensing service and the
record keeping expense associated therewith.
(1992 Code, § 7-62) (Ord. 21-75, passed 4-7-1975; Ord. 7-78, passed 1-30-1978;
Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980; Ord. 109-90, passed 11-26-1990; Ord. 59-07, passed
4-16-2007; Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 90.078 LICENSING OF ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (a)   Notwithstanding §
90.075, each owner or keeper of animals or fowl described in §
90.008(b) that wants to own or keep more than the maximum allotted animals or
fowl must make application for a license certificate on a form prescribed by
the city within 30 days of the acquisition of such animals or fowl.
   (b)   Each owner or keeper of fowl described in §
90.008(c) must make application for a license certificate on a form prescribed
by the city within 30 days of the acquisition of such fowl.
   (c)   All applications for license certificates must be accompanied by a
written consent of 100% of the owners of all real estate situated within 100
feet of the applicant's real estate. Upon the city's approval of the required
application, the city shall issue a license certificate. The license shall
specify any restrictions, limitations, conditions, or prohibitions required by
the city. The license may be modified or revoked by the city for failure to
conform to such restrictions, limitations, conditions, or prohibitions
including, but not limited to, noise and odor.
   (d)   The term of the license shall be three years from the date of
issuance.
(Ord. 16-13, passed 4-2-2013)
GUARD DOGS
§ 90.090 PERMITS; REQUIRED.
   It is conducive to the promotion of the health and general welfare of the
inhabitants of this city to require permits for guard dogs used on commercial
property, and to establish regulations for the proper and safe use of guard
dogs in protecting commercial property.
(1992 Code, § 7-80) (Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980)
§ 90.091 PERMITS; APPLICATION; TRANSFERS; INSPECTIONS; FEE; TAGS; TERM.
   (a)   A guard dog permit must be obtained for each commercial property where
guard dogs are to be used. Procedures for permit application, for inspection of
guard dog facilities and for issuance of dog identification tags will be
established by the animal control officer, or his or her designee. Permits for
both permanent and temporary locations may be transferred to a new location
operated by the same business firm during the license year. However, the
transfers shall not be effective until the animal control officer, or his or
her designee, has inspected and approved the required facilities at the new
location, and the information required in this section for permit applications
has been recorded. Five working days’ advance notification shall be required by
the animal control officer, or his or her designee, for permit transfers.
   (b)   Permit applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   The business name, address and telephone number of the commercial
property where guard dogs are to be used;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the handler who can be
reached at any time of the day or night;
      (3)   The number of dogs to be used and a general description of their
use;
      (4)   The location where the dogs are to be housed; and
      (5)   Any other information that the animal control officer, or his or
her designee, deems necessary by rule and regulation. Permit holders shall
notify the animal control officer, or his or her designee, if any information
recorded as part of the permit application is changed during the course of the
period for which the permit is issued.
   (c)   The animal control officer, or his or her designee, shall inspect the
facilities where the guard dog is to be used and housed when the guard dog
permit is applied for and when it is renewed.
   (d)   If the inspection reveals that the requirements of this subchapter are
met, a fee of $100 shall be paid and a guard dog license and special guard dog
identification tags for the approved commercial property shall be issued by the
animal control officer, or his or her designee. The permit shall be displayed
at the approved commercial property and an identification tag shall be affixed
to the collar of each dog used. Holders of the guard dog permit shall be exempt
from the license fee requirements of §
90.075 for their guard dogs.
   (e)   The guard dog permit shall be valid for the period of one year and
must be renewed annually within 30 days after the renewal date. The renewal fee
shall be $100.
   (f)   The guard dog permit must be obtained prior to housing or utilizing
guard dogs at the commercial property.
(1992 Code, § 7-81) (Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980)
§ 90.092 HOUSING, FACILITIES AND HANDLING.
   Whenever there is a guard dog on the premises, the standards of this section
in addition to the other requirements of this subchapter shall be complied
with.
   (a)   Housing must have anti-escape fences completely surrounding it or be
an anti-escape building sufficient to house guard dogs.
   (b)   All gates and entrances to the area where the guard dog is housed,
used or trained must be kept locked when the handler is not present.
   (c)   Where guard dogs are used outside buildings, the area must be enclosed
by at least a six-foot chain-link fence or other enclosure of equal security,
to which anti-escape devices have been added. The adequacy of the fencing shall
be subject to the approval of the animal control officer or his or her
designee.
   (d)   In order to control noise, the animal control officer, or his or her
designee, may require a sight barrier which breaks the dog’s line of sight.
   (e)   In buildings where the guard dogs are used, exterior glass must be
adequate to prevent the dog from jumping through it. Additional protective
measures may be required by the animal control officer, or his or her designee.
   (f)   The building and yard in which a guard dog is used must be posted with
guard dog signs, approved by the animal control officer, or his or her
designee, that shall not be more than 200 feet apart, and shall be at all
property corners and at every entrance into the area.
   (g)   For guard dogs either transported or utilized in vehicles, adequate
measures must be taken to prevent the public from accidental contact with the
guard dog.
   (h)   A handler is required to be physically present while guard dogs are
being utilized at temporary sites which do not comply with this subchapter.
   (i)   All guard dogs will be leashed and muzzled when on a public street.
(1992 Code, § 7-82) (Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980)
§ 90.093 EXCLUSIONS.
   Dogs that are used as private guard dogs on the property of their owner’s
private residence shall be excluded from the provisions of this subchapter
unless the residence is located on premises utilized for commercial purposes.
(1992 Code, § 7-83) (Ord. 12-80, passed 3-3-1980)
HOBBY BEEKEEPING
§ 90.100 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall establish or maintain any hive or colony unless the
city issues a permit allowing the applicant to establish and maintain a colony
on the property he/she owns. Exception: If the principal use of the property is
a college, university, post high school, middle school, high school, or zoo,
the application shall require authorization from the property owner or
authorized agent. The permit will be valid for one year.
   (b)   Permits are nontransferable and do not run with the land.
   (c)   By signing the permit, the applicant acknowledges that he or she shall
defend and indemnify the city against any and all claims arising from his/her
hobby beekeeping. If the principal use of the property is a college,
university, post high school, middle school, high school, or zoo, the property
owner or authorized agent shall also acknowledge that they shall defend and
indemnify the city against any and all claims arising from the hobby beekeeping
on the subject property.
   (d)   The fee for the initial permit shall be $50. For each subsequent
permit, there shall be a $25 renewal fee. The Sioux Falls Zoo and Aquarium
shall not be required to pay for the initial permit or any subsequent permit.
   (e)   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant has registered his or
her apiaries with the state as required by SDCL ch. 38-18, and complies with
the applicable provisions of this code and SDCL ch. 38-18.
   (f)   The applicant must show proof of having successfully completed a
beekeeping class not more than one year prior to the initial application. The
beekeeping class must be from an organization approved by the city.
   (g)   Hobby beekeeping shall only be allowed on property that meets one of
the following zoning classifications:
      (1)   A DD or AD1 form in any eligible zoning district.
      (2)   A OPEN2 form in the REC or S-2 Institutional Campus zoning
district.
      (3)   A OPEN3 form in the AG zoning district.
      (4)   A BCF1 or BCF3 form in the S-1 General Institutional or S-
2 Institutional Campus zoning district whose principal use is a college,
university, post high school, middle school, or high school.
      (5)   A property in the S-2 Institutional Campus zoning district with no
form established that is located within the boundaries of a school campus.
   (h)   If the property is a DD or AD1 form, the initial application must be
accompanied by a written consent of 80% of property owners of all property
situated within 100 feet of the applicant's property, and 100% of all property
owners abutting the applicant's property. In all other forms, the hive(s) must
be located at least 100 feet from any property not owned or controlled by the
applicant or authorized agent.
   (i)   Beekeepers are subject to annual inspections conducted by animal
control.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019; Ord. 99-22, passed 8-16-2022; Ord. 73-24,
passed 8-20-2024)
§ 90.101 STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.
   (a)   Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames, which
must be kept in sound and usable conditions.
   (b)   Each beekeeper must ensure that a convenient source of water is
available within ten feet of each colony at all times that the colonies remain
active outside the hive, and the water shall be maintained so as not to become
stagnant.
   (c)   Each beekeeper must ensure that no wax comb or other material that
might encourage robbing by other honeybees is left upon the grounds of the
apiary lot. Such materials once removed from the site shall be handled and
stored in sealed containers, or placed within a building or other vermin-proof
container.
   (d)   Each beekeeper shall maintain his or her beekeeping equipment in good
condition, including keeping the hives painted if they have been painted but
are peeling or flaking, and securing unused equipment from weather, potential
theft or vandalism, and occupancy by swarms.
   (e)   A sign provided by animal control shall be displayed on a place
clearly visible from the closest sidewalk, circulation area, parking lot or
right- of-way to the hive(s), or in a location designated by the city. Said
sign must warn the public as follows: BEE HIVE ON THIS PROPERTY. REPORT
VIOLATIONS TO SIOUX FALLS ANIMAL CONTROL (605-367-7000). Hives located at the
Sioux Falls Zoo and Aquarium are exempt from this requirement.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019; Ord. 99-22, passed 8-16-2022; Ord. 73-24,
passed 8-20-2024)
§ 90.102 LOCATION OF HIVES.
   (a)   Hive placement. The beehive(s) must not be located in the front yard
of a property whose primary form is a DD or AD1 form. The beehives must be no
closer than 25 feet to an occupied building on another lot. The hives shall be
located at least ten feet from a property line. All hives shall be placed
appropriately on the lot so as to inhibit access to the hive from adjacent
properties and to prevent interference with the movements of persons on
adjacent properties, sidewalks, circulation areas, parking lots, or in the
public right-of-way. The front of the hive shall face away from the closest
property line, sidewalk, and/or right-of-way, whichever is closest.
   (b)   Flyway barriers. A flyway barrier must be installed in front of the
hive if the hive is located less than 25 feet from the property line in the DD
and AD1 forms. A flyway barrier is not required if the hive is located at least
ten feet off the ground.
   (c)   Security fence. Except in the OPEN3, DD and AD1 forms, a hive must be
enclosed by a fence at least ten feet from the front of the hive and four feet
from the other sides in accordance to Chapter 160. This requirement may be
waived by Animal Control. A fence is not required if the hive(s) is located at
least ten feet off the ground.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019; Ord. 99-22, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 90.103 COLONY DENSITIES.
   There must be no more than two colonies of honeybees for every 2,000 square
feet of property area, with no more than four colonies on any one property.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 90.104 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Notwithstanding compliance with the requirements of this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person to keep any colony or colonies in such a
manner, or of such a disposition, as to cause any unhealthy condition,
interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others,
interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property
of others, or as to create a nuisance to others.
   (b)   If a colony is found to be a nuisance, the hobby beekeeper must
relocate or destroy all hives within 30 days of the final nuisance
determination.
   (c)   All hives and colonies shall be subject to inspection by the city upon
request.
§ 90.105 COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Beekeepers shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws,
including but not limited to those provisions found within SDCL ch. 38-18, and
all other relevant city ordinances, including zoning regulations.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 90.106 PENALTIES.
   The city may utilize any action available under the law to address
violations of this subchapter, including but not limited to the following:
   (a)   The city may seek to enjoin any person or operation who violates the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (b)   In the case of a violation of this subchapter, the city may elect to
destroy a hive and/or relocate a colony, if there is an immediate need to
protect public safety, or may require the hobby beekeeper to destroy or
relocate a colony. Such circumstances shall be present when there is: (1) a
colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping; (2) a
dangerous swarm of honeybees that poses an immediate risk to the safety of
humans; or (3) a colony residing in a standard or man-made hive which, by
virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper.
   (c)   The permit may be modified or revoked by the city for failure to
comply with the applicable provisions of city ordinance, state law, rule or
regulation, or for other good cause. The licensee may appeal through the
procedures established by the administrative code provisions of this code
according to the procedure set forth in §
30.040.
   (d)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the general penalty
under §
10.999.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 90.107 SPRAYING.
   The city is not liable for any damage to honeybees, hives, colonies, or
hobby beekeeping operations resulting from the city's use of spray to kill
pests or weeds on public rights-of-way or public property.
(Ord. 106-19, passed 11-5-2019)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Duties of Fire Chief
   
91.002   Powers of Fire Chief
Fire Prevention Code
   
91.015   Adopted
   
91.016   Amendments, additions and deletions by the city to the 2021
International Fire Code
   
91.017   Conflicts
   
91.018   Plan review
   
91.019   Notification to fire department of inoperable fire safety equipment
   
91.020   Public use of fireworks
   
91.021   Filing of reports
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Airports, see
ch. 99
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Burning of structures, see §
151.047
   Driving over fire hose, see §
76.084
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
   Emergency management, see
ch. 33
   Emergency vehicle warning device, see §
73.003
   Fire department inspection for licenses issued by other departments, see §
110.035
   Fire escapes and chimneys, see §
160.514
   Fire protection in manufactured home parks, see §
152.070
   Firefighters’ pension fund, see §§
39.305 through
39.344
   Fires in parks, see §
95.022
   Fireworks in parks, see §
95.012
   Following fire apparatus, see §
76.083
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Historic preservation, see
ch. 151
   Licenses issued by fire department, see §
110.033
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Notification of fumigation by holder of pest control license, see §
120.002
   One-time permits issued by fire department, see §
110.034
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Traffic code, see title VII
   Utilities, see
ch. 50
   Utility service to comply with technical regulations, see §
50.004
   Water rates for fire protection, see §
51.051
Statutory reference:
   Fire protection and safety regulations, see SDCL ch. 9-33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The fire chief shall have command of the fire department.
(1992 Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
§ 91.002 POWERS OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The fire chief may prescribe limits in the vicinity of a fire within which
no person except those admitted by the chief or his or her subordinate shall be
permitted to come. The chief or officer having charge at any fire may call upon
any person present to assist the firefighters in their duties.
(1992 Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 91.015 ADOPTED.
   The 2021 International Fire Code, published by the International Code
Council together with Appendixes B and D, Index and Amendments, and additions
thereto as provided in this subchapter is hereby adopted, and shall constitute
the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Sioux Falls, SD. A printed copy of such
2021 International Fire Code, with Appendixes B and D, Index and Amendments,
and additions thereto shall be filed with the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 16-15) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002; Ord. 19-04, passed 3-1-
2004; Ord. 33-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 21-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 100-12,
passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 21-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 43-19, passed 4-9-2019;
Ord. 143-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 91.016 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS BY THE CITY TO THE 2021
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Fire Code
adopted in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or deleted as follows. All
other sections and subsections of the 2021 International Fire Code shall remain
the same.
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the city
of Sioux Falls, SD, hereinafter referred to as "this fire code."
   101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted. The following appendices are adopted:
      Appendix B Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings
      Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads
   102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be the most recent edition published of those that are listed
in Chapter 80 and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and
further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. Where differences occur
between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall apply.
   103.1 General. The division of fire prevention is established. The city
shall designate a person as the code official. The function of the division
shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of the provisions
of this fire code.
   103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   103.3 Inspectors and fire protection engineer. For the purpose of this fire
code, "code official" also means inspectors and fire protection engineer
assigned to the fire prevention division for the purpose of fire code
enforcement.
   103.4 Liability. The chief and other individuals charged by the chief with
the control of extinguishment of any fire, the enforcement of this code or any
other official duties, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge
of their duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for any damage
that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of
any act or omission in the discharge of their duties. Any suit brought against
the chief or such individuals because of such an act or omission performed in
the enforcement of any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws or
ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code or enforced by the
code enforcement agency, such chief or employee shall be afforded all the
protection provided by the city's insurance pool, immunities, and any
immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming any
such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any
permits or certificates issued under this code.
   104.1 General. The city may enforce the provisions of this fire code, render
interpretations of this fire code, and adopt policies, procedures, rules, and
regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies, procedures, rules, and regulations shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this fire code and shall not have the
effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this fire code.
   104.11.3 Systems and devices. No person shall render a system or device
inoperative during an emergency unless by direction of the fire chief or fire
department official in charge of the incident. No person shall tamper with,
interfere with, or impair in any way any public or private fire alarm system or
apparatus, wire or equipment of any kind belonging to, or in any way connected
to the fire department or the fire alarm system.
   Section 105 Licenses and Permits
   105.1 General. Operational licenses, construction permits, and event permits
shall be in accordance with Section 105.
   105.1.1 Licenses and permits required. Any property owner or authorized
agent who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or
   modify systems and equipment which is regulated by this code, or cause any
such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and
obtain the required license or permit.
   105.1.2 Types of operational licenses, construction permits, and event
permits. There shall be three types of licenses/permits as follows:
      1.   Operational license. An operational license allows the applicant to
conduct an operation or a business for which a license is required by Section
105.5 until renewed or revoked.
      2.   Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant to
install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by
Section 105.6.
      3.   Event permit. An event permit allows an applicant to install or use
a product or device, or conduct an operation for which a permit is required by
Section 105.8.
   105.2 Application. Application for licenses or permits required by this fire
code shall be made to the code official in such form and detail as prescribed
by the code official. Applications for licenses or permits shall be accompanied
by such plans as prescribed by the code official.
   105.2.1 Refusal to issue licenses or permits. If the application for a
license or permit describes a use that does not conform to the requirements of
this fire code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the code official shall
not issue a license or permit, but shall return the application to the
applicant with the refusal to issue such license or permit. Such refusal shall,
when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal.
   105.2.2 Inspection authorized. Before a new operational license or permit is
approved, the code official is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles,
buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces, or areas to be used to determine
compliance with this fire code or any operational constraints required.
   105.2.3 Time limitation of application. An application for an operational
license or permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have
been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless such application has
been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that the
code official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there is reasonable cause.
   105.2.4 Action on application. The code official shall examine or cause to
be examined applications for operational licenses and permits and amendments
thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the
construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws,
the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work or operation
conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable
thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable.
   105.2.5 Fee schedule. Fees for licenses and permits shall be as set forth by
city ordinance.
   105.2.6 Increased fee. When work for which a permit is required by this fire
code is commenced without obtaining the required permit, the fee as specified
in Section 105.2.5 shall be doubled. The payment of such increased fee shall
not relieve any person or firm from completely complying with all applicable
sections of this fire code for said work.
   105.3 Conditions of an operational license or permit. An operational license
or permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store, or handle materials;
or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property;
or to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities; or to
install or modify any fire protection system or equipment or any other
construction, equipment installation, or modification in accordance with the
provisions of this fire code where a permit is required by Sections 105.5,
105.6, [and] 105.8. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to
violate, cancel, or set aside any of the provisions of this fire code or other
applicable regulations or laws of the jurisdiction.
   105.3.1 Expiration. A construction permit shall remain in effect until
reissued, renewed, or revoked or for such a period of time as specified in the
permit. Construction permits shall automatically become invalid unless the work
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of
180 days after the time the work is commenced. Before such work recommences, a
new permit shall be first obtained and the fee, if any, shall be one-half the
amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been
made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work, and
provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy,
or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued.
   105.3.5 Posting the license or permit. Issued licenses and permits shall be
kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily
available for inspection by the code official.
   105.3.6 Compliance with code. The issuance or granting of a license or
permit shall not be construed to be a license or permit for, or an approval of,
any violation of any of the provisions of this fire code or of any other
ordinance of the jurisdiction. Licenses or permits presuming to give authority
to violate or cancel the provisions of this fire code or other ordinances of
the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a license or permit based
on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the code official
from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other
data. Any addition to or alteration of approved construction documents shall be
approved in advance by the code official, as evidenced by the issuance of a new
or amended permit.
   105.3.7 Information on the license or permit. The code official shall issue
all licenses or permits required by this fire code on an approved form
furnished for that purpose. The license or permit shall contain a general
description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other
information required by the code official. Issued licenses or permits shall
bear the signature of the code official.
   105.3.9 Electronic submittal of documents. Submittal of "as built"
construction documents for building fire protection systems shall be provided
within ten days of final acceptance testing. Documents shall be in an approved
electronic format.
   105.4 Revocation. The code official may revoke an operational license or
permit issued under the provisions of this fire code when it is found by
inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction
documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited
to, any one of the following:
      1.   The license or permit is used for a location or establishment other
than that for which it was issued.
      2.   The license or permit is used for a condition or activity other than
that listed in the permit.
      3.   Conditions and limitations set forth in the license or permit have
been violated.
      4.   There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the
material fact in the application for the license or permit or plans submitted
or a condition of the permit.
      5.   The license or permit is used by a different person or firm than the
name for which it was issued.
      6.   The licensee or permittee failed, refused, or neglected to comply
with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this
fire code within the time provided therein.
      7.   The license or permit was issued in error or in violation of an
ordinance, regulation, or this fire code.
   105.5 Required operational licenses and/or permits. The code official may
issue operational licenses and/or permits for the operations set forth in
Sections 105.5.1 through 105.5.52.
   105.5.1 Additive manufacturing. No license or permit required.
   105.5.2 Aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products, and plastic
aerosol 3 products. No license or permit required.
   105.5.3 Amusement buildings. No license or permit required.
   105.5.4 Aviation facilities. An operational license is required to use a
Group H or Group S occupancy for aircraft servicing or repair and aircraft
fuel-servicing vehicles.
   105.5.5 Carnivals and fairs. No license or permit required.
   105.5.6 Cellulose nitrate film. No license or permit required.
   105.5.7 Combustible dust-producing operations. An operational license is
required to operate a grain elevator, flour starch mill, feed mill, or a plant
pulverizing aluminum, coal, cocoa, magnesium, spices or sugar, or other
operations producing combustible dusts as defined in Chapter 2 of this fire
code.
   105.5.8 Combustible fibers. No license or permit required.
   105.5.9 Compressed gases. No license or permit required. Associated Table
105.5.9 shall be utilized where referenced for application of other provisions
of this fire code.
   105.5.10 Covered and open mall buildings. No license or permit required.
   105.5.11 Cryogenic fluids. No license or permit required. Associated Table
105.5.11 shall be utilized where referenced for application of other provisions
of this fire code.
   105.5.12 Cutting and welding. No license or permit required.
   105.5.13 Dry cleaning plants. An operational license is required to engage
in the business of dry cleaning or to change to a more hazardous cleaning
solvent used in existing dry cleaning equipment.
   105.5.14 Energy storage solutions. Not adopted by the city.
   105.5.15 Exhibits and trade shows. No license or permit required.
   105.5.16 Explosives. An operational license is required for the manufacture,
storage, handling, sale, or use of any quantity of explosives, explosive
material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special effects within the scope of Chapter
56 of this fire code.
      Exception: Storage in Group R-3 occupancies of smokeless propellant,
black powder, and small arms primers for personal use, not for resale, and in
accordance with Section 5606.
   105.5.17 Fire hydrants and valves. No license or permit required.
   105.5.18 Flammable and combustible liquids. An operational license is
required:
      1.   To use or operate a pipeline for the transportation within
facilities of flammable or combustible liquids. This requirement shall not
apply to the off-site transportation in pipelines regulated by the Department
of Transportation (DOT) nor does it apply to piping systems.
      2.   To store, handle, or use Class I liquids in excess of 5 gallons (19
L) in a building or in excess of 10 gallons (37.9 L) outside of a building,
except that a permit is not required for the following:
         2.1.   The storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a
motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant, or mobile heating
plant, unless such storage, in the opinion of the code official, would cause an
unsafe condition.
         2.2.   The storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes, or similar
flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting, or
similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.
      3.   To store, handle, or use Class II or Class IIIA liquids in excess of
25 gallons (95 L) in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a
building, except for fuel oil used in connection with oil-burning equipment.
      4.   To store, handle, or use Class IIIB liquids in tanks or portable
tanks for fueling motor vehicles at motor fuel-dispensing facilities or where
connected to fuel-burning equipment.
         Exception: Fuel oil and used motor oil used for space heating or water
heating.
      5.   To remove Class I or II liquids from an underground storage tank
used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved,
stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes.
      6.   To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals,
wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries, and similar
facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed,
transported, store, dispensed, or used.
      7.   To place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) an
underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible
liquid tank.
      8.   To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible
liquid tank to a material that poses a greater hazard than that for which the
tank was designed and constructed.
      9.   To manufacture, process, blend, or refine flammable or combustible
liquids.
      10.   To engage in the dispensing of liquid fuels into the fuel tanks of
motor vehicles at commercial, industrial, governmental, or manufacturing
establishments.
      11.   To utilize a site for the dispensing of liquid fuels from tank
vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, marine craft, and other special
equipment at commercial, industrial, governmental, or manufacturing
establishments.
   105.5.19 Floor finishing. An operational permit is required for floor
finishing or surfacing operations exceeding 350 square feet (33 m2) using Class
I or Class II liquids.
   105.5.20 Fruit and crop ripening. An operational license is required to
operate a fruit- or crop-ripening facility or conduct a fruit-ripening process
using ethylene gas.
   105.5.21 Fumigation and insecticidal fogging. No license or permit required.
   105.5.22 Hazardous materials. No license or permit required.
   105.5.23 HPM facilities. No license or permit required.
   105.5.24 High-piled storage. No license or permit required.
   105.5.25 Hot work operations. No license or permit required.
   105.5.26 Industrial ovens. No license or permit required.
   105.5.27 Lumber yards and woodworking plants. An operational license is
required for the storage or processing of lumber exceeding 100,000 board feet
(8,333 ft3) (236 m3).
   105.5.28 Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings.
No license or permit required.
   105.5.29 LP gas. An operational license is required for:
      1.   Storage and use of LP gas.
         Exception: A permit is not required for individual containers with a
500-gallon (1,893 L) water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3.
      2.   Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP gas.
   105.5.30 Magnesium. No license or permit required.
   105.5.31 Miscellaneous combustible storage. No license or permit required.
   105.5.32 Mobile food preparation vehicles. A permit is required for mobile
food preparation vehicles with appliances that produce smoke or grease laden
vapors.
   105.5.33 Motor fuel-dispensing facilities. An operational license is
required for the operation of automotive, marine, and fleet motor fuel-
dispensing facilities.
   105.5.34 Open burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or
maintaining of an open fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or
other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit
shall be adhered to.
      Exception: Recreational fires.
   105.5.35 Open flames and torches. No license or permit required.
   105.5.36 Open flames and candles. See Section 105.8 for permit requirements.
   105.5.37 Organic coatings. No license or permit required.
   105.5.38 Outdoor places of assembly. No license or permit required.
   105.5.39 Places of assembly. No license or permit required.
   105.5.40 Plant extraction systems. An operational license is required to use
plant extraction systems.
   105.5.41 Private fire hydrants. No license or permit required.
   105.5.42 Pyrotechnic special effects material. See Section 105.8.1 for
permit requirements.
   105.5.43 Pyroxylin plastics. No license or permit required.
   105.5.44 Refrigeration equipment. No license or permit required.
   105.5.45 Repair garages and motor fuel dispensing facilities. An operational
license is required for operation of repair garages.
   105.5.46 Rooftop heliports. An operational license is required for the
operation of a rooftop heliport.
   105.5.47 Spraying or dipping. An operational license is required to conduct
a spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or combustible liquids or
the application of combustible powders regulated by Chapter 24 of this fire
code.
   105.5.48 Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts. No license or permit
required.
   105.5.49 Temporary membrane structures and tents. See Section 105.6.24 for
construction permit requirements.
   105.5.50 Tire-rebuilding plants. An operational license is required for the
operation and maintenance of a tire-rebuilding plant.
   105.5.51 Waste handling. No license or permit required.
   105.5.52 Wood products. No license or permit required.
   105.6 Required construction permits. The fire code official is authorized to
issue construction permits for work as set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through
105.630.24.
   105.6.1 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. A construction permit is
required for installation of or modification to an automatic fire-
extinguishing system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this fire code
is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
   105.6.2 Compressed gases. No license or permit required.
   105.6.3 Cryogenic fluids. No license or permit required.
   105.6.4 Emergency responder radio coverage system. A construction permit is
required for installation or modification to emergency responder radio coverage
systems and related equipment. Maintenance performed in accordance with this
code is not considered to be a modification and does not require a construction
permit.
   105.6.5 Energy storage systems. No license or permit required.
   105.6.6 Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. A
construction permit is required for installation of or modification to fire
alarm and detection systems and related equipment. Maintenance performed in
accordance with this fire code is not considered a modification and does not
require a permit.
   105.6.7 Fire pumps and related equipment. A construction permit is required
for installation of or modification to fire pumps and related fuel tanks,
jockey pumps, controllers, and generators. Maintenance performed in accordance
with this fire code is not considered a modification and does not require a
permit.
   105.6.8 Flammable and combustible liquids. A construction permit is
required:
      1.   To install, repair, or modify a pipeline for the transportation of
flammable or combustible liquids.
      2.   To install, construct, or alter tank vehicles, equipment, tanks,
plants, terminals, wells, fuel-dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries,
and similar facilities where flammable and combustible liquids are produced,
processed, transported, stored, dispensed, or used.
      3.   To install, alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of
service, or otherwise dispose of a flammable or combustible liquid tank.
   105.6.9 Fuel cell power systems. No license or permit required.
   105.6.10 Gas detection systems. No license or permit required.
   105.6.11 Gates and barricades across fire apparatus access roads. No license
or permit required.
   105.6.12 Hazardous materials. No license or permit required.
   105.6.13 High piled combustible storage. No license or permit required.
   105.6.14 Industrial ovens. No license or permit required.
   105.6.15 LP gas. A construction permit is required for installation of or
modification to an LP gas system.
   105.6.16 Motor vehicle repair rooms and booths. No license or permit
required.
   105.6.17 Plant extraction systems. No license or permit required.
   105.6.18 Private fire hydrants. No license or permit required.
   105.6.19 Smoke control or smoke exhaust system. No license or permit
required.
   105.6.20 Solar photovoltaic power systems. A construction permit is required
to install or modify solar photovoltaic power systems. Maintenance performed in
accordance with this code is not considered to be a modification and does not
require a permit.
   105.6.21 Special event structure. Temporary structures must be permitted
following Section 105.6.24.
   105.6.22 Spraying or dipping. A construction permit is required to install
or modify a spray room, dip tank, or booth.
   105.6.23 Standpipe systems. A construction permit is required for the
installation, modification, or removal from service of a standpipe system.
Maintenance performed in accordance with this fire code is not considered a
modification and does not require a permit.
   105.6.24 Temporary membrane structures and tents. A construction permit is
required to erect an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent
having an area in excess of 1,000 square feet (92 m2). The owner of the
temporary membrane structure, or their representative, shall acquire the
construction permit prior to the placement of the structure.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
      2.   Funeral tents and curtains or extensions attached thereto, when used
for funeral services.
      3.   Tents and awnings open on all sides which comply with all of the
following:
         3.1   Individual tents shall have a maximum size of 1,000 square feet
(92 m2).
         3.2   The aggregate area of multiple canopies placed side by side
without a fire break clearance of not less than 12 feet (3,658 mm) shall not
exceed 1,000 square feet (92 m2) total.
         3.3   A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm) to structures and
other tents shall be maintained.
   105.8 Required event permits.
   105.8.1 Pyrotechnic displays and open flame demonstrations. An event permit
is required for all pyrotechnic displays or for open flames during a theatrical
or concert performance.
   105.8.2 Blasting. A permit is required for blasting or use of explosives
during a construction project.
   105.8.3 Hazardous stand-by. An event permit is required for hazardous
situations stand-by. These include events where use of flammable liquids or
gases are used as part of an entertainment or performance, where crowds are
anticipated to or beyond occupancy limits, or major events where public safety
is of concern or exiting may be compromised (see ARTICLE 9, ASSEMBLY AND
SPECIAL EVENTS).
   111.1 General. For the purpose of appeal of items relating to interpretation
and application of this fire code, the Board of Appeals as established in the
Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD,
Chapter 150 shall be utilized. The decision of the board or the hearing
examiner is subject to judicial review as provided by law.
   112.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this fire
code or fails to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, installs,
alters, repairs, or does work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate used
under provisions of this fire code, is guilty of a city ordinance violation,
punishable by the general penalty provisions of
Chapter 40 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   113.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine
as specified in the general penalty provisions of
Chapter 40 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be
used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be
operated within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
   308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Not adopted by the city.
   312.2 Posts. Guard posts shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
      1.   Constructed of steel not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter and
concrete filled.
      2.   Spaced not more than 4 feet (1,219 mm) between posts on center.
      3.   Set not less than 4 feet (1,219 mm) deep in a concrete footing of
not less than a 15-inch (381 mm) diameter.
      4.   Set with the top of the posts not less than 3 feet (914 mm)
aboveground.
      5.   Located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the protected object.
   315.2 Permit required (Not adopted by the city).
   315.3.3 Equipment rooms. Combustible material shall not be stored in boiler
rooms, mechanical rooms, or electrical equipment rooms.
      Exception:
      Fire sprinkler-protected mechanical rooms meeting all of the following:
      1.   Containing no fuel-fired or electric heat-producing equipment other
than that used exclusively for conditioning the mechanical space.
      2.   Containing entirely ducted (nonplenum) air-handling equipment.
      3.   Storage shall be kept a minimum of 4 feet (1,219 mm) away, or per
manufacturer's specified clearance, where greater, from all portions of
equipment and shall not hinder ready access to equipment servicing areas or
controls.
      4.   Required clearances shall be permanently marked in an approved
manner upon the floor surrounding the equipment such as to make prohibited
storage areas plainly visible.
   505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided
with approved address numbers or letters. Each character shall be not less than
4 inches (102 mm) in height and not less than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) in width. They
shall be installed on a contrasting background and be plainly visible from the
street or road fronting the property. When required by the code official,
address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to
facilitate emergency response. Multibuilding campus/complex developments
addressed on private or public streets shall be provided with signage at the
entrance to the campus/complex indicative of the address ranges within. Where
access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed
from the public way, a monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall be
used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
   901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out
of service, the fire department and the code official shall be notified
immediately and, where required by the code official, the building shall either
be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left
unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection system has been returned
to service. Practices requiring fire protection (i.e., spray finishing, mixing/
dispensing of flammable and hazardous liquids, etc.) shall be discontinued
until fire protection system(s) are restored.
   Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with at least one approved
means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to
perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires.
   Fire watch associated with an impaired fire protection system, and all costs
associated with providing fire watch, shall be the responsibility of the
property owner or responsible party. Where an owner or responsible party cannot
be contacted or is unable to respond to the location within 60 minutes of
notification, Sioux Falls Fire Rescue will provide personnel for fire watch
duties until such time owner/responsible party contact and/or response occurs.
Fire watch provided by Sioux Falls Fire Rescue shall be billable to the owner
or responsible party at $75.00 per fire inspector, unless otherwise stipulated
in this subsection. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the owner or
responsible party will be billed at the rate of a Step 12 fire inspector.
Billing shall be on a per-hour basis, or fraction thereof, with a 2-hour
minimum charge.
   902.1 Definitions. The following words and terms in addition to the defined
terms already incorporated by reference in Section
91.016 of this code, shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used
elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein.
   [F] 903.2.6 Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings with a Group I fire area.
      Exceptions:
      1.   An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 is required in Group I-1 Condition 1 or 2 facilities.
      2.   An automatic sprinkler system is not required where Group I-4 day
care facilities are at the level of exit discharge and where every room where
care is provided has not fewer than one exterior exit door.
      3.   In buildings where Group I-4 day care is provided on levels other
than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be installed on the entire floor where care is
provided, all floors between the level of care and the level of exit discharge,
and all floors below the level of exit discharge other than areas classified as
an open parking garage.
   [F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R-
1 and R-4 fire areas and Group R-2 multifamily residences having six or more
dwelling units.
   [F] 903.2.10 Group S-2 parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings classified as parking garages where any of the
following conditions exist:
      1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage in accordance
with Section 406.6 exceeds 12,000 square feet (1,115 m2).
      2.   Where the enclosed parking garage in accordance with Section 406.6
is located beneath other groups.
         Exception: Enclosed parking garages located between Group R-
3 occupancies.
   [F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be required
in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an
approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that
will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall
not be omitted from a room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated
construction, or contains electrical equipment.
      1.   A room where the application of water, or flame and water,
constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.
      2.   A room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because
of the nature of the contents, where approved by the fire code official. Such
rooms shall be separated from the remainder of the building by fire barrier
walls and horizontal assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than two hours.
      3.   Generator and transformer rooms separated from the remainder of the
building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-
resistance rating of not less than two hours.
      4.   Rooms or areas that are of noncombustible construction with wholly
noncombustible contents.
      5.   Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces.
      6.   Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms, and control spaces
associated with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with
Section 3008.
   [F] 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in
Group R occupancies shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance
with NFPA 13R where the Group R occupancy meets all of the following
conditions:
      1.   Four stories or fewer above grade plane.
      2.   The floor level of the highest story is 60 feet (18,288 mm) or less
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
      3.   The floor level of the lowest story is 60 feet (18,288 mm) or less
below the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with
Sections 510.2 and 510.4 shall be measured from grade plane.
   [F] 903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems
shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1.
The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with
the requirements of this section and the plumbing code. For connections to
public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire
protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure
fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as
approved by the fire code official.
   [F] 904.13.2 System interconnection. The actuation of the fire suppression
system shall automatically shut down the fuel and/or electrical power supply to
the cooking equipment and all electrical receptacles located beneath the hood.
The fuel and electrical supply reset shall be manual.
   907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of
1,000 or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an
occupant load of 1,000 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency
voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Group A-3 occupancies used for religious worship.
      2.   Where approved, the prerecorded announcement is allowed to be
manually deactivated for a period of time, not to exceed three minutes, for the
sole purpose of allowing a live voice announcement from an approved, constantly
attended location.
   907.2.2 Group B. A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group B
occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
      1.   The combined Group B occupant load of all floors is 500 or more.
      2.   The Group B occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below
the lowest level of exit discharge.
      3.   The fire area contains a Group B ambulatory health care facility.
      4.   The Group B fire area has more than two occupied levels.
      Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.
   907.2.6.2 Group I-2. An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed
in corridors in Group I-2, Condition 1 facilities and spaces permitted to be
open to the corridors by Section 407.2. The system shall be activated in
accordance with Section 907.4. Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies shall be
equipped with an automatic smoke detection system as required in Section 407.
      Exceptions: Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke
compartments that contain patient sleeping rooms where patient sleeping units
are provided with smoke detectors that comply with UL 268. Such detectors shall
provide a visual display on the corridor side of each patient sleeping unit and
an audible and visual alarm at the nursing station attending each unit. Smoke
detectors installed as part of an intelligent or addressable fire alarm system
capable of annunciation of room origin at a constantly attended location shall
be acceptable.
   907.2.8.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An automatic smoke detection
system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with 907.5
shall be installed throughout all interior corridors serving sleeping units and
at the top of each enclosed stairwell.
      Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in
buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where
each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to
an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit.
   [F] 907.2.8.4 Heat detectors. Heat detectors shall be installed in each
attic subdivision or similar areas not otherwise covered by an automatic fire-
extinguishing system.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Heat detection is not required in areas protected by an automatic
fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or in
addition to the requirements of Section 903.3.1.2.
      2.   Heat detectors are not required where the fire partitions extend
into and through the interstitial attic space.
   907.2.9 Group R-2. Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be installed in
Group R-2 occupancies, as required in Sections 907.2.9.1 through 907.2.9.5.
   907.2.9.1 Manual and automatic fire alarm system. A manual and automatic
fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance
with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-2 where any of the following
conditions apply:
      1.   Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located three or more stories
above the lowest level of exit discharge;
      2.   Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located more than one story
below the highest level of exit discharge of exits serving the dwelling unit or
sleeping unit; or
      3.   The building contains more than 16 dwelling units or sleeping units;
or
      4.   The building contains four or more dwelling units or sleeping units
above the level of exit discharge.
      Exceptions: 
      1.   A fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two
stories in height where all dwelling units or sleeping units and contiguous
attic and crawl spaces are separated from each other and public or common areas
by at least 1-hour fire partitions and each dwelling unit or sleeping unit has
an exit directly to a public way, exit court, or yard.
      2.   Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and the occupant notification appliances
will automatically activate throughout the notification zones upon a sprinkler
water flow.
      3.   A fire alarm system is not required in buildings that do not have
interior corridors serving dwelling units and are protected by an approved
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2, provided that dwelling units either have a means of egress door
opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to the exits or
are served by open-ended corridors designed in accordance with Section 1026.6,
Exception 4.
   907.2.9.4 Smoke Detectors. Automatic smoke detection shall be provided in
each enclosed stairway and all exit corridors.
   907.2.9.5 Heat detectors. Automatic heat detectors shall be installed in
each attic subdivision, any attached garages and similar areas not otherwise
covered by an automatic fire-extinguishing system.
      Exceptions:  
      1.   Automatic heat detection is not required in areas protected by an
automatic fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or in addition to the requirements of Section 903.3.1.2.
      2.   Automatic heat detectors are not required where the fire partitions
extend into and through the interstitial attic space.
   [F]907.2.12.1.2 Duct smoke detection. Duct smoke detectors complying with
Section 907.3.1 shall be located as follows:
      1.   In the main return air and exhaust air plenum of each air-
conditioning system having a capacity greater than 2,000 cubic feet per minute
(cfm) (0.94 m3/s). Such detectors shall be located in a serviceable area
downstream of the last duct inlet.
      2.   At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more
stories from a return air duct or plenum of an air-conditioning system. In
Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, a smoke detector is allowed to be used in each
return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4 m3/s) and serving not
more than 10 air-inlet openings.
      3.   Duct smoke detectors installed more than 10 feet above a finished
floor, above a ceiling, or on a rooftop shall be installed with remote test/
indicators in an approved location below and in proximity to the unit served.
   [F] 907.5 Occupant notification. Occupant notification by fire alarms shall
be in accordance with Sections 907.5.1 through 907.5.2.3.3. Occupant
notification by smoke alarms in Group R-1 occupancies shall comply with Section
907.5.2.1.3.2.
   [F] 907.5.2.1.3 Audible signal frequency in Group R-1 sleeping rooms.
Audible signal frequency in Group R-1 occupancies shall be in accordance with
Sections 907.5.2.1.3.1 and 907.5.2.1.3.2.
   [F] 907.5.2.1.3.1 Fire alarm system signal. In sleeping rooms of Group R-
1 occupancies, the audible alarm activated by a fire alarm system shall be a
520-Hz low-frequency signal complying with NFPA 72.
   [F] 907.5.2.1.3.2 Smoke alarm signal in sleeping rooms. In sleeping rooms of
Group R-1 occupancies that are required by Section 907.2.8 or 907.2.9 to have a
fire alarm system, the audible alarm signal activated by single- or multiple-
station smoke alarms in the dwelling unit or sleeping unit shall be a 520-Hz
signal complying with NFPA 72. Where a sleeping room smoke alarm is unable to
produce a 520-Hz signal, the 520-Hz alarm signal shall be provided by a listed
notification appliance or a smoke detector with an integral 520-Hz sounder.
   912.2.1 Visible location. Fire department connections shall be located on
the street side of buildings, fully visible, and recognizable from the street
or nearest point of fire department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by
the code official. A weather-rated horn/strobe connected to the fire detection
or sprinkler system shall be located not lower than 8 feet above the fire
department connection and within 10 feet horizontally of the connection. The
weather-rated horn/strobe must be visible from the fire lane or street.
   1005.3.1 Stairways. The capacity, in inches (mm), of means of egress
stairways shall be calculated by multiplying the occupant load served by such
stairway by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) per
occupant. Where stairways serve more than one story, only the occupant load of
each story considered individually shall be used in calculating the required
capacity of the stairways serving that story.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Facilities with smoke-protected assembly seating shall be permitted
to use the capacity factors in Table 1029.6.2 indicated for stepped aisles for
exit access or exit stairways where the entire path for means of egress from
the seating to the exit discharge is provided with a smoke control system
complying with Section 909.
      2.   Facilities with outdoor smoke-protected assembly seating shall be
permitted to the capacity factors in Section 1029.6.3 indicated for stepped
aisles for exit access or exit stairways where the entire path for means of
egress from the seating to the exit discharge is open to the outdoors.
   1005.3.2 Other egress components. The capacity, in inches (mm), of means of
egress components other than stairways shall be calculated by multiplying the
occupant load served by such component by a means of egress capacity factor of
0.2 inch (5.1 mm) per occupant.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Facilities with smoke-protected assembly seating shall be permitted
to use the capacity factors in Table 1029.6.2 indicated for level or ramped
aisles for means of egress components other than stairways where the entire
path for means of egress from the seating to the exit discharge is provided
with a smoke control system complying with Section 909.
      2.   Facilities with outdoor smoke-protected assembly seating shall be
permitted to the capacity factors in Section 1029.6.3 indicated for level or
ramped aisles for means of egress components other than stairways where the
entire path for means of egress from the seating to the exit discharge is open
to the outdoors.
   1007.1.1 Two exits or exit access doorways. Where two exits, exit access
doorways, exit access stairways or ramps, or any combination thereof, including
the exit access, are required from any portion of the exit access, they shall
be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the length of the
maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area to be served
measured in a straight line between them. Interlocking or scissor stairways
shall be counted as one exit stairway.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Where interior exit stairways or ramps are interconnected by a 1-
hour fire- resistance-rated corridor conforming to the requirements of Section
1020, the required exit separation shall be measured along the shortest direct
line of travel within the corridor.
      2.   Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the separation
distance shall be not less than one-third of the length of the maximum overall
diagonal dimension of the area served.
   1007.1.2 Three or more exits or exit access doorways. Where access to three
or more exits is required, not less than two exit or exit access doorways
including the exit access shall be arranged in accordance with the provisions
of Section 1007.1.1. Additional required exit or exit access doorways shall be
arranged a reasonable distance apart so that if one becomes blocked, the others
will be available.
   1010.1.7 Thresholds. Thresholds at doorways shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19.1
mm) in height above the finished floor or landing for sliding doors serving
dwelling units or 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) above the finished floor or landing for
other doors. Raised thresholds and floor level changes greater than 1/4 inch
(6.4 mm) at doorways shall be beveled with a slope not greater than one unit
vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope).
      Exceptions:
      1.   In occupancy Group R-2 or R-3, threshold heights for sliding and
side hinged exterior doors shall be permitted to be up to 8 inches (203 mm) in
height if all of the following apply:
         1.1.   The door is not part of the required means of egress.
         1.2.   The door is not part of an accessible route as required by
Chapter 11.
         1.3.   The door is not part of an accessible unit, Type A unit or Type
B unit.
   1010.1.9.4 Locks and latches. Locks and latches shall be permitted to
prevent operation of doors where any of the following exist:
      1.   Places of detention or restraint.
      2.   In buildings in occupancy Group A having an occupant load of 300 or
less, Groups B, F, M, and S, in places of religious worship, and exterior decks
allowed to have one exit where the exit access from the deck extends back into
the building, the main door or doors are permitted to be equipped with key-
operated locking devices from the egress side provided:
         2.1.   The locking device is readily distinguishable as locked.
         2.2.   A readily visible durable sign is posted on the egress side on
or adjacent to the door stating: THIS DOOR TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN THIS SPACE
IS OCCUPIED. The sign shall be in letters 1 inch (25 mm) high on a contrasting
background.
         2.3.   The use of the key-operated locking device is revocable by the
building official for due cause.
      3.   Where egress doors are used in pairs, approved automatic flush bolts
shall be permitted to be used, provided that the door leaf having the automatic
flush bolts does not have a doorknob or surface-mounted hardware.
      4.   Doors from individual dwelling or sleeping units of Group R
occupancies having an occupant load of 10 or less are permitted to be equipped
with a night latch, dead bolt, or security chain, provided such devices are
openable from the inside without the use of a key or tool.
      5.   Fire doors after the minimum elevated temperature has disabled the
unlatching mechanism in accordance with listed fire door test procedures.
   1011.5.2 Riser height and tread depth. Stair riser heights shall be 7 inches
(178 mm) maximum and 4 inches (102 mm) minimum. The riser height shall be
measured vertically between the nosings of adjacent treads. Rectangular tread
depths shall be 11 inches (279 mm) minimum measured horizontally between the
vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads and at a right
angle to the tread's nosing. Winder treads shall have a minimum tread depth of
11 inches (279 mm) between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of
adjacent treads at the intersections with the walk line and a minimum tread
depth of 10 inches (254 mm) within the clear width of the stair.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Spiral stairways in accordance with Section 1011.10.
      2.   Stairways connecting stepped aisles to cross aisles or concourses
shall be permitted to use the riser/tread dimension in Section 1029.14.2.
      3.   In Group R-3 occupancies, within dwelling units in Group R-
2 occupancies, and in Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group R-
3 occupancy or accessory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies,
the maximum riser height shall be 8 inches (203 mm), the minimum tread depth
shall be 10 inches (254 mm), the minimum winder tread depth at the walk line
shall be 10 inches (254 mm), and the minimum winder tread depth shall be 6
inches (152 mm). A nosing projection not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm), but not
more than 1 1/4 inches (32 mm), shall be provided on stairways with solid
risers where the tread depth is less than 11 inches (279 mm).
      4.   See Section 403.1 of the International Existing Building Code for
the replacement of existing stairways.
      5.   In Group I-3 facilities, stairways providing access to guard towers,
observation stations, and control rooms not more than 250 square feet (23 m2)
in area shall be permitted to have a maximum riser height of 8 inches (203 mm)
and a minimum tread depth of 9 inches (229 mm).
   1015.4 Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings that
allow passage of a sphere 5 inches (127 mm) in diameter from the walking
surface to the required guard height.
      Exceptions:
      1.   The triangular openings at the open sides of a stair, formed by the
riser, tread, and bottom rail shall not allow passage of a sphere 6 inches (152
mm) in diameter.
      2.   At elevated walking surfaces for access to and use of electrical,
mechanical, or plumbing systems or equipment, guards shall not have openings
that allow passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.
      3.   In areas that are not open to the public within occupancies in Group
B, I-3, F, H, M, or S, and for alternating tread devices and ships ladders,
guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 21 inches (533
mm) in diameter.
      4.   In assembly seating areas, guards required at the end of aisles in
accordance with Section 1029.16.4 shall not have openings that allow passage of
a sphere 5 inches (127 mm) in diameter up to a height of 26 inches (660 mm).
From a height of 26 inches (660 mm) to 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the adjacent
walking surfaces, guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere
8 inches (203 mm) in diameter.
      5.   Within individual dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2 and
R-3 occupancies, guards on the open sides of stairs shall not have openings
that allow passage of a sphere 5 inches (127 mm) in diameter.
   1020.4 Dead ends. Where more than one exit or exit access doorway is
required, the exit access shall be arranged such that there are no dead ends in
corridors more than 20 feet (6,096 mm) in length.
      Exceptions:
      1.   In Group I-3 of Condition 2, 3, or 4, the dead end in a corridor
shall not exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm).
      2.   In occupancies in Groups B, E, F, M, R-1, R-2, S, and U, where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the length of the dead-end corridors shall
not exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm).
      3.   A dead-end corridor shall not be limited in length where the length
of the dead-end corridor is less than 2.5 times the least width of the dead-end
corridor.
   1023.8 Discharge identification. An interior exit stairway and ramp shall
not continue below its level of exit discharge unless an approved barrier or a
directional exit sign is provided at the level of exit discharge to prevent
persons from unintentionally continuing into levels below. Directional exit
signs shall be provided as specified in Section 1013.
   1031.3.2 Minimum size. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have a
minimum net clear opening of 5.0 square feet (0.46 m2).
   1031.3.3 Maximum height from floor. Emergency escape and rescue openings
shall have the bottom of the clear opening not greater than 48 inches (1,219
mm) measured from the floor.
   1031.5.2 Ladders or steps. Window wells with a vertical depth of more than
48 inches (1,219 mm) shall be equipped with an approved permanently affixed
ladder or steps. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of at least 12
inches (305 mm), shall project at least 3 inches (76 mm) from the wall, and
shall be spaced not more than 18 inches (457 mm) on center (o.c.) vertically
for the full height of the window well. The ladder or steps shall not encroach
into the required dimensions of the window well by more than 6 inches (152 mm).
The ladder or steps shall not be obstructed by the emergency escape and rescue
opening. Ladders or steps required by this section are exempt from the stairway
requirements of Section 1011.
   1104.25 Egress path markings. Not adopted by the city.
   2001.3 Operational license. For operational licenses to operate aircraft-
refueling vehicles, application of flammable or combustible finishes, and hot
work, see Section 105.5.
   2101.2 Operational license required. An operational license shall be
required as set forth in Section 105.5.
   2201.2 Operational license. An operational license shall be required for
combustible dust- producing operations as set forth in Section 105.5.
   2301.2 Operational license. An operational license shall be required as set
forth in Section 105.5.
   2304.3 Unattended self-service stations. Unattended self-service stations
shall be limited to private or corporate fleet vehicle service stations and
shall comply with Sections 2304.3.1 through 2304.3.5.
   2306.2 Method of storage. Approved methods of storage for Class I, II, and
IIIA liquid fuels at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance
with Sections 2306.2.1 through 2306.2.5. Double-walled underground storage
tanks shall be used.
      Exception: Above-ground storage tanks shall be acceptable as an
alternative where engineering analysis has determined the use of underground
storage tanks impractical or not feasible. Where approved, above-ground storage
tanks shall be listed in accordance with UL 2085.
   2306.2.1.1 Inventory control for underground tanks. Accurate daily inventory
records shall be maintained and reconciled on underground fuel storage tanks
for indication of possible leakage from tanks and piping. The records shall be
kept at the premises or made available for inspection by the fire code official
within 24 hours of a written or verbal request and shall include records for
each product showing daily reconciliation between sales, use, receipts, and
inventory on hand. Where there is more than one system consisting of tanks
serving separate pumps or dispensers for a product, the reconciliation shall be
ascertained separately for each tank system. A consistent or accidental loss of
product shall be immediately reported to the fire code official.
   2307.4 Location of dispensing operations and equipment. In addition to the
requirements of Section 2306.7, the point of transfer for dispensing operations
shall be 25 feet (7,620 mm) or more from buildings having combustible exterior
wall surfaces, buildings having noncombustible exterior wall surfaces that are
not part of a one-hour fire-resistance-rated assembly, or buildings having
combustible overhangs, lot lines of property which could be built on, public
streets, or sidewalks and railroads and at least 10 feet (3,048 mm) from
driveways and buildings having noncombustible exterior wall surfaces that are
part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly having a rating of one-hour or more.
      Exception: The point of transfer for dispensing operations need not be
separated from canopies that are constructed in accordance with the
International Building Code and which provide weather protection for the
dispensing equipment.
      LP gas containers shall be located in accordance with Chapter 61. LP gas
storage and dispensing equipment shall be located outdoors and in accordance
with Section 2306.7. Like dispensing systems shall be separated by a minimum of
20 feet and a minimum of 50 feet from systems dispensing other liquid or
gaseous motor vehicle fuels.
   2308.3 Location of dispensing operations and equipment. Compression,
storage, and dispensing equipment shall be located aboveground, outside. Like
dispensing systems shall be separated by a minimum of 20 feet and a minimum of
50 feet from systems dispensing other liquid or gaseous motor vehicle fuels.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Compression, storage, or dispensing equipment shall be allowed in
buildings of noncombustible construction, as set forth in the International
Building Code, which are unenclosed for three quarters or more of the
perimeter.
      2.   Compression, storage, and dispensing equipment shall be allowed
indoors in accordance with Chapter 53.
   2309.3.1 Location of dispensing operations and equipment. Generation,
compression, storage, and dispensing equipment shall be located in accordance
with Sections 2309.3.1.1 through 2309.3.1.5.5. Like dispensing systems shall be
separated by a minimum of 20 feet and a minimum of 50 feet from systems
dispensing other liquid or gaseous motor vehicle fuels.
   2401.3 Operational licenses. Operational licenses shall be required as set
forth in Sections 105.5 and 105.6.
   2501.2 Operational license. An operational license shall be required as set
forth in Section 105.5.
   2801.2 Operational license. An operational license shall be required as set
forth in Section 105.5.
   3103.2 Approval required. Tents and membrane structures having an area in
excess of 1,000 square feet (93 m2) shall not be erected, operated, or
maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from
the code official.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
      2.   Tents open on all sides which comply with all of the following:
         2.1.   Individual tents having a maximum size of 1,000 square feet (93
m2).
         2.2.   The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side
without a fire break clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm), not exceeding 1,000
square feet (93m2) total.
         2.3.   A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm) to all structures and
other tents.
   3103.5 Use period. Temporary tents, air- supported, air-inflated, or
tensioned membrane structures shall not be erected for a period of more than
180 days within a 12-month period on a single premise.
   3105.2 Approval. Temporary stage canopies in excess of 1,000 square feet (93
m2) shall not be erected, operated, or maintained for any purpose without first
obtaining approval and a permit from the fire code official.
   3105.5 Required documents. The following documents shall be submitted to the
fire code official for review before a permit is approved:
      1.   Construction documents: Construction documents shall be prepared in
accordance with the International Building Code by a registered design
professional. Construction documents shall include:
         1.1.   A summary sheet showing the building code used, design
criteria, loads, and support reactions.
         1.2.   Detailed construction and installation drawings.
         1.3.   Design calculations.
         1.4.   Operating limits of the structure explicitly outlined by the
registered design professional including environmental conditions and physical
forces.
         1.5.   Effects of additive elements such as video walls, supported
scenery, audio equipment, vertical and horizontal coverings.
         1.6.   Means for adequate stability including specific requirements
for guying and cross-bracing, ground anchors, or ballast for different ground
conditions.
   3106.4.7 Combustible refuse. Combustible refuse shall be kept in
noncombustible containers with tight-fitting or self-closing lids. Combustible
refuse shall be removed from the event site at regular intervals to prevent an
unsafe accumulation within the event site.
   3206.11 Signage. Signage in conformance with Exhibits A, B, or C below shall
be posted indicating the maximum storage height in accordance with the
following:
      1.   In buildings capable of but not used for high-pile storage, signage
shall be posted to indicate storage height to a maximum of 12 feet (6 feet
where high-hazard commodities are stored).
      2.   Buildings designed for high-pile storage shall post signage at the
designed storage height based on engineering analysis considering commodity
classification, storage arrangement, and required fire protection designed
storage height.
   3206.12 Location of signs. Signs shall be mounted at the storage limitation
height, at 50 feet on center intervals on all walls starting 25 feet from any
corner, on columns, and/or on racking at approximate 50-foot intervals. Signs
shall be visibly located and designed in accordance with the following as
determined by commodity classification, storage height, and/or sprinkler design
requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6932.jpg]
   Exhibit 'A': High hazard commodity posting requirement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6934.jpg]
   Exhibit 'B': Class I-IV commodity storage height limitations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6936.jpg]
   Exhibit 'C': Engineered design height limitations.
   3401.2 Operational license required. An operational license shall be
required as set forth in Section 105.5.
   5601.2 Operational license required. An operational license shall be
required as set forth in Section 105.5 and regulated in accordance with this
section.
   5601.2.2 Sale and retail display. No person shall construct a retail display
nor offer for sale explosives, explosive materials, or fireworks within the
city limits of the city of Sioux Falls.
      Exception: Existing locations. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to prohibit any licensed South Dakota fireworks wholesaler in business as of
January 1, 1982, to store or sell at wholesale at the then existing location.
   5701.4 Operational licenses and permits. Operational licenses and permits
shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.5 and 105.6.
   5703.4 Spill control and secondary containment. Where required, rooms,
buildings, or areas used for storage, dispensing, use, mixing, or handling
Class I, II, and IIIA liquids shall be provided with spill control and
secondary containment in accordance with Section 5004.2. Spill control and
secondary containment shall meet the requirements of applicable South Dakota
Administrative Rules.
   5703.6.5 Protection from corrosion and galvanic action. Where subject to
external corrosion, piping, related fluid-handling components, and supports for
both underground and aboveground applications shall be fabricated from
noncorrosive materials and coated or provided with corrosion protection.
Dissimilar metallic parts that promote galvanic action shall not be joined.
Cathodic protection systems shall meet the requirements of applicable South
Dakota Administrative Rules.
   5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill prevention. An approved means or method in accordance
with Section 5704.2.9.7.5 and applicable South Dakota Administrative Rules
shall be provided to prevent the overfill of all Class I, II, and IIIA liquid
storage tanks.
   5704.2.8.3 Secondary containment. Vaults shall be substantially liquid-tight
and there shall be no backfill around the tank or within the vault. Vault
impermeability ratings shall be in accordance with applicable South Dakota
Administrative Rules. The vault floor shall drain to a sump. For
premanufactured vaults, liquid tightness shall be certified as part of the
listing provided by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. For field-
erected vaults, liquid tightness shall be certified in an approved manner.
   5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Tanks storing Class I,
II, and IIIA liquids inside buildings shall be equipped with a device or other
means to prevent overflow into the building including, but not limited to, a
float valve, a preset meter on the fill line, a valve actuated by the weight of
the tank's contents, a low head pump which is incapable of producing overflow,
or a liquid-tight overflow pipe at least one pipe size larger than the fill
pipe and discharging by gravity back to the outside source of liquid or to an
approved location. Aboveground tanks exceeding the exempt amounts shall be
located in a special enclosure as defined in Section 5704.2.9.5.1 or in an H-
2 room as defined in the International Building Code.
   5704.2.9.7.3 Secondary containment. Protected aboveground tanks shall be
provided with secondary containment, drainage control, or diking in accordance
with Section 5704.2 and applicable South Dakota Administrative Rules. A means
shall be provided to establish the integrity of the secondary containment in
accordance with NFPA 30.
   5704.2.9.7.5 Overfill prevention. Protected aboveground tanks shall not be
filled in excess of 95 percent of their capacity. Overfill protection must also
be consistent with applicable South Dakota Administrative Rules.
   5704.2.10 Drainage and diking. The area surrounding a tank or group of tanks
shall be provided with drainage control or shall be diked to prevent accidental
discharge of liquid from endangering adjacent tanks, adjoining property, or
reaching waterways. Diking must also meet the requirements of applicable South
Dakota Administrative Rules.
      Exceptions:
      1.   The code official is authorized to alter or waive these requirements
based on a technical report which demonstrates that such tank or group of tanks
does not constitute a hazard to other tanks, waterways, or adjoining property,
after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions,
nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings on the same or adjacent
property, capacity, and construction of proposed tanks and character of liquids
to be stored, and nature and quantity of private and public fire protection
provided.
      2.   Drainage control and diking is not required for listed secondary
containment tanks.
   5704.2.10.1 Volumetric capacity. The volumetric capacity of the diked area
shall not be less than 110 percent of the greatest amount of liquid that can be
released from the largest tank within the diked area. The capacity of the diked
area enclosing more than one tank shall be calculated by deducting the volume
of the tanks other than the largest tank below the height of the dike.
   5704.2.11 Underground tanks. Underground storage of flammable and
combustible liquids in tanks shall comply with Section 5704.2 and Sections
5704.2.11.1 through 5704.2.11.4.2 and shall be double-walled.
   5704.2.11.2 Depth and cover. Excavation for underground storage tanks shall
be made with due care to avoid undermining of foundations of existing
structures. Underground tanks shall be set on firm foundations and surrounded
with at least 6 inches (152 mm) of noncorrosive inert material, such as clean
sand or in accordance with manufacturer's recommended practice, whichever is
greater.
   5704.2.11.3 Overfill protection and prevention systems. Fill pipes shall be
equipped with a spill container and an overfill prevention system in accordance
with NFPA 30 and applicable South Dakota Administrative Rules.
   5704.2.11.4 Leak prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall
comply with Sections 5704.2.11.4.1 and 5704.2.11.4.2 and applicable South
Dakota Administrative Rules.
   5704.2.11.4.1 Inventory control. Daily inventory records shall be maintained
for underground storage tank systems. Such systems shall be in accordance with
applicable South Dakota Administrative Rules.
   5704.2.11.4.2 Leak detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be
provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the
system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and applicable
South Dakota Administrative Rules.
   5704.2.13.1.2 Out of service for 90 days. Underground tanks not used for a
period of 90 days shall be safeguarded in accordance with all the following or
be removed in accordance with Section 5704.2.14:
      1.   Flammable or combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank.
      2.   All piping, including fill line, gauge opening, vapor return, and
pump connection, shall be capped or plugged and secured from tampering.
      3.   Vent lines shall remain open and be maintained in accordance with
Sections 5704.2.7.3 and 5704.2.7.4.
      4.   Prior to reuse, tanks and piping systems out of service for greater
than 90 days shall be tested for tightness by an approved method.
   5704.2.13.1.4 Tanks abandoned in place. Tanks must be removed from the
ground unless there is documentation by a professional approved by the fire
code official that such removal would be impractical. Tanks abandoned in place
shall be abandoned as follows:
      1.   Flammable and combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank and
connected piping.
      2.   The suction, inlet, gauge, vapor return, and vapor lines shall be
disconnected.
      3.   The tank shall be filled completely with an approved, inert solid
material.
         Exception: Residential heating oil tanks of 1,100 gallons (4,164 L) or
less, provided the fill line is permanently removed to a point below grade to
prevent refilling of the tank.
      4.   Remaining underground piping shall be capped or plugged.
      5.   A record of tank size, location, and date of abandonment shall be
retained.
      6.   All exterior above-grade fill piping shall be permanently removed
when tanks are abandoned or removed.
   6101.2 Operational licenses and permits. Operational licenses and/or permits
shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.5 and 105.6. Distributors shall
not fill an LP gas container for which a permit is required unless a permit for
installation has been issued for that location by the code official.
   D103.6.3 Emergency access route signage. Where temporary emergency access
roads are required, signage shall be posted following Figure D103.6.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6938.jpg]
   Figure D103.6.3
   D103.6.4 Subdivision roadway widths. All subdivision private roadways must
meet 28-foot road width as specified in
Chapter 157 and Engineering Design Standards.
   D107.3 Temporary emergency access roads. Temporary access roads for
emergency response use only shall meet the following:
      1.   A minimum of 6 inches of gravel (or other approved material)
compacted to 95 percent compaction, capable of all-weather travel.
      2.   Roads shall be a minimum of 20 feet unobstructed width.
      3.   Access/entrance to the road may be controlled via a secured chain or
gate at points of entry and at connection to an interior intersecting roadway.
      4.   Fire lane signage, in accordance with IFC Appendix 'D', shall be
posted to prohibit vehicle blockage of access roadway entry/exit points.
      5.   Road maintenance, including grading/scraping to maintain a navigable
surface and required snow removal, shall be performed as needed to ensure
availability at all times. Maintenance shall be the sole responsibility of the
developer.
      6.   Failure to maintain a functional driving surface will require the
temporary access road to be paved in accordance with the requirements of the
City of Sioux Falls Engineering Design Standards. This is not a substitute for
a second permanent approved fire apparatus access road as required by code.
(1992 Code, § 16-15.1) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002; Ord. 19-04, passed 3-1-
2004; Ord. 33-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 21-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 100-12,
passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 50-13, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 21-16, passed 4-5-2016;
Ord. 12-17, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 43-19, passed 4-9-2019; Ord. 143-21, passed
11-16-2021)
§ 91.017 CONFLICTS.
   If there is a conflict between the provisions of the fire code adopted by
this subchapter and applicable provisions of the Revised Ordinances of the
city, state law, rule or regulation, the provisions of the Revised Ordinances
of the city, state law, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling.
(1992 Code, § 16-16) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
§ 91.018 PLAN REVIEW.
   When applicable to the fire prevention code or building code, no person
shall erect, construct, enlarge or improve any building or structure in the
city, or cause the work to be done, without first submitting a complete and
official set of plans to the fire chief or the fire prevention division for
review and approval.
(1992 Code, § 16-23) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
§ 91.019 NOTIFICATION TO FIRE DEPARTMENT OF INOPERABLE FIRE SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   (1)   Persons owning, controlling or otherwise having charge of any
fixed fire extinguishing system, fire warning system or standpipe system shall
notify the fire department at any time the system or portions of the system are
inoperable, taken out of service or being repaired.
      (2)   The fire department shall also be notified when service is
restored.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to make or cause to be made any fire
extinguishing or fire reporting or warning system or any portions or parts
thereof inoperable or incapable of carrying out their intended purpose.
(1992 Code, § 16-28) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
§ 91.020 PUBLIC USE OF FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Public use of fireworks within the city shall be limited to those
specific class 1.4G fireworks having no audible report or projectile or
launching components.
   (b)   Examples of prohibited use fireworks include, but are not limited to,
fire crackers, bottle rockets, roman candles, parachutes and similar devices
intended to propel or project flaming or explosive materials.
   (c)   Fireworks may not be used on any public sidewalk, street or alleyway;
fireworks may not be used on private property without the expressed knowledge
and permission of the property owner.
(1992 Code, § 16-29) (Ord. 33-07, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 91.021 FILING OF REPORTS.
   The fire department shall maintain a suitable system of filing fire reports.
The fire department may charge a reasonable fee for each copy so furnished.
(1992 Code, § 16-31) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Report of certain deaths
   
92.002   Burial grounds
   
92.003   Sanitary inspections
   
92.004   Use of common articles prohibited
   
92.005   Impure drinking water
   
92.006   Ice
   
92.007   Septic tanks
   
92.008   Rendering of animal matter
   
92.009   Swimming pools
   
92.010   Wells
   
92.011   Unsanitary hotel, roominghouse or lodginghouse
   
92.012   Requirements for new installations and replacement of underground and
aboveground storage tank systems
   
92.013   Minimum standards for prevention of certain communicable diseases in
commercial premises
Health Center Governing Board
   
92.025   Created
   
92.026   Composition of board; qualifications of members
   
92.027   Selection, nomination of members
   
92.028   Term of members
   
92.029   Officers
   
92.030   Meetings
   
92.031   Quorum
   
92.032   Minutes, records
   
92.033   Acceptance of county, state or federal funds
   
92.034   General powers and duties
Sioux Falls Board of Health
   
92.045   Created
   
92.046   Composition of board; qualification of members
   
92.047   Selection, nomination of members
   
92.048   Term of members
   
92.049   Officers
   
92.050   Meetings
   
92.051   Quorum
   
92.052   Minutes, records
   
92.053   General powers and duties
   
92.054   Health officer
   
92.055   Administrative and technical staff
   
92.056   Public health laboratory
Nuisances and Offensive Conditions
   
92.070   Prohibited
   
92.071   Illustrative enumeration
   
92.072   Notice to abate; issuance
   
92.073   Notice to abate; noncompliance
   
92.074   Abatement by city; costs levied against premises
   
92.075   Funds for abatement and removal
   
92.076   Abandoned property
   
92.077   Smoke nuisance
   
92.078   Storage of firewood on residential property
   
92.079   Disposition of unclaimed property
   
92.080   Enforcement officers
   
92.081   Responsibility of owner, occupant to maintain premises
Industrial Hygiene
   
92.095   Definitions
   
92.096   Cleanliness and repair of work places
   
92.097   Ventilation of workplaces
   
92.098   Lighting of workplaces
Communicable Diseases
   
92.110   Definitions
   
92.111   Method of reporting
   
92.112   Reportable diseases
   
92.113   Reports of deaths
   
92.114   Notice on premises
   
92.115   Precautions by attendants
   
92.116   Permit to leave quarantined or isolated premises
   
92.117   Laboratory examinations
   
92.118   Method of control of contacts; control of carriers
   
92.119   Communicable diseases in schools
   
92.120   Children in schools
   
92.121   Special rules for tuberculosis
   
92.122   Special rules for venereal diseases
   
92.123   Diseases of animals
Regulated Medical Waste Haulers
   
92.135   Definitions
   
92.136   Storage and transportation standards
   
92.137   Vehicle requirements
   
92.138   License and insurance requirements
Sioux Falls Regional Emergency Medical Services Authority
   
92.150   Composition
   
92.151   Terms
   
92.152   Oath
   
92.153   Records report
   
92.154   Records as evidence
   
92.155   Annual report
   
92.156   Report on demand
   
92.157   City approval of tax levy
   
92.158   Quality assurance; protections and immunities
Family Day Care Homes
   
92.170   Definitions
   
92.171   Large day care facilities
   
92.172   Registration
   
92.173   Registration form contents
   
92.174   Insurance
   
92.175   Registration
   
92.176   Registration certificate displayed
   
92.177   Registered helpers
   
92.178   City obligations
   
92.179   Exceptions
   
92.180   Lapsed registration/notification of parents
   
92.181   Number of children allowed
   
92.182   Substitute provider authorized in limited circumstances
   
92.183   Additional children permitted
   
92.184   Reporting of incidents or changes in circumstances
   
92.185   Master list
   
92.186   Room heaters
   
92.187   Dangerous materials and objects
   
92.188   CPR and first aid training required
   
92.189   Inspections
   
92.190   Suspension or revocation of registration
   
92.191   Time frame and conditions to reapply after revocation
   
92.192   Effective date
Tobacco-Free Policy
   
92.210   Definitions
   
92.211   Prohibited conduct
   
92.212   Education and enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
   Emergency management, see
ch. 33
   Enforcement of noise control chapter, see §
93.009
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Forestry, see
ch. 94
   Garbage and recycling, see
ch. 57
   Hospitals, see
ch. 114
   Licenses issued by public health director, see §
110.029
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Noise control, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
   Notification of fumigation by holder of pest control license, see §
120.002
   Pest control, see
ch. 120
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Rabies control, see §§
90.030 through
90.039
   Sanitation in food establishments, see §§
112.013,
112.014
   Storing, parking or leaving an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
motor vehicle, see §
93.026
   Subdivision, see
ch. 157
   Tree nuisance declared, see §
94.015
   Unsanitary food establishments, see §
112.010
   Utilities, see title V
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of nuisances, see SDCL 9-29-13
   City board of health, see SDCL 9-32-2
   Power to promote health and suppress disease, see SDCL ch. 9-32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 REPORT OF CERTAIN DEATHS.
   (a)   Every physician, surgeon, healer or practitioner of like profession
and the manager or superintendent of every hospital or sanitarium shall report
immediately to the police chief, and in no case later than 24 hours after the
information is acquired, any death occurring or any injury sustained by a
bullet or other wound or injury and any case of sickness, injury or death
showing evidence of having been caused by poisoning or by any unlawful means.
   (b)   Every head of a household or manager or proprietor of any hotel or
lodginghouse where death occurs from any of the causes shall make a report
immediately if no physician, healer or practitioner was in attendance upon the
deceased at, or immediately prior to, death.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.204; 1992 Code, § 19-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.002 BURIAL GROUNDS.
   No sexton, funeral director, or other person shall bury or cause to be
buried the body of any deceased person except in the grounds as are now known
and used as burial grounds, or such as may be by the law designated and
authorized to be used as such.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.205; 1992 Code, § 19-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.003 SANITARY INSPECTIONS.
   The health officer shall make frequent inspections of the city and its
environs. In all cases where he or she shall discover anything which might
prove dangerous to health, he or she shall take appropriate action.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.601; 1992 Code, § 19-3)
§ 92.004 USE OF COMMON ARTICLES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The use of common drinking cups or other common drinking or eating
utensils or of common towels or of common combs and brushes or any other
article for common use which might spread any communicable disease is
forbidden.
   (b)   The term COMMON as used in this section shall mean for use of more
than one person without proper cleansing and disinfection by methods approved
by the health officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.602; 1992 Code, § 19-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.005 IMPURE DRINKING WATER.
   No person shall supply or distribute to any person at any place for
drinking, culinary or other domestic use any impure or unwholesome water, or
water containing any substance which renders the water unfit for domestic use.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.604; 1992 Code, § 19-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Utilities, see title V
§ 92.006 ICE.
   (a)   No person shall sell or deliver ice which is unfit for use for
domestic purposes or which has been cut or made from any impure or polluted
water or which is obtained from a source which is not approved by the health
department.
   (b)   No person shall sell or deliver any ice in wagons or trucks that are
used for any other purpose.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.605; 1992 Code, § 19-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.007 SEPTIC TANKS.
   No person shall build, construct, maintain or use or cause to be built,
constructed, maintained or used within 200 feet of a city sanitary sewer any
septic tank system upon any lot.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.606; 1992 Code, § 19-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.008 RENDERING OF ANIMAL MATTER.
   No person shall carry on the business of rendering any animal matter or
manufacturing such into fertilizing material except by permission of the city
council. The health officer shall be permitted entrance to all buildings used
for the purpose of rendering any animal matter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.609; 1992 Code, § 19-8) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
§ 92.009 SWIMMING POOLS.
   Artificial swimming pools and natural bodies of water used for swimming
within the city shall be subject to inspection and approval by the health
officer and shall not be used if found to be unfit for that purpose by the
health officer. The health officer is empowered to make periodic inspections of
and to take samples from those swimming pools as necessary to determine the
condition thereof. Adequate provisions for change of water, chlorination and
cleaning of the swimming pools shall be made. Swimming in those pools open to
the public shall not be permitted except at times when adequate lifeguard
service is provided.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.610; 1992 Code, § 19-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.010 WELLS.
   No person shall maintain or use any well for the purpose of drawing
therefrom water intended for drinking purposes without first obtaining a permit
from the health department to do so nor use any well after notice from the
health department to close or fill it.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.611; 1992 Code, § 19-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Utilities, see title V
§ 92.011 UNSANITARY HOTEL, ROOMINGHOUSE OR LODGINGHOUSE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any hotel,
lodginghouse or roominghouse to keep or maintain the establishment in an
unclean or unsanitary condition, or in violation of the state laws governing
that establishment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.613; 1992 Code, § 19-12) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.012 REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW INSTALLATIONS AND REPLACEMENT OF UNDERGROUND AND
ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANK SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Any person, owning or possessing storage tanks containing materials
classified as being capable of contaminating any public water supply or capable
of endangering human health or the environment within the city and within one
mile of the boundaries of the city shall provide protection against leakage or
rupture of those tanks or connections thereto. These materials shall include,
but not be limited to, hazardous materials as set forth in 49 C.F.R. part
172.101, as amended, the National Registry of Hazardous Materials, United
Nations Classification System (cf Guidebook for Hazardous Materials, Department
of Transportation, p. 5800.4) and hazardous wastes as set forth in 40 C.F.R.
part 261, a copy of which is available at the public library.
   (b)   All tank systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with
sound, recognized engineering practices. All tank systems shall meet or exceed
the following standards.
      (1)   Tanks and appurtenances must be compatible with materials stored or
handled.
      (2)   All tanks installed underground in the city and within one mile of
the boundaries of the city must first be granted a permit for installation from
the fire prevention division and have approval of the state department of
environment and natural resources.
         A.   All metallic tanks must be approved double-wall design,
cathodically protected and coated with a material approved by the state
department of environment and natural resources.
         B.   All nonmetallic tanks must be of approved double-wall design.
      (3)   All underground tanks must be equipped with a continuous leak
detection system capable of immediately detecting a leak and giving audible and
visible alarms.
      (4)   All tanks must be equipped with overfill protection devices. These
devices must alert the transfer operator that the tank is 90% full or
automatically shut off flow to the tank when the tank is no more than 95% full.
All tanks must be equipped with a spill containment basin.
      (5)   All fluid-handling piping shall be of double-walled design and
shall include double-wall containment at the tank and to grade under any
dispensing device.
         A.   All metallic piping shall be cathodically protected and coated
with a material approved by the state department of environment and natural
resources and tested as required by the city’s fire code before it is covered
with approved backfill.
         B.   All nonmetallic piping shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommended instructions and tested as required by the city’s
fire code.
      (6)   Piping on pressure systems shall be equipped with leak detection
devices that will promptly notify the operator of a problem in the system in
one or more of the following manners:
         A.   Slow down the rate of dispensing to one-third its normal rate;
         B.   Give an audible and visible warning through the tank alarm panel;
and
         C.   Completely stop the flow of the material to the dispenser.
   (c)   Any aboveground tanks shall be diked on the side and on the bottom
with materials impervious to contaminants. The volume of the dike must be
adequate to contain 110% of the volume of the largest tank and must conform
with other provisions set forth in the International Fire Code, Chapter 34, §
3404.2.10.1, as amended. Diking must be approved by the fire prevention
division.
   (d)   System plans must be submitted to the city fire department for review
by appropriate city departments. Plans shall be approved or rejected within ten
working days. Permits must be issued by the city fire department before any
work proceeds.
   (e)   Any person owning or operating a tank system shall immediately notify
Metro Communications of any alarm, spill or leak.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 14.506; 1992 Code, § 19-13) (Ord. 2774, passed 7-26-1971;
Ord. 90-86, passed 10-6-1986; Ord. 12-89, passed 1-30-1989; Ord. 79-02, passed
10-15-2002) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.013 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PREVENTION OF CERTAIN COMMUNICABLE DISEASES IN
COMMERCIAL PREMISES.
   For the prevention of the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, no person
shall maintain any commercial building, structure, premises or portion thereof
which does not comply with the following requirements. No partitions between
subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building, structure or premises
shall have an aperture which is designed or otherwise constructed to encourage
sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition.
(1992 Code, § 19-14) (Ord. 29-93, passed 4-12-1993) Penalty, see §
10.999
HEALTH CENTER GOVERNING BOARD
§ 92.025 CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created the Falls Community Health Governing Board.
   (b)   Whenever, in this subchapter, the term BOARD is used, it shall mean
the Falls Community Health Governing Board.
(1992 Code, § 19-23) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.026 COMPOSITION OF BOARD; QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   The Falls Community Health governing board shall be composed of 11
members:
      (1)   Six board members shall be individuals who are served by the Falls
Community Health and are representative of the patients in terms of demographic
factors such as race, ethnicity, gender, and income;
      (2)   Five board members shall be individuals who are, by vocation and
formal education and training, qualified health providers, or represent the
community through their expertise in those areas as government, finance, legal
affairs, trade unions, and other commercial, industrial, or social services
within the community. No more than two of the nonpatient members of the board
may be individuals who derive more than 10% of their annual income from the
health care industry; and
      (3)   The public health director/program director of Falls Community
Health and the medical director of Falls Community Health shall be nonvoting ex
officio members of the Falls Community Health governing board.
   (b)   Members of the board need not be registered voters.
(1992 Code, § 19-24) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 34-13, passed 6-18-
2013)
§ 92.027 SELECTION, NOMINATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the board shall be selected by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. Board members may be reappointed to succeed
themselves but the number of terms of office shall be as provided by §
30.025 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 19-25) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.028 TERM OF MEMBERS.
   Each member of the board shall serve for a term of three years. A member who
misses three consecutive meetings with unexcused absences shall be
automatically terminated from the board and another person shall be nominated
and appointed to serve for the remainder of the term.
(1992 Code, § 19-26) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.029 OFFICERS.
   The board shall annually hold an election of officers and elect those
officers as needed to carry out the functions of the board, including a
chairperson. The term of office shall be for a period of one year. No member
shall be elected to the same office for more than two consecutive terms. The
officers so elected by each board shall constitute the executive committee of
that board.
(1992 Code, § 19-27) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.030 MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the board shall be held each month as designated by the
chairperson. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by request to
the chairperson of one board member.
(1992 Code, § 19-28) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.031 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(1992 Code, § 19-29) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.032 MINUTES, RECORDS.
   The secretary of the board shall ensure that minutes of the meetings are
kept and provided to the board members. He or she shall also ensure that those
records of transaction and/or health services requested by the board shall be
kept by the city health department and provided to the board. All orders and
regulations made by the board, as well as other proceedings of the board, shall
be kept in a book with the minutes of the board.
(1992 Code, § 19-30) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.033 ACCEPTANCE OF COUNTY, STATE OR FEDERAL FUNDS.
   When the Falls Community Health Center shall accept county, state or federal
funds, the city may enter into an agreement with these governmental entities
regarding the operation of those programs or services funded.
(1992 Code, § 19-31) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.034 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Falls Community Health Governing Board will evaluate the Falls Community
Health’s activities, and will ensure that it is operating in compliance with
federal, state and local laws and regulations. The Falls Community Health
Governing Board will establish health care policies and other policies
pertaining to the delivery of services at the Falls Community Health. It will
ensure the accessibility and availability of those services to everyone
regardless of age, gender, race, religion, national origin, disability, or
ability to pay. The Falls Community Health Governing Board shall participate in
the annual performance appraisal process of the executive director. Board
members are prohibited from discussing, entering into deliberation or voting on
a matter in which they personally have, or may appear to have, a conflict of
interest.
(1992 Code, § 19-32) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
SIOUX FALLS BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 92.045 CREATED.
   (a)   There is hereby created the Sioux Falls board of health.
   (b)   Whenever, in this subchapter, the term BOARD is used, it shall mean
the Sioux Falls board of health.
(1992 Code, § 19-33) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.046 COMPOSITION OF BOARD; QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   The board of health shall be composed of seven members, each of whom shall
be a registered voter of the city. At least one member of the board shall be a
member of the Falls Community Health governing board and one member from the
REMSA board. The public health director shall be a nonvoting ex officio member
of the board of health.
(1992 Code, § 19-34) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 34-13, passed 6-18-
2013)
§ 92.047 SELECTION, NOMINATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the board shall be selected by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the city council. Board members may be reappointed to succeed
themselves, but the number of terms of office shall be as provided by §
30.025 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 19-35) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 34-13, passed 6-18-
2013)
§ 92.048 TERM OF MEMBERS.
   Each member of the board shall serve for a term of three years. A member who
misses three consecutive meetings with unexcused absences shall be
automatically terminated from the board and another person shall be nominated
and appointed to serve for the remainder of the term.
(1992 Code, § 19-36) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.049 OFFICERS.
   The board shall annually hold an election of officers and elect those
officers as needed to carry out the functions of the board, including a
chairperson. The term of office shall be for a period of one year. No member
shall be elected to the same office for more than two consecutive terms. The
officer so elected by each board shall constitute the executive committee of
that board.
(1992 Code, § 19-37) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.050 MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the board shall be held as designated by the
chairperson. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by request to
the chairperson of one board member.
(1992 Code, § 19-38) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 34-13, passed 6-18-
2013)
§ 92.051 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(1992 Code, § 19-39) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.052 MINUTES, RECORDS.
   The secretary of the board shall ensure that minutes of the meetings are
kept and provided to the board members. The secretary shall also ensure that
those records of transaction and/or health services requested by the board
shall be kept by the city health department and provided to the board. All
orders and regulations made by the board, as well as other proceedings of the
board, shall be maintained along with the minutes of the board.
(1992 Code, § 19-40) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 34-13, passed 6-18-
2013)
§ 92.053 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The board of health shall exercise general supervision over the health of
the city with full power to take all steps and use all measures necessary to
promote the general cleanliness and healthfulness of the city and the general
health and well-being of the people and community served. The board shall adopt
any regulations, rules or measures deemed advisable in order to carry out these
charges.
(1992 Code, § 19-41) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.054 HEALTH OFFICER.
   The public health director shall assume the duties and responsibilities of
health officer as described in this Code. The public health director shall
perform, under the direction of the city board of health, all duties required
of the board by this Code and state law and shall also serve as the program
director of Falls Community Health. When filling the vacancy for the position
of public health director, the mayor shall submit the proposed candidate to the
governing board of Falls Community Health prior to submission to the city
council. The public health director shall see to the execution of all laws and
ordinances relating to health and sanitation. The public health director or his
or her authorized representative shall be permitted at all times, for good
cause, to enter any house, commercial and/or industrial establishment, public
place or building, or private property or other building and to do whatever is
necessary to make a thorough investigation of the property, and to exercise the
power of general supervision over the health and well-being of the people and
the environmental sanitation of the community.
(1992 Code, § 19-42) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006; Ord. 34-13, passed 6-18-
2013)
§ 92.055 ADMINISTRATIVE AND TECHNICAL STAFF.
   The city is authorized to employ the necessary administrative and technical
staff and technical personnel to represent and carry out the duties of the
health officer. No person may be so employed who is a member of the immediate
family of any member of either the Falls Community Health Governing Board or
the city board of health.
(1992 Code, § 19-43) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
§ 92.056 PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY.
   The city shall provide a public health laboratory and to equip it in a
manner as may be necessary to enable the health officer to properly perform the
duties of his or her office. The services of the laboratory shall be at the
disposal of the medical profession of the state for bacteriological, chemical
and pathological examinations and tests as its facilities permit. The health
officer may charge for examinations and laboratory tests, the proceeds of which
shall be paid into the general fund.
(1992 Code, § 19-44) (Ord. 36-06, passed 3-20-2006)
NUISANCES AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS
§ 92.070 PROHIBITED.
   No person shall create, commit, maintain or permit to be created, committed
or maintained any nuisance within the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.801; 1992 Code, § 19-49) (Ord. 2677, passed 4-20-1970)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.071 ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.
   Whatever is or imminently may become hazardous or dangerous to human health,
whatever renders the ground, the water, the air, or food a hazard or an injury
to human health, or whatever annoys, injures, or endangers the health, comfort,
or safety of others, along with the following specific acts, conditions, and
things are, each and all of them, hereby declared to constitute nuisances,
provided, however, that this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (a)   Imperfect plumbing. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean, or filthy sink,
water closet, urinal, or other plumbing fixture in any building used or
occupied by human beings.
   (b)   Garbage and refuse. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be
maintained or to accumulate upon any public or private property any food waste
or general household waste found within the city that is likely to cause or
transmit disease, or that may be a hazard to health.
   (c)   Impure water. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or
household purposes that is polluted or is so constructed or situated that it
may become polluted.
   (d)   Undressed hides. Undressed hides kept longer than 24 hours, except at
the place where they are to be manufactured, or in a storeroom or basement
whose construction is approved by the health department.
   (e)   Manure. The accumulation of manure or animal or fowl waste for more
than 24 hours unless it is in a securely tied, closed, biodegradable package
placed in a leakproof, rigid container with a tightfitting lid.
   (f)   Breeding places for flies. The accumulations of manure, garbage, or
anything whatever that are harboring places and breeding areas for flies and
rodents.
   (g)    Stagnant water. Any water or liquid that supports the proliferation
of mosquitoes.
   (h)    Poison ivy. Permitting poison ivy to grow upon any public or private
property.
   (i)   Dead animals. The owner of a dead animal permitting it to remain
undisposed of longer than 24 hours after its death.
   (j)   Polluting river. Throwing or leaving any dead animal or decayed animal
or vegetable matter or any slops or filth whatever, either solid or fluid, into
any pool of water or into the Big Sioux River.
   (k)   Privies and cesspools. Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool
except those sanitary privies and cesspools the plans of which are approved by
the health department.
   (l)   Improper garbage handling. Throwing or letting fall on or permitting
to remain on any street, alley, or public or private ground any manure,
garbage, rubbish, filth, fuel, or wood while engaged in handling or removing
any substances.
   (m)   Bonfires. Burning, causing or permitting to be burned, without an
approved incinerator upon any private or public property any dirt, filth,
manure, garbage, sweepings, leaves, ashes, paper, waste, or rubbish of any
kind.
   (n)   Burning of garbage. Burning upon any private or public property any
garbage, offal, excrement, fresh or decaying fruits, vegetables, fish, meat, or
bone, or any foul, putrid, or obnoxious liquid or substance.
   (o)    Private sanitary landfill. Operating or permitting the operation of a
private sanitary landfill without controlling rodents, insects, and litter;
without compacting and covering solid waste each day; and without preventing
and prohibiting burning.
   (p)   Rubbish. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any combustible refuse matter
such as papers, sweepings, rags, grass, tree branches, wood shavings, wood,
magazines, or cardboard; or piles of brush, clothing, plastic, wood pieces,
scrap lumber, cardboard, leaves, cloth, carpet, construction waste, pallets,
tree stumps, or any similar objects that adversely affects the residents or
environment by placing them at risk of unhealthy, offensive, or otherwise
injurious conditions.
   (q)    Waste material. All noncombustible inorganic matter such as ashes,
glass, sand, earth, stones, concrete, mortar, metals, cans, barrels, pipes,
sinks, toilets, bath tubs, shower stalls, wire, scrap metal, metal pieces,
piles of earth or sand, bricks, or any similar objects that adversely affects
the residents or environment by placing them at risk of unhealthy or offensive
or otherwise injurious conditions.
   (r)   Livestock or fowl waste. Any accumulation of waste manure, straw, or
other bedding material resulting from the transportation, housing, or confining
of animals.
   (s)   Litter. Garbage, rubbish, waste material, or animal or human waste
improperly disposed of by discarding, abandoning, allowing to accumulate,
scattering, or depositing outside an approved container.
   (t)   Inoperable vehicle or vehicles. In no event shall any inoperable
vehicle or vehicles, as defined by §
93.025, that constitute a health or safety hazard be kept or located on any
premises. For the abatement of nuisance conditions related to the keeping of
any inoperable vehicles, the notice provisions of §
92.072 shall be in effect. Any notice or proceeding hereunder by the health
department to abate a nuisance condition created by an inoperable vehicle or
vehicles shall be construed as separate and cumulative to any other proceedings
under §§
93.025 through
93.035.
   (u)   Abandoned property. Any deteriorated, wrecked, or derelict property in
unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value, if
any, and which has been left unprotected from the elements, and shall include,
without being so restricted, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperative, or
partially dismantled motor vehicles (as provided in §
93.026), trailers, boats, machinery, refrigerators, washing machines,
appliances, machine parts, stoves, dryers, furnaces, water heaters, plumbing
fixtures, furniture, and any other similar articles in that condition.
   (v)    Graffiti. Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures,
designs, inscriptions, or other drawings that are scratched, scrawled, painted,
drawn, or otherwise placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, curb, or other permanent structure on public or private property and
that has the effect of defacing the property.
   (w)   Food storage and removal. All stored food for animals or fowl must be
kept either indoors or in a weather-resistant container designed to prevent
access by animals or insects. Uneaten food shall be removed daily.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.801; 1992 Code, § 19-50) (Ord. 2677, passed 4-20-1970;
Ord. 35-72, passed 6-6-1972; Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981; Ord. 120-95, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. 72-03, passed 8-11-2003; Ord. 58-07, passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 16-
13, passed 4-2-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
   Garbage and recycling, see
ch. 57
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Utilities, see title V
§ 92.072 NOTICE TO ABATE; ISSUANCE.
   Whenever the director of the designated enforcement department or his or her
designated representative shall find that a nuisance exists within the city, a
city enforcement employee (as defined in §
92.080) shall give written notice to the person creating, permitting or
maintaining the nuisance to abate the nuisance. The notice may be served by
first-class mail; and if to be mailed to the owner of the property, the mailing
may be directed to the responsible person or entity listed on the city’s rental
registration list. The notice may likewise be served by conspicuously posting a
copy of the notice upon the premises where the nuisance exists. If posted,
proof of the posting shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of record
or responsible party. The owner of record, tenant, resident or responsible
party as defined by §
40.002 of any property found to have been in violation of health, nuisance or
other code violations shall be jointly and severally liable as joint
tortfeasors for a civil penalty or penalties imposed by the city pursuant to
Title III, Chapter 40 of this code. If, after due inquiry, the city is unable
to determine who is the owner or responsible party for the violation(s) and
related fines, the city may elect to levy the fine as a direct assessment
against the subject property.
(1992 Code, § 19-51) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981; Ord. 58-07, passed 4-16-
2007)
§ 92.073 NOTICE TO ABATE; NONCOMPLIANCE.
   It shall be both unlawful and cause for the issuance of a civil penalty for
any person who has been provided notice to fail to abate or correct nuisance
conditions or code violations under the provisions of city ordinances within
the time allowed in the notice.
(1992 Code, § 19-52) (Ord. 58-07, passed 4-16-2007) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.074 ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS LEVIED AGAINST PREMISES.
   When there exists on private property a condition which has been determined
a nuisance by a city enforcement employee, a notice will be served in the
matter specified in §
92.072. The notice will describe the matter to be removed or corrected and
require removal or correction thereof within 14 days. The city health officer
may shorten the timeframe for removal or correction if the health officer
determines the nuisance item(s) presents a significant risk to the public
health if not removed or corrected in less than 14 days. If the city health
officer determines a shortened timeframe is appropriate in a particular case,
the shortened timeframe shall be set forth in the notice. Any additional
nuisance conditions not previously observed, or that may have been added to the
property after the city’s inspection(s), must also be removed or corrected
within the timeframe specified in the notice of violation. If at the end of the
14 days, or less as set forth in the notice, the nuisance has not been removed
or corrected, the city shall have authority to cause the correction or removal
and disposition. All costs incurred by the city for the removal and disposition
of the nuisance or for correcting the nuisance shall be assessed, levied and
collected as a special assessment payable in one sum or by up to five equal
annual installments as the city council may provide against the premises from
which it was removed, in the manner provided by law for the levy and collection
of other special assessments.
(1992 Code, § 19-53) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981; Ord. 58-07, passed 4-16-
2007; Ord. 57-11, passed 8-8-2011)
§ 92.075 FUNDS FOR ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL.
   The city finance director shall maintain a subdivision of funds to be known
as nuisance abatement and removal subdivision, upon which shall be drawn all
warrants for the cost and expense of abatement and removal of nuisances and to
which shall be credited collections of special assessments in accordance with §
92.074.
(1992 Code, § 19-54) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981)
§ 92.076 ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   It shall be the duty of the health department or the police department to
take possession of any article or property abandoned, left or placed on any
public or private property, and if the property is believed to have any value,
to keep it and make an attempt to find the owner thereof, and to retain any
article so taken up by it. It shall be the duty of the departments to maintain
a place for the keeping of any article until the article shall be claimed or
otherwise disposed of, and the city shall have a lien thereon for the
reasonable expenses incurred and value or cost of the time and effort necessary
in taking, removing and storing the article and for the value of the storage in
keeping thereof and may retain possession until any and all the liens are
discharged.
(1992 Code, § 19-55) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981)
§ 92.077 SMOKE NUISANCE.
   (a)   No person shall construct, maintain or use any incinerator, smokestack
or chimney unless such shall be so constructed, operated or used so that the
sparks, cinders, coal ashes, smoke or fumes therefrom shall not become
injurious or dangerous to the health, comfort or to the property of individuals
or the public, nor materially impair the comfort of persons or the value of
property within the city. All smokestacks or incinerators used and operated
shall be constructed and arranged in a manner and of a material as to be safe
from causing fires and shall be of that height from the ground so as not in any
manner to cause a violation of this section.
   (b)   Whenever any incinerator, smokestack or chimney is causing or in
danger of causing a violation of this section, the owner or person responsible
therefor shall at once cause the incinerator, smokestack or chimney to be
reconstructed or repaired of proper and safe material or raised to a height or
to be arranged within a reasonable time so that the incinerator, smokestack or
chimney will be in compliance with the provisions of this section. The city
council may, when any incinerator, smokestack or chimney is dangerous to the
health or safety of the inhabitants, or injurious to a degree as to be a
nuisance, order the incinerator, smokestack or chimney torn down or extended up
or otherwise remedied so that it shall comply with this section. The building
inspector shall report all cases of violations of this section to the council,
together with his or her recommendations thereon.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.802; 1992 Code, § 19-56) (Ord. 2677, passed 4-20-1970)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.078 STORAGE OF FIREWOOD ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, unless apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this section shall be defined as follows:
      CORD OF WOOD. A unit of quantity for cut fuel wood, equal to 128 cubic
feet in a stack measuring four feet by four feet by eight feet.
      FIREWOOD. Neatly stacked burnable wood cut into lengths of approximately
one to two feet that require no further cutting of the wood prior to placing it
in a wood burner or fireplace.
   (b)   No person shall store firewood on residentially zoned property, except
for use on the premises and in conformance with the following.
      (1)   No more than six cords of firewood shall be stored at any time,
without the written approval of the health and fire departments.
      (2)   A.   The firewood must be cut and neatly stacked and may not be
stacked closer than five feet to any property line and not higher than six feet
from grade.
         B.   Exception: Firewood may be cut and neatly stacked on or near the
lot line or against a fence, provided that it is no higher than the fence and
that it is located a minimum of six feet from any structure on adjacent
property.
      (3)   All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be
promptly removed from the premises.
(1992 Code, § 19-56.1) (Ord. 39-88, passed 5-23-1988)
§ 92.079 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   If any abandoned article or property has been or is kept for 30 days or more
without being claimed, the article or property may be disposed of by the health
department according to the following.
   (a)   If of no value or slight value, it may be destroyed.
   (b)   If of slight value but of use to the city, it may be turned over to
the proper department and used until claimed, and the charges hereby made a
lien thereon shall be regarded as a sufficient offset to the value of any use.
   (c)   If of more than slight value, it may be sold by the department ten
days after notice of the sale has been given by one publication in a legal
newspaper published in the city, and the city may be a bidder at the sale. If
on any sale an amount is bid in excess of the charges or lien of the city, the
excess shall be deposited to the general fund of the city.
(1992 Code, § 19-57) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981)
§ 92.080 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   In addition to police officers, the following persons are designated to
function as enforcement officers:
   (a)   The public health director and his or her designated representatives;
   (b)   The landfill superintendent;
   (c)   Building inspectors;
   (d)   Parks, recreation and forestry department district foremen; and
   (e)   Parking patrol employees.
(1992 Code, § 19-58) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981)
§ 92.081 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER, OCCUPANT TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   Every owner and occupant of a single or multiple dwelling shall be
responsible for maintaining the areas of the premises in a clean and sanitary
condition as specified in this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 19-59) (Ord. 89-81, passed 11-2-1981)
INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE
§ 92.095 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDUSTRIAL. Refers to production for sale of goods and services.
(1992 Code, § 19-66)
§ 92.096 CLEANLINESS AND REPAIR OF WORK PLACES.
   Every room, building or shop used for industrial purposes and the
surroundings thereof shall be maintained in good repair and shall be kept
thoroughly clean and free from any accumulation of filth, garbage, rubbish or
other waste.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.701; 1992 Code, § 19-67) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.097 VENTILATION OF WORKPLACES.
   No room shall be used as a workroom, machine shop, garage, service station,
battery station or for any other industrial purpose unless all dust, gases,
fumes, vapors, odors, fibers, lint or other impurities that are generated,
released or set in motion in quantities sufficient to pollute the air or injure
the health of any person in the shop shall be removed by suction or other
devices to give adequate change of air provided and installed with the approval
of the health department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.702; 1992 Code, § 19-68)
§ 92.098 LIGHTING OF WORKPLACES.
   There shall be adequate artificial or natural lighting for each industrial
worker. The minimum standard shall be ten footcandles of light in each workroom
at a distance 30 inches above the floor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.708; 1992 Code, § 19-69)
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
§ 92.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CARRIER. A person who, without symptoms of a communicable disease, harbors
and spreads the infectious agent of that disease.
   CLEANSING. The removal, by scrubbing and washing, of organic matter on which
microorganisms may find favorable conditions for prolonging their lives and
virulence, also the removal by the same means of microorganisms adherent to
surfaces.
   COMMUNICABLE DISEASES. Diseases which are communicable through the
conveyance of the infectious agent of the disease, directly or indirectly.
   CONCURRENT DISINFECTION. The immediate disinfection or destruction of all
infected or presumably infected articles.
   CONTACT. A person has been sufficiently near an infected person or animal to
make possible the transmission of the infectious agent to him or her, directly
or by articles freshly soiled with the infectious agent.
   CULTURES. Growths of microorganisms in or upon artificial media. The
material for CULTURES is obtained from body fluids, secretions or excreta and
is used for the purpose of determining the presence of the infectious agent.
   DISINFECTION. The process of destroying the vitality of the disease-
producing organisms by physical or chemical means.
   IMMUNES. Those persons who, because of having had the disease or by
artificial methods, have been made relatively insusceptible to the disease.
   INCUBATION PERIOD. The period of a communicable disease between the
implanting of an infectious disease and its characteristic manifestations.
   INFECTIOUS AGENT. A living microorganism or filterable virus capable under
favorable conditions of inciting a communicable disease.
   ISOLATION. The separation of persons suffering from a communicable disease,
or carriers of the infectious organism, from persons in those places and under
those conditions as will prevent the direct or indirect conveyance of the
infectious agent to susceptible persons.
   PERIOD OF COMMUNICABILITY. The time during which a person affected with a
communicable disease is capable of transmitting the infectious agent to others.
   QUARANTINE. The confining of persons, animals, or materials within a
designated area and excluding other persons, animals or materials from that
area for a prescribed period of time as determined by the health officer.
   RENOVATION. In addition to cleansing, the treatment of the walls, floors and
ceilings of rooms or houses which may be necessary to place the premises in a
satisfactory sanitary condition.
   TERMINAL DISINFECTION. The measures taken to destroy or remove infectious
material after the removal of the patient or termination of the isolation at
the time when the patient is no longer a source of infection.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.401; 1992 Code, § 19-80)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 92.111 METHOD OF REPORTING.
   Every physician or other persons having knowledge of any person affected or
apparently affected with any communicable disease which is quarantinable or
subject to isolation shall report to the health department the name of the
disease; the name, age, sex, race and address of the patient; the location,
place of employment or school attended by the patient; and the name and address
of the person making report. The report shall be made within six hours after
the case comes under observation, preferably by telephone. A specimen sent to
the health department for laboratory diagnosis accompanied by the data given in
this section shall be considered as a report.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.403; 1992 Code, § 19-82)
§ 92.112 REPORTABLE DISEASES.
   The diseases which shall be reported by physicians, as required by this
subchapter, shall be as required by the board of health from time to time.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.403; 1992 Code, § 19-83)
§ 92.113 REPORTS OF DEATHS.
   Every practicing physician shall report in writing to the health officer the
death of any of his or her patients who shall have died of any communicable
disease, within 24 hours after death. He or she shall state in the report the
specific name and type of the disease causing the death.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.403; 1992 Code, § 19-84)
§ 92.114 NOTICE ON PREMISES.
   The health officer shall cause a notice or placard as prescribed by the
state board of health to be placed upon or near any house or apartment in which
any person is infected with a communicable disease which has been classed as
quarantinable or subject to isolation by the health officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.404; 1992 Code, § 19-85)
§ 92.115 PRECAUTIONS BY ATTENDANTS.
   The physician or any other person permitted to visit any person infected
with communicable disease shall practice those measures of personal cleansing,
disinfecting and all other precautions necessary to prevent the spread of the
disease to others.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.405; 1992 Code, § 19-86)
§ 92.116 PERMIT TO LEAVE QUARANTINED OR ISOLATED PREMISES.
   No person who has been sick with any of the communicable diseases declared
to be quarantinable or subject to isolation and who has been quarantined or
isolated in any place under the direction of the health department shall be
allowed to leave that place without the permission of the health officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.406; 1992 Code, § 19-87)
§ 92.117 LABORATORY EXAMINATIONS.
   The health officer shall secure or cause to be secured material for cultures
or specimens for bacteriological or other laboratory examination to assist in
determining the diagnosis of communicable diseases whenever in his or her
judgment the procedure is necessary. Any person when requested by him or her
shall permit the specimen to be taken.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.407; 1992 Code, § 19-88)
§ 92.118 METHOD OF CONTROL OF CONTACTS; CONTROL OF CARRIERS.
   (a)   Method of control of contacts. The health officer shall have the power
to isolate or restrict the movements of any person who is known to have been
exposed to any of the quarantinable diseases or those subject to isolation for
a time equal to the maximum period of incubation of the disease, or for the
period between the minimum and maximum incubation periods of the disease.
   (b)   Control of carriers. The health officer may isolate, quarantine or
restrict the movement of carriers of the infectious agent of cerebrospinal
fever, cholera, diphtheria, dysentery, typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever or any
other communicable disease until their discharges are shown to be free from the
specific organisms of the disease.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.408; 1992 Code, § 19-89)
§ 92.119 COMMUNICABLE DISEASES IN SCHOOLS.
   (a)   The teacher of any school, college, university or Sunday school having
under his or her care any pupil who appears to be affected with any
communicable disease shall promptly send the pupil home or separate him or her
from other pupils until examined by a physician, and the pupil shall not be
readmitted to school without the permission of the health officer.
   (b)   If any of the quarantinable diseases or those subject to isolation are
present, the health officer may cause to be examined any pupils, teachers or
other persons employed in the schools and may take any measures necessary to
prevent the spread of disease. All school authorities and employees shall
conform to all rules and regulations of the health department for the
accomplishment of this end.
   (c)   The health officer shall immediately inform the school authorities of
the presence of cases of communicable diseases in any of the schools.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.409; 1992 Code, § 19-90)
§ 92.120 CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS.
   (a)   No person from any house wherein there is any person affected with any
of the quarantinable diseases or those subject to isolation shall attend any
public, private or sectarian school until the recovery or death of the sick
person, nor until provided with a permit in writing signed by the health
officer. This permit must be presented to the principal or teacher of the
school before the person is allowed to resume attendance.
   (b)   All physicians, upon the discovery of any of the quarantinable
diseases or those subject to isolation, shall instruct the parents or guardian
of any child or minor who may be residing at the infected premises of the
provisions of this section.
   (c)   The principal or teacher of any school shall report at once by
telephone to the health officer any violation of this section.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.409; 1992 Code, § 19-91)
§ 92.121 SPECIAL RULES FOR TUBERCULOSIS.
   (a)   Whenever there is a case of tuberculosis, the health officer shall
take those proper precautions as may be deemed necessary and give proper
instruction to the patient and all other persons occupying the same premises to
prevent the spread of the disease. Every person affected with tuberculosis
shall dispose of his or her sputum, saliva or other discharges in a manner not
dangerous to the public health.
   (b)   Whenever a person so affected is or is likely to be a menace to the
health of others, the health department may cause the person to be quarantined,
isolated, or removed to a hospital, sanitarium, tuberculosis camp or other
proper place until the danger has been removed. Upon recovery of a person
having tuberculosis, his or her physician shall notify the health department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.411; 1992 Code, § 19-93)
§ 92.122 SPECIAL RULES FOR VENEREAL DISEASES.
   (a)   Reports made to the health department of syphilis, gonococcus
infection or chancroid shall be considered confidential so far as consistent
with public safety. The professional attendant of any case of venereal disease
shall give explicit instructions to prevent the spread of the disease to
others.
   (b)   When the patient refuses or neglects to follow prescribed treatment,
discontinues treatment or is discharged as cured, the professional attendant
shall immediately report these facts to the health department. When any person
affected or presumably affected with venereal disease does or is liable to
menace the health of others, the health officer or his or her representative
shall have power to cause the removal of the person to a hospital or other
proper place or to take any other measures authorized by law which are
necessary in his or her opinion to prevent the spread of the disease.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.412; 1992 Code, § 19-94)
§ 92.123 DISEASES OF ANIMALS.
   Any veterinarian or other person in charge of an animal affected or
presumably affected with any disease communicable to human beings shall
immediately notify the health officer. Whenever there is reason to believe that
an animal has rabies, the animals and all other animals bitten by it shall be
securely confined by the owner or person in charge for that time as is
necessary to determine whether the disease exists. Every animal which has
rabies shall be disposed of as directed by the health officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.413; 1992 Code, § 19-95)
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE HAULERS
§ 92.135 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE HAULER. Any person who transports regulated medical
waste within the jurisdiction of the city. This may include a garbage collector
or garbage hauler.
(1992 Code, § 19-100) (Ord. 59-91, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-
2001)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 92.136 STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION STANDARDS.
   The following storage and transportation standards apply to regulated
medical waste haulers.
   (a)   Regulated medical waste may only be stored in a facility or vehicle
approved by the city.
   (b)   A vehicle may stop for no longer than 72 hours if inclement weather
does not allow safe transportation. During that time, all transportation and
storage standards must be met, especially division (c) below.
   (c)   Storage and transportation must not constitute a nuisance or offensive
condition such as, but not limited to, leakage, litter, odor, harborage of
birds, insects or rodents. Regulated medical waste must be maintained in a
nonputrescent state using refrigeration when necessary.
   (d)   Prior to loading regulated medical wastes into the transport vehicle,
all regulated medical waste must be placed in containers which are leak-
resistant and either rigid or semirigid. The vehicle body does not qualify as a
container.
   (e)   Vehicles or containers used to transport regulated medical waste shall
not be utilized to transport goods, items or materials which will be used as an
item or ingredient in human or livestock food.
   (f)   All spills, leaks or discharges of regulated medical waste at any
location other than the final destination point must be reported immediately to
Metro Communications (911).
   (g)   The regulated medical waste hauler must pay for all costs and damages
for emergency responses and environmental cleanups for which it is responsible.
(1992 Code, § 19-101) (Ord. 59-91, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-
2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003)
§ 92.137 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Regulated medical waste hauler vehicle requirements shall be as
follows.
      (1)   The cargo-carrying body must be fully enclosed and leak resistant.
      (2)   The cargo shall not be subjected to compaction or mechanical stress
during loading, unloading or transit.
      (3)   The cargo-carrying body of the vehicle must be clean and sanitary.
      (4)   The cargo-carrying body of the vehicle must be locked or secured if
left unattended.
      (5)   The vehicle must meet all applicable state and federal licensing
and identification requirements.
      (6)   An appropriately equipped cleanup or decontamination kit and
equipment shall be carried in each transport vehicle.
      (7)   A five-pound ABC rated fire extinguisher shall be carried in each
transport vehicle.
      (8)   The vehicle must exhibit the following markings or signage on two
sides and the back of the cargo-carrying body. Words or numbers must be at
least three inches high:
         A.   The name of the regulated medical waste hauling company.
         B.   The following words: “Regulated medical waste;” and
         C.   Placards of at least 64 square inches in size, which exhibit the
universal biohazard emblem.
      (9)   The vehicle must be inspected and approved annually by the city and
must bear a current inspection decal as issued by the city.
      (10)   The vehicle must abide by all other construction and operation
requirements as outlined in city ordinances.
      (11)   The vehicle shall be subject to random inspections at anytime by
the city.
   (b)   Exception: Vehicles which are hauling less than a total of 50 pounds
or less than one cubic yard of regulated medical waste do not have to meet the
vehicle requirements. However, they must still meet storage and transportation
standards under §
92.136.
(1992 Code, § 19-102) (Ord. 59-91, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-
2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003)
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
§ 92.138 LICENSE AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No regulated medical waste hauler shall use the streets for the
collection and removal of any regulated medical waste without first having
obtained a regulated medical waste hauler’s license from the city. No business
license shall be issued or transferred under the provisions of this subchapter
without the approval of the city. The provisions of
chapter 110 of this Code, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not
in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (b)   Insurance requirements.
      (1)   Workers’ compensation insurance providing the statutory limits
required by state law. In addition, it shall provide coverage B, employer’s
liability coverage, of not less than $1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000
disease–policy limits. The required limit may be met by excess liability
(umbrella) coverage;
      (2)   Commercial general liability insurance providing occurrence form
contractual, personal injury, bodily injury and a property damage liability
coverage with limits of as least $1,000,000 per occurrence, $2,000,000 general
aggregate and $2,000,000 aggregate products and completed operations. The
required limit may include excess liability (umbrella) coverage. If “occurrence
form” insurance is not available, “claims made” insurance will be acceptable;
and
      (3)   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, nonowned, and
hired automobiles, trucks and trailers. The coverage shall be as broad as that
found in the standard comprehensive automobile liability policy with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence. The required
limit may include excess liability (umbrella) coverage. The city’s approval or
acceptance of certificates of insurance does not constitute city assumption of
responsibility for the validity of any insurance policy, nor does the city
represent that the above coverages and limits are adequate to protect any
individual, group or business, and assumes no liability therefor.
(1992 Code, § 19-103) (Ord. 59-91, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-
2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003)
SIOUX FALLS REGIONAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AUTHORITY
§ 92.150 COMPOSITION.
   The Sioux Falls Regional Emergency Medical Services Authority shall be
composed of five commissioners.
(1992 Code, § 19-110) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993; Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-
1999)
§ 92.151 TERMS.
   Of the commissioners appointed initially to the regional emergency medical
services authority, commissioner A shall be appointed for a term of one year,
commissioner B for a term of two years, commissioner C for a term of three
years, commissioner D for a term of four years and commissioner E for a term of
five years. Thereafter all members shall be appointed for a term of five years.
(1992 Code, § 19-112) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.152 OATH.
   Each commissioner of the regional emergency medical services authority shall
before entering upon official duties take and file in the city clerk’s office
the oath of office required for appointive officers of the city.
(1992 Code, § 19-113) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.153 RECORDS REPORT.
   The secretary of the regional emergency medical services authority shall
keep a record of its proceedings and make those reports as may be required by
the authority.
(1992 Code, § 19-114) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.154 RECORDS AS EVIDENCE.
   The records of the regional emergency medical services authority kept by its
secretary or copies of any records when duly certified by the secretary shall
be competent evidence of the proceedings of the authority.
(1992 Code, § 19-115) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.155 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The regional emergency medical services authority shall make an annual
report to the city council.
(1992 Code, § 19-116) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.156 REPORT ON DEMAND.
   The city council may require a report from the regional emergency medical
services authority at any time and the books, records, papers and account of
the authority shall at all times be subject to inspection by the city council
or its officers or agents.
(1992 Code, § 19-117) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.157 CITY APPROVAL OF TAX LEVY.
   The levy of taxes by the regional emergency medical services authority shall
have prior approval of the city council before it is set and certified.
(1992 Code, § 19-118) (Ord. 10-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 92.158 QUALITY ASSURANCE; PROTECTIONS AND IMMUNITIES.
   (a)   The emergency medical services authority shall conduct a quality
assurance program. The quality assurance program shall meet or exceed the
requirements of SDCL 34-11-11. All agencies which provide emergency medical
services, including those employing call takers, emergency medical dispatchers,
law enforcement and fire first responders, medical transport agencies and their
online medical control, receiving facilities, and, if and as appropriate, a
coroner, shall participate when requested by the emergency medical services
authority to do so.
   (b)   The quality assurance records and proceedings of the emergency medical
services authority and its medical board and other persons associated with
those quality assurance records and proceedings are afforded the same
protections and immunities as provided in SDCL 36-4 and SDCL 36-4B.
(1992 Code, § 19-119) (Ord. 27-95, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 82-04, passed 8-9-
2004)
FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES
§ 92.170 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHILD. Person under the age of 18.
   CHILDREN. More than one child.
   COMPENSATION. Something given or received for services.
   DAY CARE FACILITY. A place, which may or may not be a home, in which one or
more children not related to the care provider, are cared for on a regular
basis, at least once a week, for compensation, whether paid directly or
indirectly.
   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A dwelling, occupied as a residence by the care
provider, in which family-like care is given. For the purposes of this
subchapter, it shall include all land, buildings and structures located on the
property where the family day care home is situated.
   PASSED A BACKGROUND CHECK.
      (1)   The central registry for child abuse established by SDCL 26-8A-10
has been checked and it does not indicate that the person was responsible for
any proven instance of child abuse or neglect.
      (2)   The person is not required to register as a sex offender under SDCL
chapter 22-24B.
      (3)   A criminal background check has been performed, the results of
which do not indicate that the person has been convicted of child abuse
pursuant to SDCL ch. 26-10 or a similar law of any other state or of the United
States, at any time, or that the person has been convicted of any felony within
the previous five years. For renewal registrations, a criminal background check
that is less than three years old is sufficient.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association, institution, or
other incorporated or unincorporated organization.
   PROVIDER. A person who is actively involved in family-like care of more than
one family of children other than their own, but to no more than 12 children
including the provider’s own children who are under the age of six years, for
any part of the 24-hour day for compensation, whether paid directly or
indirectly, and is at least 18 years of age.
   REGISTRATION. The applicant has completed all requirements for registration
under this subchapter.
   REGISTERED HELPER. A person who provides planned care to children and has
met all the requirements to be a provider, except for age, and is at least 15
years of age. Any REGISTERED HELPER who is not 18 years of age may not be left
alone on the premises with children in care.
   RELATED. Any of the following relationships by marriage, blood or adoption
between the provider and the children in care: parent, grandparent, great-
grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent, stepbrother or stepsister.
   SCHOOL. A public or private school, which provides education through the
sixth grade.
   SUBSTITUTE PROVIDER. A person who is at least 18 years of age but has not
met or completed all requirements for registration and will provide care on an
unplanned, limited short-term basis.
   VISITOR. A guest to the family day care home that has minimal or incidental
contact with the children and does not provide direct care.
(1992 Code, § 19-120) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-
2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.171 LARGE DAY CARE FACILITIES.
   Day care facilities caring for more than 12 children at any given time shall
be licensed under SDCL ch. 26-6 as a day care center or as a group family day
care home, except as provided in §
92.181.
(Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004)
(1992 Code, § 19-121)
§ 92.172 REGISTRATION.
   No person shall establish, maintain, operate, advertise or hold themselves
out as operating a family day care home without first being registered with the
city health department. The annual fee for registration shall be $25 if the
family day care home maintains a current state department of social services
family day care home registration; $125 if the family day care home does not
maintain a current state department of social services family day care home
registration. Applications for registration renewal shall be made annually.
Renewal applications or any additional renewal registration requirements
received after December 31 of each year shall be charged a late fee of $50.
Fees are not refundable or prorated.
(1992 Code, § 19-122) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-
2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.173 REGISTRATION FORM CONTENTS.
   The application for registration shall contain at a minimum the following:
   (a)   The name of the person desiring to operate a family day care home;
   (b)   The address where the person will operate the family day care home;
   (c)   Affirmation that there will be 12 or fewer children, including the
children of the applicant under the age of six years who will be in attendance
at the family day care home at any one time, except as provided in §
92.181;
   (d)   The names, addresses and social security numbers of the applicant, if
a natural person, all providers and all other persons 15 years of age and older
who reside at or will be present on the premises on a regular basis;
   (e)   Proof that each provider:
      (1)   Has passed a background check within 90 days immediately prior to
registration; and
      (2)   Completed a first aid course and an infant/toddler CPR
certification or similar courses as approved by the health department.
   (f)   Proof that all persons 15 years of age and older who reside at or who
will be present on the premises on a regular basis have passed a background
check within 90 days immediately prior to registration; and
   (g)   For renewal registrations, proof that each provider has completed
yearly educational requirements as provided or approved by the city.
(1992 Code, § 19-123) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-
2012)
§ 92.174 INSURANCE.
   No provider shall be issued a registration until proof of insurance is
furnished to the city, showing the following insurance to be in full force and
effect during the entire term of the registration. The provider shall furnish
proof of liability insurance for an in-home day care provider in the minimum
amount of $300,000 for bodily injury/death growing out of any one accident or
any other cause. The liability insurance shall protect against loss from
liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury, including
death resulting therefrom, suffered or alleged to have been suffered by any
person resulting directly or indirectly from any act or activity of the
provider or any person acting for the provider or under the provider’s control
or direction.
(Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.175 REGISTRATION.
   Within 15 days of receipt of the application, the director of the health
department or designee shall review the same for compliance, and if in
compliance, a registration certificate shall be issued. Registration expires on
December 31 of the year of issue.
(1992 Code, § 19-124) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004)
§ 92.176 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE DISPLAYED.
   Registration certificates shall be displayed in plain view within the family
day care home.
(1992 Code, § 19-125) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 13-11, passed 3-7-
2011)
§ 92.177 REGISTERED HELPERS.
   If it is determined by the provider that a helper is required or in any way
employed, the helper must be registered. Parents must be notified of all
helpers of a family day care home immediately, to be followed up by written
communication to the health department and parents no later than one week after
the registered helper begins assisting the provider.
(Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.178 CITY OBLIGATIONS.
   The city shall provide to applicants and family day care providers the
following:
   (a)   Information on how to obtain background checks;
   (b)   Tuberculosis tests;
   (c)   “Basic child care” and “infant/toddler first aid/CPR” courses at least
three times annually. Other child care educational courses shall be provided
throughout the year; and
   (d)   A newsletter periodically containing educational articles and
information on training opportunities in the community, which shall be mailed
to all registered child care homes.
(1992 Code, § 19-126) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004)
§ 92.179 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Schools shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.
   (b)   Registration is not required for providers who are related to all of
the children that are cared for.
(1992 Code, § 19-127) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004)
§ 92.180 LAPSED REGISTRATION/ NOTIFICATION OF PARENTS.
   The health department shall establish procedures for notification of parents
when a family day care provider that is either noncompliant with this ordinance
or has not completed the registration process by December 31 of each year.
(1992 Code, § 19-127.1) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008)
§ 92.181 NUMBER OF CHILDREN ALLOWED.
   (a)   A provider of a family day care home may care for no more than 12
children, including the provider’s own children who are under the age of 6
years. If there are more than four children under the age of 18 months in the
day care home, there must be a registered provider and a second registered
provider or registered helper present. If there are more than eight children
under the age of 18 months present in the day care home, then a third
registered provider or registered helper must be present.
   (b)   Beginning January 1, 2010, a provider of a family day care home may
care for a maximum of 12 children, including the provider’s own children who
are under the age of six years. No more than four of the 12 children may be
under the age of two years, and no more than two of these four children may be
under the age of one unless there is a registered helper in the home. If a
provider cares for children under two years of age, the provider must maintain
an adult child ratio of one adult to four children for children under the age
of two.
   (c)   Family day care providers caring for special needs children will need
to decrease the number of children according to the special needs child’s plan
of care and individual needs.
(1992 Code, § 19-128.1) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008)
§ 92.182 SUBSTITUTE PROVIDER AUTHORIZED IN LIMITED CIRCUMSTANCES.
   A short-term, unregistered substitute provider may be allowed to take over
care for the registered provider for up to 12 hours per week, not to exceed 52
hours in a year, for unexpected situations such as a family emergency, provider
illness or doctor appointments. Planned events such as vacations and planned
medical leaves are not covered under this section; care during these events
must be provided by a registered provider or a registered helper. The provider
is required to notify the health department and day care parents when a
substitute provider has been utilized. The notification shall occur within 24
hours at the latest under any circumstances. All visitors are to be under the
direct supervision of a registered provider.
(1992 Code, § 19-128.2) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-
2012)
§ 92.183 ADDITIONAL CHILDREN PERMITTED.
   The maximum number of children cared for in a family day care home may not
exceed 12, except:
   (a)   Between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
when the maximum number may not exceed 14, if the two additional children are
enrolled in a school; and
   (b)   Between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on days that regularly-scheduled
classes have been canceled at the school that the two additional children
attend. This does not include planned or scheduled closures.
(1992 Code, § 19-128.3) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-
2008)
§ 92.184 REPORTING OF INCIDENTS OR CHANGES IN CIRCUMSTANCES.
   The provider shall report a change in circumstance that could affect the
provider’s ability to provide adequate care or change the environment provided
in the day care, or is of a substantive nature requiring parents to be
notified. A change in circumstance includes, but is not limited to, events such
as a change in registered helper; a change of address; a change in household
size; a change in household composition; changes in a provider’s name; opening,
closing or reopening of a day care; a change in the condition of the home; or
involvement with the Office of Child Protection Services or law enforcement
concerning allegations of child abuse, neglect or violent crimes. The report
must be made to the health department and to day care parents within 24 hours
after the change in circumstances occurs. The provider must notify the health
department and day care parents within 24 hours after the occurrence of an
unusual incident such as a fire, serious injury to a child, serious illness
that results in the hospitalization of a child, or the death of a child while
in care. The provider shall also notify parents of notice of violations or
citations issued to the provider or any helper in the family day care home. If
the change in household size or composition involves a person 15 years of age
or older residing at the residence or being present on the premises on a
regular basis, the individual must pass a background check within 90 days. If
an individual residing at the residence or present on the premises on a regular
basis does not pass a background check, the individual must be removed from the
residence immediately upon failure to pass the background check or the day care
is in violation and the registration of the day care may be suspended or
revoked pursuant to the provisions of § 92.190.
(1992 Code, § 19-128.4) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-
2012)
§ 92.185 MASTER LIST.
   Providers of family day care homes shall maintain a current and accurate
master list of all children enrolled in the day care, birth dates of all
children, along with parent contact information including home and work
addresses and all telephone numbers. The master list shall be provided by the
day care provider upon the request of law enforcement, health department
employees or code enforcement officers at any time of day or night.
(1992 Code, § 19-128.5) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-
2012)
§ 92.186 ROOM HEATERS.
   Unvented fuel-fired room heaters are prohibited from use in a family day
care home. Any stoves or fuel-fired heaters in use in spaces occupied by
children shall be separated from the space by partitions or screens.
(1992 Code, § 19-129) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.187 DANGEROUS MATERIALS AND OBJECTS.
   Flammable and combustible liquids and poisonous materials shall be stored in
a space accessible only to designated personnel. Firearms shall be unloaded and
stored in a locked area. Firearms and ammunition shall be stored separately.
All sharp kitchen utensils, matches and lighters shall be inaccessible to
children.
(1992 Code, § 19-130) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008)
§ 92.188 CPR AND FIRST AID TRAINING REQUIRED.
   All family day care providers and registered helpers registered under this
chapter must maintain a current infant/child cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) certification from the American Red Cross, American Heart Association, or
suitable equivalent, as well as provide a copy of a current certificate of
completion for first aid training to the health department.
(1992 Code, § 19-131) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-
2012)
§ 92.189 INSPECTIONS.
   All family day care homes shall be open to announced or unannounced
inspection by health department employees, law enforcement, code enforcement
officers and day care parents at any time during normal business hours. The
most recent family day care home inspection by the health department shall be
displayed in plain view within the family day care home.
(1992 Code, § 19-132) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008; Ord. 13-11, passed 3-7-
2011; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.190 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The public health director has authority to suspend or revoke a
registration for good cause. “Good cause” may include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Circumstances or events, including exigent circumstances or events,
or for the purpose of conducting an investigation involving a provider’s
action, inaction or failure to comply with any terms of this subchapter when
reasonably corroborated and objectively considered to pose an imminent risk of
harm to the health, safety or rights of a child in care;
      (2)   A registrant, a provider employed by the registrant or a person
present on the premises on a regular basis is required to register as a sex
offender under SDCL chapter 22-24B;
      (3)   A registrant, a provider or a person present on the premises on a
regular basis employed by the registrant has been added to the central registry
for child abuse established by SDCL 26-8A-10;
      (4)   A registrant, a provider or a person present on the premises on a
regular basis is a person described in the first sentence of SDCL 26-6-14.11 or
otherwise ineligible under state or federal law to be a registrant or provider;
      (5)   The applicant omitted material information upon the application for
registration under §
92.172;
      (6)   The information on the application for registration under §
92.172 contains a material misstatement of facts;
      (7)   Any failure to comply with the requirements of this subchapter or
temporary suspension for any substantiated allegation of mistreatment, neglect
or improper supervision;
      (8)   Failure to cooperate with health department personnel investigating
a complaint regarding the family day care home or a provider, including an
impromptu site visit;
      (9)   The state department of social services/ child care services has
denied, suspended, revoked or refused to renew registration under SDCL ch. 26-
6; or
      (10)   Notwithstanding division (a)(1) above, any other substandard
condition that the health department has determined constitutes a threat to the
health, safety or well-being of a child or the children cared for in the family
day care home, of which the health department has been notified and the
department has had an opportunity to thereafter notify the registrant, and the
condition has not been remedied within the time specified by the health
department.
   (b)   If the public health director finds good cause to suspend or revoke a
day care registration, the director may take immediate action to suspend or
revoke the provider’s registration. A registration suspension shall be
temporary in nature and the terms of any suspension shall be specified at the
time of issuance; however, if no other time period is specified for a
registration suspension, the suspension shall be deemed in effect for the
initial maximum time period of 90 days. The suspension period may be reviewed
and increased by up to 90-day increments if there is a valid reason for the
extension. Circumstances that shall constitute a valid reason for the extension
include, but are not limited to, circumstances where either a police or child
protection services investigation or action has not been determined or
concluded, or where a finding against the provider at the state level has been
appealed. However, a total period of suspension shall not exceed one year under
any circumstances. The provider shall be informed of any temporary suspension
or extension(s) of the suspension period. A provider shall have the right to
appeal any suspension, extension of a suspension or revocation pursuant to the
provisions of this code. Any circumstances or events that lead to a
registration suspension herein can similarly amount to good cause for a
registration revocation. A revocation may be ordered immediately without a
suspension or at any time during or after a suspension. Citations or notice of
violation(s) may be issued for violations of this subchapter including the
provisions of this section. When a citation or notice of violation is issued,
it must be displayed on the door or doors used by parents bringing their
children into the day care for at least 30 days after the issuance of the
citation or notice of violation.
   (c)   A person aggrieved by the decision of the public health director may
appeal under the provisions of §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 19-133) (Ord. 81-04, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-
2008; Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.191 TIME FRAME AND CONDITIONS TO REAPPLY AFTER REVOCATION.
   If a provider’s registration has been revoked, the provider must wait at
least one year to reapply to be a registered day care provider within the city.
If a provider then reapplies to be registered, the provider must submit a plan
to the public health director within 20 days of reapplication setting forth
both the reason(s) for the revocation and the step(s) the provider has taken to
resolve the issue(s) that led to the revocation. The provider also must submit,
simultaneously with the reapplication, documentation and/or evidence that
substantiates good cause for granting reregistration. The director has broad
authority to require the submission of documentation and/or evidence, to
require that the provider undergo additional training, and to require the
provider to follow any other course of action or satisfy any reasonable
conditions deemed by the director to improve the safety of children in the
provider’s care. The director may deny the request for reregistration if it is
determined that the provider has failed to establish good cause to grant the
reapplication or that additional conditions and requirements placed on the
provider will not adequately protect a child or children in the provider’s
care.
(Ord. 28-12, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 92.192 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The city council adopted Ordinance 91-08 on July 14, 2008, with an effective
date of January 1, 2009.
(1992 Code, § 19-134) (Ord. 91-08, passed 7-14-2008)
TOBACCO-FREE POLICY
§ 92.210 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   CITY PROPERTY. All property owned, leased, or operated by the city
including, but not limited to, all city parks; city golf courses; city
buildings; and any ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of any public transit
depot.
   SMOKING. The carrying or holding of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any
other lighted smoking equipment; the use of an ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE; or
the inhalation or exhalation of smoke from any lighted smoking equipment.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product made or derived from tobacco that is intended
for human use, including any component part or accessory of a tobacco product.
A TOBACCO PRODUCT includes, but is not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes,
electronic smoking devices, cigarette tobacco, roll- your-own tobacco,
smokeless tobacco, and dissolvable tobacco.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any device that can be used to deliver an
aerosolized solution that may or may not contain nicotine to the
person inhaling from the devices, including, but not limited to, an e-
cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, e-hookah, or other simulated smoking
device. Nicotine products approved by the U.S. Food & Drug Administration for
tobacco cessation shall be allowed.
   YOUTH ACTIVITIES. Activities in which the intended participants and/or the
intended attendees are primarily under 18 years of age.
(Ord. 115-16, passed 12-6-2016; Ord. 43-17, passed 5-2-2017)
§ 92.211 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   The use of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices is hereby
prohibited on any city-owned property when any youth activities take place.
   (b)   The use of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices is hereby
prohibited in all vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city.
   (c)   Smoking is hereby prohibited at permitted activities as referenced in
§
95.018 unless the permittee designates a defined area(s) that will minimize
public exposure to smoking. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be
provided notice of the designated smoking area prior to issuing a permit under
§
95.018.
   (d)   Smoking is hereby prohibited on city property that is leased or
managed by a third party unless otherwise provided in this subsection.
Notwithstanding the first sentence of this subsection, the lessee or third-
party manager of city property may designate smoking area(s) that shall
minimize public exposure to smoking.
   (e)   Except for designated smoking area(s) authorized in subsection (d)
above, smoking will not be allowed at the Denny Sanford PREMIER Center campus
within the area defined by the public access roads that connect Bailey St. to
Western Ave. and Russell St. to Western Ave.
   (f)   Smoking will not be allowed at city golf courses except during the
course of play, after the first tee, and before the green of the final hole of
any nine holes of play.
   (g)   Smoking is hereby prohibited at any ticket, boarding, and waiting
areas of any public transit depot.
   (h)   Smoking is hereby prohibited within a distance of 25' from any
entrance, passageway, operable window, or ventilation of any city-owned
building, unless such person is immediately passing through such are, without
stopping or standing, en route to another destination, or unless that person is
smoking within a designated smoking area pursuant to subsection (d), above.
   (i)   Any city policy regulating smoking or the use of tobacco products by
the public on city property must be approved by the city council, unless
otherwise provided by law or by a joint powers agreement approved by the city
council.
(Ord. 115-16, passed 12-6-2016; Ord. 43-17, passed 5-2-2017)
§ 92.212 EDUCATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The city’s public health director shall develop a comprehensive
tobacco education program to educate the public about the harmful effects of
tobacco product use.
   (b)   The city’s public health director shall conduct informational
activities to notify and educate the public about the city’s smoking and
tobacco-free policies.
   (c)   The city’s public health director may publish and distribute
educational materials relating to this subchapter.
   (d)   Signs will be posted at smoke-free and tobacco-free areas notifying
the public of this subchapter.
   (e)   Any person in violation of this subchapter may be ejected from the
city property on which the violation occurred.
   (f)   That this subchapter is cumulative of other state laws that regulate
tobacco product use and smoking including, but not limited to, SDCL Ch. 34-46
and city code §
130.010, which prohibits smoking in any city-owned buildings, as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 115-16, passed 12-6-2016; Ord. 43-17, passed 5-2-2017)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
Noise Regulations
   
93.001   Definitions and standards
   
93.002   Noises prohibited
   
93.003   Use district noise levels
   
93.004   Sound level measurement
   
93.005   Exemptions
   
93.006   Exceptions
   
93.007   Permit
   
93.008   Motor vehicle noise
   
93.009   Enforcement
   
93.010   Additional remedies
   
93.011   Sound permit application deadline and fees
Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Motor Vehicles
   
93.025   Definitions
   
93.026   Storing, parking or leaving vehicles declared nuisance
   
93.027   Exceptions
   
93.028   Removal
   
93.029   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles
   
93.030   Modification of state law
   
93.031   Duty of private property owners
   
93.032   Notice to remove
   
93.033   Responsibility for removal
   
93.034   Notice procedure
   
93.035   Content of notice
Cross-reference:
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
   General offenses, see title XIII
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007
   Nuisances and offensive conditions, see §§
92.070 through
92.081
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Sound trucks, see §
97.039
   Traffic code, see title VII
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see SDCL 32-30-12 et seq.
NOISE REGULATIONS
§ 93.001 DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS.
   All terminology used in this subchapter and not defined in this section
shall be in conformance with applicable American National Standards Institute
publications. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level as measured with a
sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is dB(A)
or dBA.
   AMBIENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level of the all-
encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of
sounds from many sources.
   CONTINUOUS SOUND. Any sound which exists, essentially without interruption,
for a period of ten minutes or more.
   CYCLICALLY VARYING NOISE. Any sound which varies in sound level so that the
same level is obtained repetitively at reasonably uniform intervals of time.
   DECIBEL. A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in
describing the amplitude of sound. DECIBEL is denoted as “dB.”
   DEVICE. Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually
produces, noise when operated or handled.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE (COMMONLY REFERRED TO AS JACOB’S BRAKE). A device
used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal
combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the
use of wheel brakes.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used in response to any emergency or to
protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property
from an imminent exposure to danger.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. A sound of short duration usually less than one second with
an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power,
including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semitrailers, campers, helicopters, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts,
snowmobiles and racing vehicles.
   MUFFLER. An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating
from the apparatus.
   NINETIETH PERCENTILE NOISE LEVEL. The A-weighted sound pressure level that
is exceeded 90% of the time in any measurement period (such as the level that
is exceeded for nine minutes in a ten-minute period) and is denoted L90. The
measurement period shall not be less than ten minutes unless otherwise noted in
this chapter.
   NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs reasonable persons
with normal sensitivities, or which injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, hearing, peace and safety of other persons.
   PEAK. A sound level with a brief occurrence within a sound event which is
characterized by a quick onset, an above average sound amplitude, and a rapid
return to a lower sound level.
   PERSON. Any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user,
owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or
employees.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE. Any noise for which the information content of that
noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as but not limited to
understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or
normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY. Any imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at
the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway or alley or
similar place which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity.
   PURE TONE. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a
set of single pitches.
   RECEIVING LAND USE CATEGORY. The principal use of the receiving property
regardless of the zoning use established by city zoning ordinances.
   REPETITIVE IMPULSIVE NOISE. Any noise which is composed of impulsive noises
that are repeated at sufficiently slow rates so that a sound level meter set at
fast meter characteristic will show changes in sound pressure level greater
than 10 dB(A).
   SOUND. A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium with interval forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
   SOUND LEVEL METER.
      (1)   An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector and
integrator, time averager, output meter and/or visual display and weighting
networks, that is sensitive to pressure fluctuations.
      (2)   The instrument reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated
and is of type 2 or better as specified in American National Standards
Institute publication S1. 4-1971 or its successor publication.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space due to sound.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure, which shall be 20
micropascals, denoted LP or SPL.
   STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE. Any device, fixed or movable, which is located or
used on property other than a public right-of-way.
   STEADY NOISE. A sound pressure level which remains essentially constant
during the period of observation; i.e., does not vary more than six dB(A) when
measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter.
   USE DISTRICT. Those districts established by the city zoning ordinance.
(1972 Code, § 9-1; 1992 Code, § 25.5-1) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 22-
86, passed 3-31-1986; Ord. 57-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-
2010)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 93.002 NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person or for any
person to allow another person to make, cause to be made or continued any noise
disturbance within the limits of the city. This includes the following specific
prohibitions in division (b) below, along with exceeding the decibel levels set
forth in this subchapter or granted through a sound permit.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts are declared to be in
violation of this subchapter:
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices. Sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle or other vehicle
on any street or public place within the county or any city therein except as a
danger warning signal or the sounding of any signaling device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
         A.   Using, operating or allowing the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in a manner as to
violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance; or
         B.   Using, operating or allowing the use or operation of any device
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in a manner as
to be plainly audible at the property boundary of the source or plainly audible
at 50 feet from the device when operated within a vehicle parked on a public
right-of-way or plainly audible at 100 feet from the device when operated
within a moving vehicle.
      (3)   Public loudspeakers. Using, operating or allowing the use or
operation of a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable
position or mounted upon any sound vehicle in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, park, place or public property for the purpose of commercial
advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or
transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in a manner as to
violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance;
      (4)   Hawkers and peddlers. Selling anything by outcry within any area of
the city therein zoned primarily for residential uses in a manner as to violate
§
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this division (b)
(4)shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise,
food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and
other similar licensed public entertainment events, or occasional sale of
property by public auction;
      (5)   Loading operation. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects between
the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in a manner as to
violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance;
      (6)   Enclosed places of public entertainment. Operating or permitting to
be operated in any place of public entertainment any loudspeaker or other
source of sound which produces, at a point that is normally occupied by a
customer, maximum sound pressure levels of 100 dB(A) as read with the slow
response on a sound level meter, unless a conspicuous and legible sign at least
225 square inches in area is posted near each public entrance stating:
“WARNING: SOUND LEVELS MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT.” This division (b)(6)
shall not be construed to allow the operation of any loudspeaker or other
source of sound in a manner as to violate §
93.003;
      (7)   Fireworks or explosives. The use of explosives or fireworks, or the
firing of guns or other explosive devices so as to be audible across a property
boundary or on a public space or right-of-way, without first obtaining a permit
as provided by §
93.007. This division (b)(7) shall not be construed to permit conduct
prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations governing the activity.
      (8)   Racing events. Permitting any motor vehicle racing event at any
place in a manner as to violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance, without first obtaining a permit as
provided by §
93.006 and
96.183;
      (9)   Powered model mechanical devices. The flying of a model aircraft
powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing
or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise-producing devices,
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day; or in a manner
as to violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance;
      (10)   Dynamic braking devices. Operating any motor vehicle with a
dynamic braking device engaged except for the aversion of imminent danger;
      (11)   Defect in vehicle. Operating or permitting to be operated or used
any truck, automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle which, by virtue of
disrepair or manner of operation, violates §
93.003 or causes a noise disturbance;
      (12)   Standing motor vehicles. The operating or causing or permitting to
be operated any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto in a
manner as to violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance for a consecutive period longer than 15
minutes during which the vehicle is stationary in a residential zone;
      (13)   Noise sensitive zones. Creating noise in excess of the standards
as defined in §
93.003 within the vicinity of any school, hospital, institution of learning,
court or other designated area where exceptional quiet is necessary, while the
school, hospital, institution, court or other area is in use;
      (14)   Bells and alarms. Sounding, operating or permitting to sound or
operate an electronically amplified signal from any bell, chime or clock,
including but not limited to bells, chimes or clocks in schools, houses of
religious worship or governmental buildings, which fails to meet the standards
set forth in §
93.003;
      (15)   Fixed sirens, whistles and horns. The sounding or causing the
sounding of any whistle, horn or siren as a signal for commencing or suspending
work, or for any other purpose except as a sound signal of imminent danger, in
a manner as to violate §
93.003 or cause a noise disturbance; and/or
      (16)   Recreational vehicles and snowmobiles. Operating a recreational
vehicle or snowmobile in a manner which violates §
93.003 or causes a noise disturbance.
(1972 Code, § 9-2; 1992 Code, § 25.5-2) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 85-
78, passed 8-21-1978; Ord. 84-94, passed 9-19-1994; Ord. 57-98, passed 6-15-
1998; Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-2010; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-25)
§ 93.003 USE DISTRICT NOISE LEVELS.
   (a)   Maximum permissible sound levels.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be
operated any stationary source of sound in a manner as to create a 90th
percentile sound pressure level (L90) of any measurement period (which shall
not be less than ten minutes unless otherwise provided in this chapter) which
exceeds the limits set forth for the following receiving land use districts
when measured at the boundary or at any point within the property affected by
the noise:
Normal Sound
Receiving Land Use Category Time Sound Level Limit db(A)
Normal Sound
Receiving Land Use Category Time                    Sound Level Limit db(A)
Agricultural                6:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. 75
                            10:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 55
Commercial or business      At all times            65
Industrial                  At all times            75
Noise sensitive zone        6:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. 60
                            10:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 50
Residential                 6:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. 60
                            10:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 55
 
Impulsive Sound
Receiving Land Use Category Time No. of Peaks Per Hour Maximum db(A)
Impulsive Sound
Receiving Land Use   Time                 No. of Peaks Per Hour Maximum db(A)
Category
Agricultural         At all times         2                     89
                                          4                     83
                                          8                     77
                                          16+                   71
Agricultural         At all times         16+                   61
residential
Commercial           At all times         1                     90
                                          2                     84
                                          4                     78
                                          8                     72
                                          16+                   66
Industrial           At all times         1                     95
Noise sensitive zone At all times         2                     79
                                          4                     73
                                          8                     67
Residential          6 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. 1                     85
                     10:30 p.m. to 6 a.m. 1                     80
 
      (2)   When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in
more than one land use category, the limits of the most restrictive use shall
apply at the boundaries between different land use categories.
   (b)   Correction for character of sound.
      (1)   For any stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone,
cyclically varying sound or repetitive impulsive sound, the limits set forth in
division (a) above shall be reduced by FIVE dB(A).
      (2)   Notwithstanding compliance with division (b)(1) above, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any stationary
source of sound which emits a pure tone, cyclically varying or repetitive
impulsive sound which creates a noise disturbance.
(1972 Code, § 9-3; 1992 Code, § 25.5-3) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 57-
98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-2010) Penalty, see § 10.999
§ 93.004 SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.
   Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-
weighting scale, in accordance with standards promulgated by the American
National Standards Institute or other reasonable standards adopted and tested
by the health department. An L90 measurement shall have a measurement period no
less than ten minutes unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
(1972 Code, § 9-4; 1992 Code, § 25.5-4) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 6-
10, passed 2-10-2010)
§ 93.005 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level
regulations:
   (a)   Noise of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief
valves;
   (b)   Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding
to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; and
   (c)   Noise resulting from emergency work.
(1972 Code, § 9-5; 1992 Code, § 25.5-5) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 85-
78, passed 8-21-1978; Ord. 57-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-
2010)
§ 93.006 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following exceptions shall be allowed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:30 p.m. in residential or commercial land use zones. These uses and
activities are not required to obtain a sound permit unless otherwise stated:
   (a)   School events. School outdoor concerts and music activities including
marching band activities, sporting activities with musical components, art
festivals and student fund-raisers;
   (b)   Religious events. Religious organizations conducting worship services
outdoors;
   (c)   City-sponsored events. The city, including, but not limited to, parks
and recreation department-sponsored activities;
   (d)   Private events in city parks. Private events in city parks with a
duration of one hour or less;
   (e)   Construction work. Operating, or causing to be used or operated, any
equipment used in construction, repair alteration or demolition work on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances in any land use
district where the operation causes a sound pressure level no more than 75 dbA
measured at a distance of 50 feet;
   (f)   Domestic power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any
power equipment rated five horsepower or less used for home or building repair
or grounds maintenance, including, but not limited to, a power saw, sander,
lawn mower or garden equipment in residential or commercial zones at a sound
pressure no more than 75 dbA measured at a distance of 50 feet;
   (g)   Commercial power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any
power equipment, except construction equipment used for construction
activities, rated more than five horsepower, including, but not limited to
chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers or powered hand tools in
residential or commercial land use districts at a sound level no more than 82
dbA measured at a distance of 50 feet;
   (h)   Refuse compacting vehicles or units. Operating or permitting to be
operated or used any refuse compacting vehicle or unit at a sound level no more
than 75 dbA measured at a distance of 50 feet; and
   (i)   Permits. Permits approved by the health director or his or her
designated agent, and a restricted exhibition driving event permit in
accordance with §
96.183.
(1992 Code, § 25.5-5.5) (Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-2010; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 93.007 PERMIT.
   (a)   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions in
this subchapter for an activity shall be made to the health director or his or
her designated agent.
   (b)   Permits must comply with the following:
      (1)   Application shall be made on a form provided by the health
department;
      (2)   Application shall be made in accordance with the application
deadlines set forth in §
93.011;
      (3)   Payment of a fee as set forth in §
93.011, except bona fide neighborhood block parties which shall be free;
      (4)   Permits may be issued for any activity conducted between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. Permits shall allow the permitted sound pressure
level of no more than an L90 of 70 dbA or allow no more than five peaks of 77
dbA or higher in any three-minute period until 8:00 p.m. when the permit shall
allow the permitted sound pressure level of no more than an L90 of 65 dbA or no
more than five peaks of 72 dbA or higher in any three-minute period. Permits
shall expire at 10:30 p.m. unless otherwise stated;
      (5)   Permits may be issued in the Main Street Sioux Falls Business
Improvement District for the purpose of music and entertainment between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. except Friday and Saturday nights when the
permits may be granted from 6:00 a.m. until 11:30 p.m. These permits shall
allow the permitted sound pressure level of no more than an L90 of 70 dbA or
allow no more than five peaks of 77 dbA or higher in any three-minute period
for the entire duration of the permit;
      (6)   A special sound permit for a location may be granted allowing
extended time and/or decibel levels on a case by case basis. In those cases,
the parameters of the event(s) covered by the permit shall be outlined on the
permit;
      (7)   The permit may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements
deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the city or the surrounding
neighborhood;
      (8)   The health director or his or her designated agent may revise the
conditions of any permit if atmospheric conditions, topography or unanticipated
acoustic reverberations increase sound levels at the receiving land;
      (9)   The permit shall be posted at the activity; and
      (10)   When sound readings are taken to determine compliance with a
permit, the sound readings shall be of the sound emitting from the permitted
source.
(1972 Code, § 9-6; 1992 Code, § 25.5-6) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 57-
98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-2010)
§ 93.008 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.
   (a)   Unless permitted under §
93.006 and §
96.183, no person shall drive or move or cause or knowingly permit to be driven
or moved a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at any time in a manner as
to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle shown.
Noise shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet (7.5 meters) and at a
height of at least 4 feet (1.2 meters) above the immediate surrounding surface.
 
                                                                             Sound
                                                                             Pressure
                                                                             Level dB(A)
                                                                             Speed Speed
                                                                             Limit Limit
                                                                             40    over
                                                                             mph   40
                                                                             or    mph
                                                                             less
Motor vehicles with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or
gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or any      90    94
combination of vehicles towed by the motor vehicle
Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor    80    84
vehicle
 
   (b)   This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding
the enforcement of any other provisions of this subchapter relating to motor
vehicle mufflers for noise control.
   (c)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle
within the city unless the exhaust system of the vehicle is:
      (1)   Free from defects which affect sound reduction;
      (2)   Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; and
      (3)   Not equipped with any cutout, bypass or similar device.
(1972 Code, § 9-7; 1992 Code, § 25.5-7) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 85-
78, passed 8-21-1978; Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-2010; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-
2025)
Statutory reference:
   Motor vehicle noise, see SDCL 32-15-11
§ 93.009 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The health department shall have joint enforcement responsibility with
appropriate law enforcement agencies as it relates this subchapter.
   (b)   Permits shall allow the permitted sound pressure level of no more than
an L 90 of 70 dbA or allow no more than five peaks of 77 dbA or higher in any
three-minute period until 8:00 p.m. when the permit shall allow the permitted
sound pressure level of no more than an L90 of 65 dbA or no more than five
peaks of 72 dbA or higher in any three-minute period. Permits shall expire at
10:30 p.m. unless otherwise stated.
   (c)   Permits issued in the Main Street Sioux Falls Business Improvement
District for the purpose of music and entertainment shall allow the permitted
sound pressure level of no more than an L90 of 70 dbA or allow no more than
five peaks of 77 dbA or higher in any three-minute period for the entire
duration of the permit.
   (d)   Any violation of the parameters, conditions or requirements set forth
for a permit shall be deemed a violation of the permit and shall subject the
permit to revocation or compliance review.
   (e)   A permit may be periodically reviewed and, if findings warrant, the
terms and conditions of the permit may be revised or the permit revoked.
   (f)   In the case that a permit holder or an activity is found to be in
violation of this chapter, a notice of violation or a citation may be written.
If two or more notices of violation and/or citations are written, the permit
holder will be subject to a compliance review. Failure to remedy the noise
violation and/or noise disturbance or comply with the orders of the compliance
review may result in revocation or denial of future permits.
   (g)   If 25 residents of the city affected by a sound activity wish to
protest a sound permit, they may sign a petition and present it to the health
director. When the health director receives a petition, a compliance review of
the sound permit will occur.
(1972 Code, § 9-8; 1992 Code, § 25.5-8) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978; Ord. 6-
10, passed 2-10-2010)
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
§ 93.010 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   In addition to the imposition of other penalties, violations of §§
93.002 through
93.008 are deemed and declared to be a nuisance, and as such may be subject to
summary abatement by means of a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(1972 Code, § 9-10; 1992 Code, § 25.5-9) (Ord. 72-78, passed 7-10-1978)
§ 93.011 SOUND PERMIT APPLICATION DEADLINE AND FEES.
 
Sound Permit Applications and Fees
Application Type Description      Application      Permit Cost Past Deadline
                                  Deadline                     Fee
                 Single vendor
                 permitting
                 multiple events  Minimum 2 weeks
Monthly          within a         prior to 1st day $240        $360
                 calendar month.  of the month
                 Limited to no
                 more than 10
                 days
                 Single vendor
                 requesting for   Minimum 1 week
Single Event     event lasting no prior to event   $60         $90
                 more than 3
                 consecutive days
                 Single event
                 lasting no more
                 than 3           Minimum 1 month  1 day-$90;  1 day-$135;
Special          consecutive days prior to event   2 day-$130; 2 day-$195;
                 requesting       date             3 day-$170  3 day-$255
                 extended time
                 and/or decibel
                 levels
 
(1992 Code, § 25.5-16) (Ord. 6-10, passed 2-10-2010)
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 93.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is left unattended or stored on any
public property in the same or substantially same place within the city for a
longer period than 24 hours.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is not in operating condition due to
damage, removal or inoperability of one or more tires and wheels, the engine or
other essential parts required for the operation of the vehicle, or which does
not have lawfully affixed thereto a valid state license plate or which
constitutes an immediate health, safety, fire or traffic hazard.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, alley or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and also means any other publicly owned property
or facility.
   REMOVAL AGENCY. Any public body, private or nonprofit organization
authorized by the city to remove and salvage abandoned or inoperable vehicles.
   VEHICLE. Any conveyance which is designed to travel along the ground or in
the water and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, pull trailers, go-
carts, golf carts, boats, campers and trailers.
(1992 Code, § 25-40) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 102-76, passed 12-6-
1976; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-1987)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 93.026 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING VEHICLES DECLARED NUISANCE.
   (a)   The presence of an abandoned, discarded, wrecked, burned, dismantled,
inoperable, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private
or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance, which may be abated as
such in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (b)   It is unlawful to keep or place any of the vehicles or vehicle parts:
      (1)   Upon public streets or property except on an emergency basis; or
      (2)   Upon the private property of any person owning, in charge of, or in
control of any real property within the city, whether as an owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, for longer than 14 days unless it is within a
carport, fully enclosed building or structure. A tarpaulin, tent or other
similar temporary structure shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of
this section.
   (c)   In no event shall an inoperable vehicle that constitutes an imminent
health, safety or fire hazard be kept or located on any premises.
(1992 Code, § 25-41) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-
1987)
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances and offensive conditions, see §§
92.070 through
92.081
   Removal of vehicles illegally parked, §
71.026
§ 93.027 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   One inoperable vehicle kept on private property without being shielded
from public view if licensed and kept on a private driveway. If this inoperable
vehicle is in a state of externally visible disrepair or disassembly, it shall
not be kept on the private driveway longer than 14 days;
   (b)   Filling stations, automobile repair shops or any other motor vehicle
related businesses in compliance with applicable city ordinances may place
inoperable vehicles being repaired or offered for sale on the premises; and
   (c)   Junkyards operated and maintained in compliance with applicable city
ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 25-42) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-
1987)
§ 93.028 REMOVAL.
   Whenever the police department finds an abandoned or inoperable vehicle on
public property within the city, it is authorized to place written notice on
the vehicle that it will be removed to a garage or place of safety unless the
owner removes the vehicle from public property within 24 hours of the giving of
the notice. After the expiration of the 24-hour period, the vehicle may be
removed by a removal agency to a garage or place of safety. Nothing in this
section precludes the police department from immediately removing a vehicle
that constitutes an imminent health, safety or fire hazard.
(1992 Code, § 25-43) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 102-76, passed 12-6-
1976; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-1987)
§ 93.029 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   The removal agency shall have the rights and obligations conferred upon it
by SDCL ch. 32-36 in regard to titling or disposition of the unclaimed
abandoned or inoperable vehicle, except that, if not otherwise provided by
state law, it shall have a possessory lien upon any vehicle removed under
provisions of this subchapter for the costs or reasonable charges in taking
custody of and storing those vehicles.
(1992 Code, § 25-44) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 102-76, passed 12-6-
1976; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-1987)
§ 93.030 MODIFICATION OF STATE LAW.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, SDCL 32-30-12 is modified to read as
follows:
      Whenever any vehicle is left unattended on any public road, highway, or
highway right-of-way of this state, for a longer period than 24 hours, without
notifying the sheriff or highway patrol office of the county or a peace officer
of the municipality where the vehicle is parked, it shall be deemed to be an
abandoned vehicle and subject to the provisions of SDCL 32-30-13 through 32-30-
18, inclusive, or in the alternative, the city may elect to proceed subject to
the provisions of SDCL 32-36-2 through 32-36-10, inclusive, as if the abandoned
vehicles as defined herein were included in SDCL 32-36-2, Definition of Terms.
(1992 Code, § 25-45) (Ord. 104-87, passed 12-14-1987)
§ 93.031 DUTY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.
   No person owning, in charge of or in control of any real property within the
city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
abandoned or inoperable vehicle of any kind to remain on the property longer
than 14 days.
(1992 Code, § 25-46) (Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-1987)
§ 93.032 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   A notice in writing shall be served by the city upon any person having an
abandoned or inoperable vehicle on their property requesting the removal of the
motor vehicle in the time specified in this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 25-47) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-
1987)
§ 93.033 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   Upon proper notice, the owner of the abandoned or inoperable vehicle and the
owner or occupant of the private property on which the vehicle is located,
either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal.
(1992 Code, § 25-48) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-
1987)
§ 93.034 NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   The city shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the
private property where the abandoned or inoperable vehicle is located. It shall
constitute sufficient notice, when a copy of the notice is sent by registered
or certified mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or
her last known address.
(1992 Code, § 25-49) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973; Ord. 14-87, passed 3-9-
1987)
§ 93.035 CONTENT OF NOTICE.
   The notice in §
93.034 shall contain the request for removal within 14 days after the mailing
of the notice, and the notice shall advise that failure to comply with the
notice to remove shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 25-50) (Ord. 88-73, passed 10-8-1973)
CHAPTER 94: FORESTRY
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Definitions
Trees on Private Property
   
94.015   Nuisance tree declared
   
94.016   Control on private property
   
94.017   Duty to correct
   
94.018   Nuisance tree removal fund
   
94.019   Planting of ash trees prohibited
Trees in Public Places
   
94.030   General supervision
   
94.031   Director’s authority generally
   
94.032   Supervision of work
   
94.033   Rules and regulations; permit fees
   
94.034   Disposition of fees
   
94.035   Permit to remove; required
   
94.036   Permit to remove; application data
   
94.037   Street trees permitted
   
94.038   Planting in public rights-of-way
   
94.039   Abuse or mutilation of trees
   
94.040   Injury to trees by moving; trimming
   
94.041   Duties of private owners
   
94.042   Assessment for maintenance
   
94.043   Order to remove; procedure
   
94.044   Order to remove; time for compliance
   
94.045   Order to remove; appeal or order
   
94.046   Order to remove; failure to comply
   
94.047   Order to remove; special assessment
Arborist’s License
   
94.060   Required
   
94.061   Chapter 110 applicable
   
94.062   Application
   
94.063   Examination required
   
94.064   Reexamination
   
94.065   Expiration
   
94.066   Reexamination upon failure to renew
   
94.067   Revocation
   
94.068   Appeals
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Nuisances and offensive conditions, see §§
92.070 through
92.081
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
Statutory reference:
   Authority to require removal of weeds, see SDCL 9-30-5
   Noxious and unhealthful vegetation, see SDCL 9-32-12
   Weed control generally, see SDCL ch. 38-22
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. Parks and recreation board established by city ordinance.
   DIRECTOR. The director of parks and recreation.
   PARKING STRIP. The area along the public streets and avenues between the
curbline and the sidewalk line.
   STREET. Any type of motor vehicle transportation system including, but not
limited to, street, avenue, road, drive, circle, court, lane, trail, place or
alley.
   STREET TREE. A tree in any public parking strip.
   TOPPING. The indiscriminate cutting of tree branches to stubs or lateral
branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.901; 1992 Code, § 42-1) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 94.015 NUISANCE TREE DECLARED.
   Dead, diseased or insect-infested trees or other woody plants identified by
the director shall be declared dangerous and a nuisance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.1101; 1992 Code, § 42-17) (Ord. 106-82, passed 10-4-
1982; Ord. 72-03, passed 8-11-2003; Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12,
passed 6-12-2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances and offensive conditions, see §§
92.070 through
92.081
§ 94.016 CONTROL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The director shall have the authority to regulate and control nuisance trees
and other woody plants upon private property only when an action is
demonstrably necessary for public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or
insects to public trees and places.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.902; 1992 Code, § 42-35) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.017 DUTY TO CORRECT.
   The occupant, person in charge or owner of any lot or parcel of land in the
city shall keep the property free of nuisance trees and other woody plants by
treating or removing, as may be appropriate and approved by the director.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.1102; 1992 Code, § 42-18) (Ord. 106-82, passed 10-4-
1982; Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.018 NUISANCE TREE REMOVAL FUND.
   The city council may provide in the annual appropriation ordinance for a
fund, to be expended under the direction of the director for the correction and
control of nuisances trees or other woody plants, as provided for in this
chapter. All monies collected for expense of correction and control of nuisance
trees pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the fund.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.1106; 1992 Code, § 42-22) (Ord. 106-82, passed 10-4-
1982; Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.019 PLANTING OF ASH TREES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall plant, or allow to be planted, any variation of Genus
Fraxinus, commonly known as ash, on any property.
(Ord. 84-18, passed 9-18-2018)
TREES IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 94.030 GENERAL SUPERVISION.
   The director shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all
trees and other woody plants growing in public places.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.902; 1992 Code, § 42-33) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.031 DIRECTOR’S AUTHORITY GENERALLY.
   The director shall have authority to regulate and control the planting,
trimming, spraying, preservation and removal of trees and other woody plants in
public places to ensure safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of those
public places.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.902; 1992 Code, § 42-34) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.032 SUPERVISION OF WORK.
   The director shall regulate, control and supervise all work done under a
permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.902; 1992 Code, § 42-36) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.033 RULES AND REGULATIONS; PERMIT FEES.
   The director shall adopt and enforce rules and regulations to carry out the
purposes of this chapter. The rules and regulations shall set forth the amount
to be charged for the various permits required under this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.902; 1992 Code, § 42-37) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.034 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be turned over
to the finance department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.903; 1992 Code, § 42-38) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.035 PERMIT TO REMOVE; REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall remove trees in public places without first procuring
a permit from the director.
   (b)   Any permitted tree removal requires treatment of the residual tree
stump by grinding the stump and major flare roots to a depth of six to eight
inches below grade.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.903; 1992 Code, § 42-39) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.036 PERMIT TO REMOVE; APPLICATION DATA.
   The permit to remove a tree in public places in the city shall state the
number and species of trees to be removed; and that other information as the
director shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a
permit should be issued under this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.903; 1992 Code, § 42-40) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.037 STREET TREES PERMITTED.
   (a)   The director shall maintain a list of approved street trees.
   (b)   The director may approve species other than from the approved list
when the planting of the species is of equal or greater benefit to the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.903; 1992 Code, § 42-47) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.038 PLANTING IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF- WAY.
   (a)   The director shall establish rules and regulations for the planting of
trees in the public parking strip, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   No person shall plant or allow a tree to be planted in the right-
of-way without a permit subject to the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Only approved trees may be planted in the parking strip;
      (3)   No tree shall be planted where the clear space between the curb and
the sidewalk is less than five feet;
      (4)   No tree shall be planted closer than three feet from the curb;
      (5)   Trees must be one inch in diameter or larger measured six inches
above the ground;
      (6)   Trees shall not be planted under power lines unless approved by the
director;
      (7)   Trees shall be planted at least 40 feet apart except where
otherwise permitted by the director;
      (8)   Trees shall be placed at least ten feet from a fire hydrant;
      (9)   Trees shall be placed at least ten feet from a driveway;
      (10)   Trees shall be placed at least 15 feet from a streetlight;
      (11)   Trees on a corner lot shall be planted at least 30 feet back from
the corner; and
      (12)   Trees shall be placed at least 20 feet back from stop/yield sign
or traffic signal.
   (b)   The established rules and regulations shall be available on the city’s
website.
(1992 Code, § 42-48) (Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-
2012; Ord. 83-18, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 94.039 ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES.
   No person shall:
   (a)   Practice topping of any street tree or other tree on public property;
   (b)   Use climbing spurs to trim, spray, repair, inspect or preserve street
trees; and/or
   (c)   Damage or destroy trees due to negligence or noncompliance. If found
at fault, the person(s) responsible shall be required to pay for the necessary
cost of repairs, removals and replacements.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.907; 1992 Code, § 42-57) (Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008;
Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 94.040 INJURY TO TREES BY MOVING; TRIMMING.
   (a)   No person, whether licensed or not, shall move any building or other
structure in a manner as to interfere with or injure any tree in any public
area, except as provided in this section. If in moving any building or
structure it is necessary to trim or move any tree, all work shall be done
under the supervision and control of the director and at the expense of the
person moving the building or structure. Should injury or death result to any
tree because of trimming or moving, the person moving the building or structure
shall, upon direction of the director replace the tree at the expense of the
person moving the building or structure.
   (b)   An arborist licensed by the city is required for any tree trimming
that may be necessary to move a building or structure in any public area. In
addition, any tree trimming above the established height of branches above a
street as established in § 94.037 shall require written permission from the
abutting property owner of those tree(s). The permission will be attached to
the building moving application. If permission from the abutting property owner
is denied, the moving route will not be approved by the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.906; 1992 Code, § 42-49) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.041 DUTIES OF PRIVATE OWNERS.
   Any person growing a tree within the parking strip or other public place or
responsible for trees growing on property abutting on public places supporting
trees or woody plants shall:
   (a)   Trim trees or woody plants so as not to cause a hazard to public
places or interfere with the proper lighting of public streets by the
streetlights or interfere with the visibility of any traffic sign. All trees or
woody plants shall be trimmed to allow free passage of pedestrians and
vehicular traffic and in a manner so as to allow ten feet clearance over
sidewalks and 12 feet clearance over all streets; provided, however, that trees
along arterial or collector streets shall be trimmed to allow a clearance of 16
feet; and
   (b)   Treat or remove any trees or woody plants that are so diseased or
insect ridden as to constitute a hazard to public safety or other trees or
plants in public places.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.904; 1992 Code, § 42-50) (Ord. 46-00, passed 5-15-2000;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.042 ASSESSMENT FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The city council may, at the time of making its annual tax levy for other
purposes, levy for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, planting and
otherwise improving and caring for boulevards a special front foot assessment.
(1992 Code, § 42-56) (Ord. 117-95, passed 9-5-1995; Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-
2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.043 ORDER TO REMOVE; PROCEDURE.
   When the director determines that the removal of trees or other woody plants
upon private property is necessary to preserve public health and safety,
protect the health of the urban forest, the director may serve a written order
to correct the dangerous condition upon the owner, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for its existence.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.905; 1992 Code, § 42-51) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.044 ORDER TO REMOVE; TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
   The order to remove trees or other woody plants shall set forth a time limit
for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation.
In cases of extreme danger to persons or public properly, the director may
require compliance immediately upon service of the order.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.905; 1992 Code, § 42-52) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.045 ORDER TO REMOVE; APPEAL OR ORDER.
   A person to whom an order to remove trees or other woody plants is directed
may, within three days of the service of the order, appeal to the board who
shall set a day for hearing thereon and give notice thereof to the person
appealing. Upon the hearing and review the board may affirm, modify or revoke
the order of the director. Unless the order is revoked or modified it shall
remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom directed. No person to
whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with the order within five days
after an appeal shall have been determined.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.905; 1992 Code, § 42-53) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.046 ORDER TO REMOVE; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   When a person to whom an order to remove trees or other woody plants is
directed fails to comply within the specified time, the director shall remedy
the condition or contract with others for that purpose and charge the cost
thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The person remedying a
condition under a contract made under this section may enter the premises for
that purpose.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.905; 1992 Code, § 42-54) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
§ 94.047 ORDER TO REMOVE; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   If the cost of remedying a condition for which a written notice of
responsibility from the director to remove or trim trees or other woody plants
is not paid within 30 days after receipt of a statement, the cost may be levied
against the abutting property benefitted as a special assessment. The levying
of special assessment shall not affect the liability of the person to whom the
written notice of responsibility is directed to fine and imprisonment for the
violation of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.905; 1992 Code, § 42-55) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12-2012)
ARBORIST’S LICENSE
§ 94.060 REQUIRED.
   No person for hire or for other valuable consideration may perform tree
maintenance or remove trees within the city unless the person can provide proof
of general liability insurance and holds a valid arborist’s license granted by
the director.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.908; 1992 Code, § 42-65) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 94.061 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 42-66)
§ 94.062 APPLICATION.
   Each applicant for an arborist’s license shall make a verified application
upon blanks supplied by the parks and recreation department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.909; 1992 Code, § 42-67) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 94.063 EXAMINATION REQUIRED.
   Every applicant for an arborist’s license may be subject to an examination
to be given by the director. Each applicant must obtain a score of at least 70%
correct in order to be entitled to the license. The director may waive the
examination if an applicant is currently certified by either the State Arborist
Association or the International Society of Arboriculture.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.909; 1992 Code, § 42-68) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 94.064 REEXAMINATION.
   Any applicant for an arborist’s license who fails to pass the required
examination shall be required to wait at least 24 hours before again making
application of the license. The applicant shall pay the same fee as for the
original examination.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.909; 1992 Code, § 42-69)
§ 94.065 EXPIRATION.
   Each license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall expire on
December 31 for the year it was issued.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.909; 1992 Code, § 42-70) (Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 94.066 REEXAMINATION UPON FAILURE TO RENEW.
   If any license issued under this subchapter is not renewed within six months
from the date of expiration, a new application and reexamination shall be
required.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.909; 1992 Code, § 42-71)
§ 94.067 REVOCATION.
   The director may revoke the license of any arborist for violation of any
provision of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the parks and
recreation department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.909; 1992 Code, § 42-72) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 94.068 APPEALS.
   When any person has made application for an arborist’s license and the
application has been denied or refused by the director or when any license has
been revoked or when renewal of any license has been refused by the director or
when any person believes himself or herself otherwise injured or wronged by the
director or any members of his or her staff, the applicant or other person
whose license has been refused or revoked or that other person mentioned in
this section may appeal from the action of the director or his or her staff to
the board for a review of the denial, revocation or other ruling or order. Upon
the review the board may affirm, modify or reverse the action of the director
or his or her staff.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.910; 1992 Code, § 42-73) (Ord. 11-77, passed 2-14-1977;
Ord. 94-08, passed 7-21-2008)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
95.001   Definitions
   
95.002   Filling position of director of parks and recreation
   
95.003   Employee exemption from certain rules
   
95.004   Protection to trees and shrubbery
   
95.005   Protection to prohibited areas
   
95.006   Playing golf
   
95.007   Injuring park property
   
95.008   Vehicle operation and parking
   
95.009   Littering prohibited
   
95.010   Restrictions on abutting landowners
   
95.011   Handbills and signs prohibited
   
95.012   Firearms, guns, and fireworks
   
95.013   Animals protected
   
95.014   Feeding and keeping waterfowl
   
95.015   Trapping prohibited
   
95.016   Fees; requirements for use of park facilities
   
95.017   Transfer of season passes
   
95.018   Permits required for use of parks
   
95.019   Rules for permit authorization
   
95.020   Procedure for appealing director’s refusal for permit
   
95.021   Selling prohibited except by agreement or permit
   
95.022   Fires in parks
   
95.023   Permit required for certain activities
   
95.024   Hours parks open to public
   
95.025   Vehicles after hours
   
95.026   Utility easements
   
95.027   Comprehensive parks and recreation system plan
   
95.028   Site master plans
   
95.029   Alcoholic beverages
   
95.030   Fishing
   
95.031   Bicycling
   
95.031.1   Wheeled motor vehicles prohibited on recreation trail
   
95.032   Authority of director to prohibit certain conduct; notice
   
95.033   Glass containers
Park and Recreation Board
   
95.045   Created
   
95.046   Composition
   
95.047   Members holding elective office
   
95.048   Appointment
   
95.049   Terms
   
95.050   Vacancies
   
95.051   Officers
   
95.052   Meetings, orientation
   
95.053   Quorum
   
95.054   Affirmative vote for action
   
95.055   Bylaws
   
95.056   Records, reports
   
95.057   Annual report
   
95.058   Duties generally
Fees
   
95.070   Definitions
   
95.071   Recreation activity and facility fees
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Conservation open space zoning district, see §§
160.360 through
160.365
   Forestry, see
ch. 94
   Licenses issued by parks, recreation and forestry department, see §
110.027
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Recreation/conservation district, see §§
159.215 through
159.222
   Recreation open space zoning district, see §§
160.370 through
160.375
   Subdivision, see
ch. 157
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Combined park and recreation board, see SDCL 9-38-90.1 et seq.
   Municipal parks and recreational facilities, see SDCL 9-38-1 et seq.
   Recreation systems, see SDCL ch. 42-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Every wheeled conveyance having two tandem wheels, propelled solely
by human power, upon which any person may ride, except scooters and similar
devices, but also including adult tricycles.
   BOARD. The parks and recreation board established by city ordinance.
   DIRECTOR. The director of parks and recreation.
   E-BICYCLE. A wheeled conveyance having two tandem wheels or two parallel
wheels and one forward or rearward wheel, and two of which are not less than 12
inches in diameter, with operable pedals for propulsion, and with an electric
motor of 750 watts or less.
      An e-bicycle is a Class I e-bicycle if the motor provides assistance only
when the person is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance when a speed of 20
miles per hour is achieved.
      An e-bicycle is a Class II e-bicycle if the motor is capable of
propelling the bicycle without the person pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when a speed of 20 miles per hour is achieved.
      An e-bicycle is a Class III e-bicycle if the motor provides assistance
only when the person is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance when a speed
of 28 miles per hour is achieved.
   PARK. Any park, playground, boulevard, lake, river, stream, recreational
center, zoo area, golf course, ballpark, or any other area outside of or in the
city and devoted to active and passive recreation.
   RECREATION TRAILS. Any publicly owned pathway within the floodplain of the
Big Sioux River and the pathways which lead directly into this pathway system
which are open to the public for recreation or travel and which prohibit
motorists from traveling upon them.
   VEHICLE. Any motorized or unmotorized wheeled conveyance and trailers in tow
of any size, kind, or description, excluding bicycles and Class I e-bicycles.
(1992 Code, § 27-1) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-18-
2018; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 95.002 FILLING POSITION OF DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   When filling a vacancy for the position of director of parks and recreation,
the mayor shall submit the proposed candidate’s name to the board prior to
submission of the candidate to the city council.
(1992 Code, § 27-2) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.003 EMPLOYEE EXEMPTION FROM CERTAIN RULES.
   The sections of this chapter governing activities and the general rules are
not applicable to employees of the city while within a park on required or
official duties and in the course of that employment.
(1992 Code, § 27-3) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.004 PROTECTION TO TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   No person shall pick or cut any wild or cultivated flowers, or cut, break,
dig or in any way deface any tree, shrub or plant within the limits of any
park.
(1992 Code, § 27-4) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.005 PROTECTION TO PROHIBITED AREAS.
   No person shall go on foot or otherwise upon the grass or turf of any park
or parkway where any prohibitory sign is posted.
(1992 Code, § 27-5) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.006 PLAYING GOLF.
   No person shall golf within any park within the city, except in areas
designated by the parks and recreation department as a golf course or driving
range.
(1992 Code, § 27-5.1) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.007 INJURING PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall cut, break, scratch, mark, mar or in any way injure or
deface any building, fence, wall lamp, flagpole, construction improvement,
facility or any other feature or property upon or within any park.
(1992 Code, § 27-6) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.008 VEHICLE OPERATION AND PARKING.
   No person shall operate or park any vehicle including a Class III e-bicycles
in any park, except on clearly marked and designated roadways or parking areas
therein, or except as authorized by the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-7) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-
2012; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019; Ord. 18-24, passed 3-5-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.009 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall throw, deposit, place or leave in any park or parkway,
or water therein, any paper, rubbish, waste, cans, bottles or refuse of any
kind, whether or not such is offensive to the senses or is injurious to health,
except in the receptacles provided for waste.
   (b)   No person shall deposit, place or leave any waste materials in any
waste receptacle in any park which has not been generated within the park.
(1992 Code, § 27-8) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.010 RESTRICTIONS ON ABUTTING LANDOWNERS.
   No owner, occupant or person in charge of any land abutting upon any park
shall allow any earth, rubbish or refuse of any kind, whether or not such is
offensive to the senses or injurious to health, to blow, to fall or to wash
upon or into any park.
(1992 Code, § 27-9) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.011 HANDBILLS AND SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   Except when authorized in writing by the director, no person shall erect any
signs or posts or affix any notice or handbill or other writing to any tree,
post, wall, fence or building or any other structure or improvement within any
park.
(1992 Code, § 27-10) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.012 FIREARMS, GUNS, AND FIREWORKS.
   Except as authorized by the director, no person shall fire or discharge any
gun or any other type of firearm or discharge or set off any type of rocket,
firecracker, or other fireworks or anything containing any substance of an
explosive character within any public park.
(1992 Code, § 27-11) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-
2012; Ord. 7-19, passed 1-15-2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.013 ANIMALS PROTECTED.
   No person shall harm any bird nest within the limits of any park, nor aim or
discharge any airgun, slingshot or other weapon, or throw any stones or other
missiles at, nor injure, or attempt to injure any bird or wild creature within
any park.
(1992 Code, § 27-12) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.014 FEEDING AND KEEPING WATERFOWL.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Feed any waterfowl in or immediately adjacent to the city bike
trails and any city park, excluding Arrowhead Park and the Great Plains Zoo;
      (2)   Distribute any food for waterfowl within the area of the city
bordered by North West Avenue, North Walts Avenue, West Bailey Street and West
Sixth Street, which food is, or can be, edible by waterfowl;
      (3)   Operate, install, or cause to be installed, any aerator in Covell
Lake, or the lakes within Family Park for the purpose of keeping ice from
forming; and
      (4)   Take any action to keep waterfowl within the bordered area
described herein or in or immediately adjacent to the city bike trails and any
city park, excluding Arrowhead Park and the Great Plains Zoo, including any
action to intentionally break or open the ice in Covell Lake or the lakes
within Family Park.
   (b)   Signs giving notice of the prohibitions of this section shall be
conspicuously placed by the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-12.1) (Ord. 116-99, passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 20-00, passed 3-20-
2000) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.015 TRAPPING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall possess any device with the intent to use the device to
capture any wild creature in any park with the exception of those devices which
are necessarily used for fishing in the streams and lakes within the park
system as so permitted in other portions of this chapter and except as
permitted by §
90.013.
(1992 Code, § 27-13) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.016 FEES; REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF PARK FACILITIES.
   (a)   The board shall recommend fees for the use of parks and park
facilities operated by the city. Individuals desiring to use facilities for
which a fee is charged shall enter and exit at the designated place and use
only designated areas.
   (b)   When authorized in writing by the director, private persons or
organizations may use designated portions of parks for uses or events for which
the user may charge a fee for participation in or attendance at the events. A
notice that the use or event is not city-sponsored shall be posted at the
entrance.
(1992 Code, § 27-15) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.017 TRANSFER OF SEASON PASSES.
   No person shall transfer to another person any annual pass for privileges at
park facilities, including but not limited to, swimming pools, family aquatic
facilities, tennis courts, skiing/tubing, golf courses and the zoo. Punch
passes may be transferred.
(1992 Code, § 27-15.1) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.018 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR USE OF PARKS.
   Permits to be in the park after hours or for reservation of special area
usage or as allowed in this chapter shall be obtained from the director before
the time the activity is to take place.
(1992 Code, § 27-16) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.019 RULES FOR PERMIT AUTHORIZATION.
   The director shall issue a permit under §
95.018 when he or she finds that:
   (a)   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
   (b)   The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to invite
violence, crime or disturbance of the peace;
   (c)   The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and
   (d)   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the day
and hour requested in the application.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.1) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.020 PROCEDURE FOR APPEALING DIRECTOR’S REFUSAL FOR PERMIT.
   Within five working days after receipt of a request for a permit required in
this subchapter, the director shall inform an applicant of his or her reasons
for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal
in writing within ten days to the board, which shall consider the application
under the standards for issuance set forth in this subchapter and sustain or
overrule the director’s decision within five days. A permittee shall be bound
by all applicable park ordinances. The director shall have authority to revoke
a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good
cause shown. Further appeal of decisions of the board and director may be made
in accordance with §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.2) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 43-07, passed 3-5-
2007)
§ 95.021 SELLING PROHIBITED EXCEPT BY AGREEMENT OR PERMIT.
   No person shall promote, sell, or offer to sell any article or anything of
any type in any park, except as permitted through agreement or permit.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.3) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-
2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.022 FIRES IN PARKS.
   No person shall start any fire in any park except in those places provided
therefor. Every person who starts or uses a fire shall completely extinguish
the fire before leaving the park.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.4) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.023 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.
   No bands, processions, parades, military displays, entertainment,
exhibitions, or public meetings shall be allowed in any park nor may any person
reserve a picnic shelter or portion of any park unless authorized in writing by
the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.5) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-
2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.024 HOURS PARKS OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   No person shall be in any park between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., with the
following exceptions:
   (a)   Falls Park and the area of the Downtown River Greenway from Falls Park
to E. 10th St. on the east side of the Big Sioux River shall remain open
between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
   (b)   Scheduled events may extend beyond the closing time for a park as
approved by the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.6) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 57-03, passed 6-23-
2003; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.025 VEHICLES AFTER HOURS.
   No person shall park or leave parked a vehicle within any park after closing
hours unless authorized by the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.7) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.026 UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   Requests for utility easements to be located on city park property shall be
submitted to the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.8) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.027 COMPREHENSIVE PARKS AND RECREATION SYSTEM PLAN.
   It shall be a function and a duty of the park board to submit a
comprehensive parks and recreation system plan. The director shall provide the
park board with a comprehensive parks and recreation system plan, and the plan
shall be in conformance with the city’s comprehensive land use plan. The
comprehensive parks and recreation system plan will include an inventory of
existing conditions with recommendations for future programs and services, for
acquisition and development of areas, and for any necessary facility
improvements. The plan will include parks and recreation department
administration plans, goals and operational objectives, population and other
socioeconomic trends, demand projections for park and recreation facilities and
personnel, as well as anticipated capital improvement and equipment needs by
the department. The park board shall approve the plan and submit it to the city
council for adoption. It shall be updated at least every five years.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.9) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 12-00, passed 2-14-
2000)
§ 95.028 SITE MASTER PLANS.
   Site master plans for any new or expanded park shall be prepared by the
director, approved by the park board and the city council. Site master plans
shall include, but not be limited to, overall development of existing and
proposed facilities, and proposed capital improvement projects. Inclusion of
any park development project in the capital improvement program shall be
reviewed and approved by the board and shall be in general conformance with an
approved site master plan or the comprehensive parks and recreation system
plan.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.10) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 12-00, passed 2-14-
2000)
§ 95.029 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (a)   No person shall consume, attempt to drink or consume, or have in their
possession any open or unsealed alcoholic beverages in the following city
parks: Arrowhead, Barb Iverson, Heritage, Kenny Anderson, Lyon, McKennan,
Nelson, Pasley, Phillips Avenue Plaza, Tomar, Tower, Tuthill, Van Eps,
Veterans’ Memorial and Whittier. The restriction contained in this division (a)
shall not apply to reserved events at Arrowhead House located in Arrowhead Park
held in accordance with SDCL ch. 35-4.
   (b)   No person shall consume, attempt to drink or consume, or have in their
possession any open or unsealed alcoholic beverages in Falls Park, Fawick Park,
or any park property located adjacent to and within 500 feet of the Big Sioux
River between Falls Park Dr. south to the Cliff Ave. bridge located between
12th St. and 14th St., except upon application meeting the requirements of SDCL
35-4-124 and approval by the city council. The restriction contained within
this division (b) shall not apply to the serving of alcoholic beverages by
premises licensed under SDCL ch. 35-4 within the licensed premises.
   (c)   In all other city parks, no person shall consume, attempt to drink or
consume, or have in their possession any open or unsealed alcoholic beverages,
except that the restriction shall not apply to malt beverages or wine as
defined by SDCL 35-1-1 or where alcoholic beverages are licensed to be sold.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.11) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 27-00, passed 4-3-
2000; Ord. 111-04, passed 11-15-2004; Ord. 62-06, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 152-
07, passed 9-17-2007; Ord. 28-13, passed 5-14-2013; Ord. 67-14, passed 9-9-
2014; Ord. 95-24, passed 11-19-2024; Ord. 40-25, passed 7-15-2025) Penalty, see
§
10.999
§ 95.030 FISHING.
   Fishing shall be permitted in Sertoma Lake at those times as may be
determined by the director. The director shall post notice to the public at
conspicuous places of the time when fishing is permitted. No person shall fish
in Sertoma Lake at any time not authorized by the director.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.12) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.031 BICYCLING.
   Bicycle and e-bicycle riders in the parks and upon recreation trails shall
abide by the ordinances governing the operation and equipment of bicycles
except bicycling, Class I e-bicycling, and Class II e- bicycling need not be
limited to paved areas. Bicyclists and e-bicyclists shall operate their
bicycles or e-bicycles in a prudent manner and with due regard for the safety
of others and the preservation of park property. The maximum speed allowed in
parks and on recreation trails is found in §
76.003.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.13) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 118-18, passed 12-
18-2018; Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019; Ord. 18-24, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 95.031.1 WHEELED MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON RECREATION TRAIL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motorized or
motor driven, wheeled vehicle except a Class I e-bicycle and Class II e-
bicycle on any of the recreation trails. This section shall not apply to or
limit authorized vehicles on the levees for maintenance, patrolling, and flood
emergency purposes, nor shall it apply to or limit use of Other Power-Driven
Mobility Devices (OPDMDs) by individuals with disabilities in accordance with
the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The director
shall authorize a policy to comply with the ADA) on OPDMDs. This policy shall
be available on the city's webpage.
(Ord. 66-19, passed 6-18-2019; Ord. 18-24, passed 3-5-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 95.032 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR TO PROHIBIT CERTAIN CONDUCT; NOTICE.
   The director may prohibit conduct in those areas of the parks when and where
the director deems conduct dangerous or unduly interfering with another's use
of the parks such as, but not limited to, picnicking areas. A notice
prohibiting activity within a specific area shall be conspicuously displayed
setting forth which activity, conduct, or games are restricted.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.14) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 96-12, passed 12-4-
2012)
§ 95.033 GLASS CONTAINERS.
   No glass beverage containers are permitted in any park.
(1992 Code, § 27-16.15) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
§ 95.045 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a park and recreation board for the city, to be
known as the Sioux Falls parks and recreation board. The board shall act as an
advisory body to the mayor in all executive and administrative matters, and to
the city council in all policy making and legislative matters affecting the
establishment, improvement, maintenance, regulation and management of a system
of public parks, zoological parks, parkways and boulevards and public
recreation, playgrounds and children’s parks in and for the city.
(1992 Code, § 27-17) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.046 COMPOSITION.
   The parks and recreation board shall be composed of seven members, each of
whom shall be a registered voter of the city.
(1992 Code, § 27-18) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 12-00, passed 2-14-
2000)
§ 95.047 MEMBERS HOLDING ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   The members of the parks and recreation board shall not hold any elective
office in the government of the city.
(1992 Code, § 27-19) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.048 APPOINTMENT.
   The members of the parks and recreation board shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
(1992 Code, § 27-20) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.049 TERMS.
   The members appointed to the parks and recreation board shall serve for
five-year staggered terms. The appointees shall hold office until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
(1992 Code, § 27-21) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.050 VACANCIES.
   Any vacancy on the city parks and recreation board shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member vacating the board in the same manner as is
required for a regular appointment.
(1992 Code, § 27-22) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.051 OFFICERS.
   At the first regular meeting of the parks and recreation board in December
of each year, the board shall elect from its number a president, a vice-
president and a secretary, each of whom shall serve until December 31 of the
following year. The vice-president shall act in the absence or disability of
the president. In case of death or retirement of an officer, a successor shall
be elected immediately.
(1992 Code, § 27-24) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.052 MEETINGS, ORIENTATION.
   The parks and recreation board shall hold regular meetings at least once
each month and as many special meetings as it deems proper. An orientation
shall be provided for all members. The orientation shall include, but not be
limited to
chapters 35 and
95 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 27-25) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.053 QUORUM.
   Four members of the parks and recreation board shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
(1992 Code, § 27-26) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.054 AFFIRMATIVE VOTE FOR ACTION.
   An affirmative vote of at least four members of the parks and recreation
board shall be necessary to authorize any action of the board.
(1992 Code, § 27-27) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.055 BYLAWS.
   The parks and recreation board shall adopt bylaws consistent with this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 27-27.1) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.056 RECORDS, REPORTS.
   The director shall keep a record of its proceedings, file the record with
the city clerk, and make those reports as may be required by the board. The
records of the board filed with the city clerk or copies of any records when
duly certified by the city clerk shall be competent evidence of the proceedings
of the board.
(1992 Code, § 27-28) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.057 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The parks and recreation board shall file a summary annual report of its
activities with the city clerk not later than January 31 of each year.
(1992 Code, § 27-28.1) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 95.058 DUTIES GENERALLY.
   In addition to those specifically set out in other sections of this Code,
the board shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To initiate, review, and make recommendations for ordinances,
policies, and rules governing the use of the city's public parks, swimming
pools, and other facilities in connection therewith including the golf courses;
   (b)   To provide the city council with a comprehensive parks and recreation
system plan;
   (c)   To develop plans based upon projected growth and expansion of the city
for future park needs, locations, and necessary facilities;
   (d)   To initiate and review parks and recreation programs, and to make
recommendations to the mayor and city council for their adoption;
   (e)   To review and make recommendations to the mayor and city council on
any matters affecting the establishment, improvement, maintenance, and
regulation of the parks, including any proposed revisions to
Chapter 95 except for this section. Any board recommendation to the city
council shall be provided at least 48 hours in advance of any city council
consideration on that matter unless the city council deems it necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety; and
   (f)   Advise and assist the parks and recreation director relative to parks
and recreation.
(1992 Code, § 27-29) (Ord. 49-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 12-00, passed 2-14-
2000; Ord. 60-14, passed 8-12-2014; Ord. 18-17, passed 2-21-2017)
FEES
§ 95.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. A person between the ages 18 and 64.
   ANNUAL AQUATIC SEASON. Shall be effective from date of purchase for one 12-
month period, and include the Midco Aquatic Center, outdoor aquatic centers,
and outdoor swimming pools.
   ANNUAL RECREATION CENTER PASS. Shall be effective from the date of purchase
for one 12-month period and includes recreation centers.
   CHILD. A person between the ages three and 17.
   COUPLE. Two individuals, at least one of whom is over the age of 18, who
reside in the same household.
   FALL, WINTER, AND SPRING AQUATIC SEASON. All operational days at the Midco
Aquatic Center excluding the summer aquatic season.
   FALL, WINTER, AND SPRING REDUCED - INCOME. Families/individuals who are
residents of Sioux Falls and who actively receive reduced or free school
lunches, who actively receive Medicaid benefits, receive South Dakota Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), who presently have foster children
residing in the household, or have an active Dakota EBT card–food stamp card.
   FAMILY. Immediate family members living in the household, including step and
foster children. It does not mean extended family such as grandparents, aunts,
uncles, and children older than 18 years of age.
   FREE PASS/FREE SEASON PASS. Families/individuals who are residents of Sioux
Falls and have an active Dakota EBT card–food stamp card or receive South
Dakota Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).
   INDOOR AQUATIC FACILITY. An ADA accessible facility located within a
recreation center that may include, but is not limited to, amenities such as a
leisure pool, zero-depth beach entry, play features, water slides, lap lanes,
and lazy river.
   INFANT. A person between the ages zero to less than three years old.
   JACOBSON PLAZA ICE RIBBON. An outdoor refrigerated sheet of ice that may be
used for ice skating and other recreational purposes.
   MIDCO® AQUATIC CENTER. An indoor, ADA accessible facility that may include,
but is not limited to, amenities such as leisure pool, zero-depth beach entry,
play features, water slides, lap lanes, current channel, and diving boards.
   MONTHLY RECREATION CENTER PASS. Shall be effective from the date of purchase
in any calendar month to the corresponding day of the next month if such day
exists, or if not, to the last day of the next month.
   OUTDOOR AQUATIC CENTER. An ADA accessible facility that may include, but is
not limited to, amenities such as leisure pool, zero-depth beach entry, play
features, water slides, lap lanes, and lazy river. (Drake Springs, Laurel Oak,
and Terrace Park.)
   OUTDOOR SPRAY PARK. A standalone structure not part of the Midco Aquatic
Center from which water is sprayed or released but does not accumulate.
   OUTDOOR SWIMMING POOL. A pool of water with depths from two to 12 feet of
water, which may include lap lanes and diving boards. (Frank Olson and Kuehn.)
   OUTDOOR WADING POOL. A pool of water with a separate entrance that may
include 36 inches or less of water depth and play features. (McKennan, Frank
Olson, and Kuehn.)
   RECREATION CENTER. An indoor, ADA accessible facility that may include, but
is not limited to, amenities such as an indoor aquatic facility, gymnasium,
multi-purpose space, walking/running track, and fitness space. A recreation
center shall not include the Midco Aquatic Center.
   REDUCED-INCOME. Families/individuals who are residents of Sioux Falls and
actively receive reduced or free school lunches, or who actively receive
Medicaid benefits, receive South Dakota Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF), who presently have foster children residing in the household, or have
an active Dakota EBT card–food stamp card.
   RESIDENT OF SIOUX FALLS. Any person whose place of residence is within the
city limits of Sioux Falls.
   SENIOR CITIZEN. A person age 65 and older.
   SPLASH PASS. A transferrable pass to be redeemed only toward the cost of
admission at the Midco Aquatic Center, outdoor swimming pools and outdoor
aquatic centers.
   SUMMER AQUATIC SEASON. The season of operation generally between the months
of May through August as established annually by Sioux Falls Parks and
Recreation at the Midco Aquatic Center, indoor aquatic facilities, outdoor
aquatic centers, and outdoor swimming pools.
   VETERAN. An individual who has or is currently serving in the United States
military and must provide documentation of service such as a Military ID.
(1992 Code, § 27-40) (Ord. 26-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. 24-10, passed 3-8-
2010; Ord. 98-15, passed 10-19-2015; Ord. 26-17, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 69-24,
passed 8-13-2024; Ord. 96-24, passed 11-19-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 95.071 RECREATION ACTIVITY AND FACILITY FEES.
   The following fees, inclusive of all applicable taxes, shall be charged for
city recreation activities and use of park and recreation facilities:
 Activity Fee
    Activity                                                                        Fee
(a) Aquatic Fees
   Outdoor wading pools and outdoor spray parks
      Daily admission infant, child, adult, and senior citizen                  Free
   Summer Aquatic Season Fee Schedule
      Daily admission infant                                                    Free
      Daily admission child                                                     $5
      Daily admission adult                                                     $6
      Daily admission senior citizen                                            $5
                                                                                    Sold in
                                                                                    increments
                                                                                    of no less
                                                                                    than $50
                                                                                    at a 10%
      Splash pass                                                               reduction
                                                                                    of the
                                                                                    face value
                                                                                    of the
                                                                                    pass
                                                                                    purchased.
      Season pass child                                                         $30
      Season pass adult                                                         $70
      Veteran, senior citizen and reduced-income adult season pass              $40
      Season pass family                                                        $100
      Reduced-income family season pass                                         $50
      Free season pass                                                          Free
   Fall, Winter, and Spring Aquatic Season Fee Schedule
      Fall, winter, and spring reduced-income daily admission                   $1
      Daily admission infant                                                    Free
      Daily admission child                                                     $5
      Daily admission adult                                                     $6
      Daily admission senior citizen                                            $5
                                                                                    Sold in
                                                                                    increments
                                                                                    of no less
                                                                                    than $50
                                                                                    at a 10%
      Splash pass                                                               reduction
                                                                                    of the
                                                                                    face value
                                                                                    of the
                                                                                    pass
                                                                                    purchased.
      Child season pass                                                         $70
      Adult season pass                                                         $170
      Family season pass                                                        $240
      Fall, winter, and spring reduced-income family season pass                $120
      Veteran, senior citizen and fall, winter, and spring reduced-income adult $95
    season pass
   Annual Aquatic Season Fee Schedule
      Child annual pass                                                         $80
      Adult annual pass                                                         $190
      Family annual pass                                                        $300
      Reduced-income family annual pass                                         $155
      Veteran, senior citizen and reduced-income individual adult annual pass   $110
      Other Fees
      Lane rental—50-meter pool (25-yard/meter course per lane/per hour)      $5
      Lane rental—50-meter pool (50-yard/meter course per lane/per hour)      $10
      Swim lessons adult with infant, toddler, preschool at outdoor aquatic     $15
    centers, and outdoor swimming pools
      Swim lessons Level I-VI at outdoor aquatic centers and outdoor swimming   $20
    pools
      Swim lessons adult (4 classes) at outdoor aquatic centers and outdoor     $20
    swimming pools
      Swim lessons at Midco Aquatic Center                                      $45
      League fees (per team)                                                    $90
      Lifeguard recertification course                                          $125
      Lifeguard certification course                                            $185
      Water safety instructor course                                            $255
      Indoor meeting space rental (per hour)                                    $50
   Miscellaneous
      Pool locker                                                               $0.25
      Indoor and outdoor swim meets (per pool/per participant/per event)        $10
(b) Ice Rink Fees
    Outdoor rinks (excluding the Jacobson Plaza Ice Ribbon)
       Ice skate rental adult                                                    $3
       Ice skate rental children                                                 $1
       Ice skate rental senior citizen                                           $2
    Jacobson Plaza Ice Ribbon
       Skate rental (all ages)                                                   $3
       Skate time reservation                                                    $5
(c) League/Tournament Fees—City-Sponsored
    Team Fee
       Athletic camps
          Athletic or other camps (per participant)                           $25
       Basketball
          Adult basketball tournament                                         $200
          Men’s adult basketball league                                     $400
          Over-40 basketball league                                           $200
          Women’s adult basketball league                                   $200
          Youth basketball tournament                                         $50
          Youth/high school 3-on-3 basketball league                          $20
       Dodgeball
          Adult dodgeball league                                              $50
       Kickball
          Adult kickball league                                               $75
       Volleyball
          Adult volleyball league                                             $120
          Adult volleyball tournament                                         $60
          Summer sand volleyball league                                       $75
(d) Scheduled Games/Practices and Tournaments Fees (Non-City-Sponsored)
   Facility fee per field/court per day–adult
      Baseball games                                                            $80
      Baseball practices                                                        $40
      Rugby games                                                               $25
      Soccer games                                                              $45
      Soccer practices                                                          $22
      Softball games                                                            $65
      Softball practices                                                        $32
      Tennis match/dual, per location                                           $100
      Tennis practices                                                          $6 per
                                                                                    court
   Fee per field per invitational tournament (adult/youth)
      Dunham, Burnside, McCart, Cherry Rock, Frank Olson, Covell, and Elmwood   $25
      Harmodon/Nelson grass infields                                            $80
      McKennan/Kuehn tennis                                                     $100
      Sherman, Kenny Anderson, Harmodon, and Pasley                             $65
      Sports camp/clinics (per event)                                           $20
      Tomar, Yankton Trail, and Spencer                                         $45
   League fee per team (adult)
      Adult fall softball league, Sherman, and Harmodon                         $50
      Adult softball league, Burnside, and Kuehn                                $50
      Adult softball league, Sherman, Kenny Anderson, and Harmodon              $170
      Coed softball league, Kenny Anderson, Harmodon, and Sherman               $120
(e) Rental Fee
          Court rental, per hour                                              $25
          Meeting room, per room, per hour excluding nonprofit organizations  $50
          Picnic shelter reservation fee                                      $25
          Portable bleacher reservation fee                                   $150
          Showmobile reservation fee                                          $275
          Terrace or McKennan Band Shell reservation fee                      $75
          Tuthill House, per hour                                             $25
          Wedding location reservation fee                                    $75
    Lighting of the Falls                                                           $200 per
                                                                                    day
(f) Participant Fees
                                                                                    $8 per
       Adult classes single session                                              contact
                                                                                    hour
       Adult tennis league, per participant                                      $7
                                                                                    $5 per
       Classes all ages multiple session                                         contact
                                                                                    hour
                                                                                    $5 per
       Youth classes through age 17 single session                               contact
                                                                                    hour
(g) Concession Fees
      Concession permits, per vendor, per event                                 $50
                                                                                    10% of
      Concession permits, seasonal, per vendor                                  gross
                                                                                    sales less
                                                                                    sales tax
      Sports photography fee (per location, per calendar year)                  $100
 
    Activity    Fee
    Recreation  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective
(h) Center Fees January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2029
                2025       2026       2027       2028
    Activity       Fee
    Recreation     Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective  Effective
(h) Center Fees    January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, January 1, 2029
                   2025       2026       2027       2028
    Daily
   Recreation                                              
    Center Pass
    Fee Schedule
    Daily
   admission      Free       Free       Free       Free       Free
    infant
    Daily
   admission      $6         $6         $6         $6         $6
    child
    Daily
   admission      $8         $8         $8         $9         $9
    adult
    Daily
   admission      $15        $15        $16        $16        $16
    couple
    Daily
   admission      $25        $26        $26        $27        $28
    family
    Daily
    admission
    veteran,
   senior         $3         $3         $3         $3         $3
    citizen, or
    reduced-income
    child
    Daily
   admission      $4         $4         $4         $4         $4
    reduced-income
    adult
    Daily
   admission      $8         $8         $8         $8         $8
    reduced-income
    couple
    Daily
   admission      $13        $13        $13        $13        $13
    reduced-income
    family
    Monthly
   Recreation
    Center Pass
    Fee Schedule
    Monthly
   admission      $25        $26        $26        $27        $28
    child
    Monthly
   admission      $41        $42        $43        $44        $45
    adult
    Monthly
   admission      $54        $55        $57        $58        $60
    couple
    Monthly
   admission      $66        $68        $69        $71        $73
    family
    Monthly
    admission
    veteran,
   senior         $13        $13        $13        $14        $14
    citizen, or
    reduced-income
    child
    Monthly
   admission      $21        $21        $22        $22        $23
    reduced-income
    adult
    Monthly
   admission      $27        $28        $28        $29        $30
    reduced-income
    couple
    Monthly
   admission      $33        $34        $35        $36        $37
    reduced-income
    family
    Annual
   Recreation
    Center Pass
    Fee Schedule
    Annual
   admission      $240       $246       $253       $259       $266
    child
    Annual
   admission      $394       $404       $415       $426       $437
    adult
    Annual
   admission      $518       $531       $545       $559       $574
    couple
    Annual
   admission      $634       $650       $667       $685       $703
    family
    Annual
    admission
    veteran,
   senior         $120       $123       $126       $130       $133
    citizen, or
    reduced-income
    child
    Annual
   admission      $197       $202       $207       $213       $218
    reduced-income
    adult
    Annual
   admission      $259       $266       $273       $280       $287
    reduced-income
    couple
    Annual
   admission      $317       $325       $334       $342       $351
    reduced-income
    family
 
   (i)   The director of parks and recreation may establish definitions for
terms used in this section, and may, upon a showing of good cause, adjust these
rates to provide discounts, bonuses, incentives, and promotions to enhance park
and recreation activities and facilities usage, as well as penalties, late
fees, deposits, and pro rata fee policies.
(1992 Code, § 27-41) (Ord. 29-96, passed 3-18-1996; Ord. 61-96, passed 5-20-
1996; Ord. 27-97, passed 4-21-1997; Ord. 45-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 16-00,
passed 3-13-2000; Ord. 105-01, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 26-07, passed 2-12-2007;
Ord. 24-10, passed 3-8-2010; Ord. 57-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 43-11, passed
6-20-2011; Ord. 52-14, passed 8-5-2014; Ord. 98-15, passed 10-19-2015; Ord. 26-
17, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 13-20, passed 2-11-2020; Ord. 69-24, passed 8-13-
2024; Ord. 96-24, passed 11-19-2024)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.001   Ordinances saved from repeal
   
96.002   Names of streets and avenues
   
96.003   Roadway widths
   
96.004   Eave pipes
   
96.005   Damage
   
96.006   Goods on sidewalk
   
96.007   Fences in residential districts
   
96.008   Saltwater mixtures on streets prohibited
   
96.009   Stair railings
   
96.010   Parking strip landscaping
   
96.011   Right-of-way vacation petition
Public Improvements Generally
   
96.025   Engineering design standards
   
96.026   Public improvements
   
96.027   Petitions for street and alley improvements
   
96.028   Interference with contractors
   
96.029   Interfering with barricades
   
96.030   Contractor’s liability policy and surety bond
   
96.031   Certificate of self-insurance
   
96.032   Protection of public
   
96.033   Front foot assessments for street maintenance
   
96.034   Assessment for local/collector street improvements
   
96.035   Assessment for arterial street sidewalk improvements
Sidewalk and Driveway Approach Construction
   
96.050   Responsibility
   
96.051   Specifications and supervision
   
96.052   Permit required
   
96.053   Approval and inspection
   
96.054   Sidewalk in planned unit developments
   
96.055   Property owner(s) duty to repair and maintain sidewalk
   
96.056   Failure to repair sidewalk defects and damage prohibited
   
96.057   Failure to abate public nuisance
   
96.058   City's right to repair or maintain
Excavations
   
96.070   Supervision
   
96.071   Refilling excavations
   
96.072   Restoring pavements or street surfacing to former condition
   
96.073   Excavations near street
Permit Required
   
96.085   Permit required
   
96.086   Application for permit
   
96.087   Permit fee
   
96.088   Condition of issuance of permit
   
96.089   Railroad company’s repair and maintenance of street crossings, ditches
and drains, lighting and crossing alarms
Snow and Ice Removal
   
96.100   Duty to remove snow
   
96.101   Notice
   
96.102   Disposal of snow and ice
   
96.103   City may remove
   
96.104   Special assessment for snow and ice removal
   
96.105   Violation
Parking on City Streets During Snow Removal
   
96.120   Definitions
   
96.121   Declaration of snow removal alert
   
96.122   Parking during snow removal alert—Zone 1
   
96.123   Parking during snow removal alert—Zone 2
   
96.124   Parking during snow removal alert—Zone 3
   
96.125   Authorization for otherwise prohibited or restricted parking
   
96.126   Determination of street direction
   
96.127   Snow gates
Numbering of Buildings
   
96.140   Designation
   
96.141   Central point
   
96.142   Numbering north and south streets
   
96.143   Numbering east and west streets
   
96.144   Issuance
   
96.145   Numbering intervals
   
96.146   Display of numbers
   
96.147   Specifications for numbers
   
96.148   Cost assessed
Bus Passenger Shelters and Courtesy Benches
   
96.160   Authorized
   
96.161   Approval required
   
96.162   Specifications and advertising
   
96.163   Application for approval process
   
96.164   Issuance of permit
   
96.165   Permit nonassignable
   
96.166   Revocation of approval
Assemblies, Parades and Processions
   
96.180   Definitions
   
96.181   Permits and exceptions
   
96.182   Insurance requirements
   
96.183   Application for permit; hold harmless
   
96.184   Application fees; special event
   
96.185   Application; review; requirements
   
96.186   Permit; issuance
   
96.187   Special event fees
   
96.188   Display of permit
   
96.189   Revocation of permit
   
96.190   [Reserved]
   
96.191   Appeal
   
96.192   Residential picketing prohibited
Plan Review Fees
   
96.205   Construction plan review fee
   
96.206   Final plan review fee
Arterial Street Platting Fee
   
96.220   Arterial street platting fee
Right-of-Way Construction and Administration
   
96.235   Declaration of findings and purpose; scope
   
96.236   Definitions
   
96.237   Right-of-way administration
   
96.238   Right-of-way permits
   
96.239   Construction and restoration
   
96.240   Enforcement of permit obligation
   
96.241   Right-of-way bonds
   
96.242   Indemnification and liability
   
96.243   General provisions
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Bicycles and recreational vehicles, see
ch. 81
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public streets or alleys, see §
111.023
   Forestry, see
ch. 94
   Historic preservation, see
ch. 151
   Improvements in unapproved streets, see §
154.038
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Obstructing snow removal and street cleaning, see §
77.008
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Storm drainage fee, see §
51.100
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Traffic code, see title VII
   Utilities, see title V
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
Statutory reference:
   Authority to require snow removal, see SDCL 9-30-5
   Regulation of streets and public places, see SDCL ch. 9-30
   Sidewalk improvements, see SDCL ch. 9-46
   Street and alley improvements, see SDCL ch. 9-45
   Street names and numbering of houses, see SDCL 9-45-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.001 ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   Nothing contained in this Code, nor in the ordinance adopting this Code,
shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any manner:
   (a)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, widening, paving, improving or abandoning any street, alley or other
public way in the city; or
   (b)   Any ordinance establishing the grades and widths of any street, alley
or other public way in the city; and all ordinances are hereby saved from
repeal and recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent
as if set out at length in this Code.
(1992 Code, § 38-1)
§ 96.002 NAMES OF STREETS AND AVENUES.
   The names of the streets and avenues in the city are hereby fixed and
adopted in accordance with and as shown by the map of the city designated as
map A, on file in the office of the city engineer, which is hereby designated
and adopted as the official map of the city.
(1992 Code, § 38-2)
§ 96.003 ROADWAY WIDTHS.
   The widths of the roadways between curblines for vehicular traffic on the
various streets in the city are hereby fixed and established in accordance with
the official record of the width of roadways in the city on file in the office
of the city engineer, which record is incorporated in this section by reference
and is designated and adopted as the official record of the width of roadways
in the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.104; 1992 Code, § 38-5)
§ 96.004 EAVE PIPES.
   No person shall place or maintain any pipe leading from the eaves of any
building in a position that the water discharged thereby may flow upon or over
any public sidewalk.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.606; 1992 Code, § 38-6)
§ 96.005 DAMAGE.
   No person without proper authority shall tear up, break or injure any
pavement, crosswalk, sidewalk or other improvement in any street or public
ground.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.607; 1992 Code, § 38-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.006 GOODS ON SIDEWALK.
   No person shall, without a license, place any goods or merchandise for sale
or exhibition upon any sidewalk or cause to be placed thereon any goods in
bottles, cans, cases or packages, or any empty boxes or packages at any time
except that, for the purpose of loading or unloading, the articles may be
placed upon the outer side of the sidewalk for that time as may be necessary to
load or unload the articles, but in no instance shall any articles be left upon
the sidewalk in the nighttime or in a way as to obstruct the sidewalk.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.803; 1992 Code, § 38-8) (Ord. 17-87, passed 3-30-1987)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.007 FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   No barbed wire fence shall be erected or maintained in a residential
district as defined by the zoning regulations.
   (b)   No fence shall be erected or maintained in a residential district in a
manner as to unreasonably obstruct the view of others or their access to light
or air.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.1105; 1992 Code, § 38-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.008 SALTWATER MIXTURES ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited directly or indirectly any
salt or saltwater brine upon any sidewalk or street except for the placing of
salt upon sidewalks and pavements when it is necessary to protect pedestrians
and vehicles from slippery conditions.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.601; 1992 Code, § 38-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.009 STAIR RAILINGS.
   Any owner having a stairway leading from an adjoining sidewalk to the cellar
or basement of a building, meeting current building codes, shall guard the
stairway with a substantial railing, and the entrance to the stairway shall be
at right angles to the street from which entry is made.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.605; 1992 Code, § 38-11) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.010 PARKING STRIP LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   Abutting owners. The property owner abutting the parking strip shall
maintain the parking strip in a safe and well-kept condition. For purposes of
this chapter, the parking strip is the area along the public streets and
avenues between the curb line (or edge of the roadway if no curb line is
present) and the sidewalk line (or property line if no sidewalk is present).
   (b)   Plant material. The parking strip shall be covered with plant
material, including turf or native grasses, cultivated flowers, wildflowers,
fruits, and vegetables except the following plant material is restricted or
prohibited as follows:
      (1)   Plantings must be maintained at a height of no more than three feet
from the top of the curb, or if no curb is present, three feet high from the
edge of the street, except as provided below.
      (2)   Plants with thorns, spines, or other sharp, rigid parts are
prohibited.
      (3)   Shrubs, either evergreen or deciduous, or other woody deciduous
plants are prohibited.
      (4)   Plant material shall not be allowed to overhang or encroach upon
the sidewalk, curb, or street.
      (5)   Trees are allowed in parking strips to the extent provided by §
94.038, and rules promulgated thereunder.
      (6)   Parking strips shall be kept free of noxious weeds, including both
state and county declared noxious weeds.
      (7)   Turf grass shall be controlled so it does not exceed eight inches
in height as provided in §
150.096, part 302.4, of the Code of Ordinances.
      (8)   A three-foot radius clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire hydrants, except as otherwise required or approved.
Within this clear space, planting heights shall not exceed eight inches in
height.
   (c)   Other landscaping material. Landscaping other than plant material is
discouraged in the parking strip. Abutting property owners shall not use
asphalt pavement, concrete, boulders, gravel, and other materials in the
parking strip, except for the following materials:
      (1)   The parking strip should have sufficient topsoil depth to support
vegetation including highly organic permeable soils which would allow deep
rooted plants to grow and enhance tree growth.
      (2)   Wood mulch may be used in the parking strip, limited to use as a
water conservation erosion control measure around plants. Wood mulch shall not
otherwise be used in the parking strip as a general landscaping feature due to
its tendency to wash offsite into nearby gutters and waterways during heavy
rain events. Non-biodegradable mulch shall not be used in the parking strip.
      (3)   Landscaping pavers, edging and rock mulch, consisting of one to
three inch nominal size rocks may be used in up to one quarter of the parking
strip, but shall not be installed in such a manner as to spill onto the street
or sidewalk and shall be installed flush with the adjacent sidewalk or curb to
prevent trip hazards.
   (d)   Landscaping permits. Notwithstanding the restrictions and prohibitions
in subsection (c) above, installation of the following items in the parking
strip is allowed if permitted by the city engineer:
      (1)   Concrete splash guards adjacent to arterial and major collector
streets, including installation of concrete in the entire parking strip when
the width of the parking strip is five feet or less. Such concrete splash
guards shall be stamped with decorative pattern and/or colored a contrasting
color to distinguish it from the sidewalk. In parking strips over five feet in
width, a concrete splash guard of up to three feet in width may be constructed
adjacent to the curb.
      (2)   Rock mulch, edging, and landscaping pavers in excess of a quarter
of the parking strip or additional use of concrete in the parking strip may be
permitted in small, isolated or difficult to maintain areas.
   (e)   Restoration. If the city or its contractor engages in construction or
maintenance activities in the right of way and the city or its contractor
damages materials in the parking strip such that restoration is required, the
restoration will be limited to turf grass sod or seed. Restoration or
replacement of other landscape enhancements (plants other than turf grass,
other landscaping material, or materials authorized by the city engineer) are
the responsibility of the property owner. Similarly, the city is not liable for
such landscape enhancements if they are damaged by city during street
maintenance, snow removal, snow storage operations, utility maintenance,
emergency operations, or other activities.
   (f)   Structural encroachments. Structural encroachments and mailboxes in
rights-of-way are restricted as follows:
      (1)   Structural encroachments. Unless approved by the city engineer,
retaining walls, fences, steps, boulders, and other similar structural
encroachments in parking strips are prohibited because they create safety
hazards, limit access to sidewalks from the street, and obstruct and increase
the cost and difficulty of installing and maintaining public improvements.
      (2)   Mailboxes and cluster box units. New installation or replacement of
mailboxes is limited to mailboxes installed on breakaway supports including a)
4" x 4" wooden post, b) 2" diameter steel or aluminum piping, or c) other
breakaway supports approved by the city engineer. Installed cluster box units
must be a model or type approved by the United States Postal Service (USPS).
Placement of mailboxes and cluster box units shall be according to USPS
guidelines. Any mailboxes that do not meet these standards are encroachments.
Neither the city nor its contractors hold liability for damage to nonconforming
mailbox installations and any payments to replace damaged mailboxes is limited
to the price of a standard mailbox and approved breakaway support.
      (3)   Liability. As part of the public right of way, the city uses the
parking strip area for public improvements and the city may remove or require
encroachments to be removed. The city is not liable for repair or replacement
of any encroachments in the parking strip or other parts of the right of way if
such items are damaged by city activities during street maintenance, snow
removal, snow storage operations, utility maintenance, emergency operations, or
other activities.
(1992 Code, § 38-12) (Ord. 37-03, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 22-16, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 96.011 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION PETITION.
   Owners of property abutting a city street or alley may petition the city to
vacate the dedicated public right-of-way. No petition will be considered by the
city unless it is signed by the owners of 100% of the property abutting a
street or alley. A charge of $250 shall be made for filing a city street or
alley right-of-way vacation petition.
(1992 Code, § 38-13) (Ord. 95-07, passed 6-18-2007)
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY
§ 96.025 ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The city council shall, by resolution, approve engineering design standards
for the construction of public improvements in the city.
(1992 Code, § 38-22) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.026 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The following public improvements shall be done in accordance with the
city’s standard specifications and engineering design standards and under the
supervision of the city engineer:
   (a)   Paving, grading and curbing of alleys, streets, avenues or public
ways;
   (b)   Construction of all public sewers and sewer connections; and
   (c)   Construction of all public water mains and water connections in the
streets.
(1992 Code, § 38-23) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.027 PETITIONS FOR STREET AND ALLEY IMPROVEMENTS.
   Owners of property abutting a city street or alley may petition the city for
public street and alley improvements. No petition will be considered by the
city unless it is signed by the owners of 50% of the property abutting a street
or the owners of 75% of the property abutting an alley.
(1992 Code, § 38-24) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.028 INTERFERENCE WITH CONTRACTORS.
   No person shall interfere with or obstruct any person in carrying out in a
lawful manner any lawful contract entered into with the city for paving,
grading or constructing sidewalks or curbs or any other public improvements or
public works.
(1992 Code, § 38-26) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.029 INTERFERING WITH BARRICADES.
   No person shall move, interfere with, break, destroy or carry away any
barricades or signs used by the city or any contractor in guarding unsafe or
dangerous places in the maintenance or repair of streets or in any lawful work
being carried on by the city or any contractor.
(1992 Code, § 38-27) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.030 CONTRACTOR’S LIABILITY POLICY AND SURETY BOND.
   (a)   Unless permitted by §§
96.235 through
96.243, no person, other than the city, shall be granted any permit, license or
contract or be permitted or authorized, except as otherwise provided in §
96.085, to grade, pave, surface, curb, excavate, make openings, break or cut
any curb or pavement, install or work on sewer mains or sewer connections,
install or work on water mains or water connections, erect or work on any
telephone or telegraph lines or poles, overhead or underground electric
transmission line or electric service, install or work on any gas mains,
construct, reconstruct or repair sidewalks, store building materials, erect or
maintain barricades in connection with construction work, or perform any
contract for public improvement or do any public improvement, work in, upon,
under or over any street, avenue, alley, public way, park or other public place
within the city without first securing and filing with the city proof of the
following:
      (1)   Workers’ compensation insurance providing the statutory limits
required by state law;
      (2)   Commercial general liability insurance coverage issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in this state covering the work and
activities proposed to be done in those public places. The insurance shall
provide occurrence form contractual, personal, injury, bodily injury and
property damage liability coverage with limits of at least $1,000,000 per
occurrence, $2,000,000 general aggregate, and $2,000,000 aggregate products and
completed operations. These limits may include excess liability (umbrella)
coverage. The insurance policy shall name the city and its representatives as
an additional insured. If occurrence form insurance is not available, claims
made insurance may be provided. The policy shall be maintained for three years
after completion of the work; and
      (3)   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, non-owned, and
hired automobiles, trucks, and trailers. The coverage shall be as broad as that
found in the standard comprehensive automobile liability policy with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence. The required
limit may include excess liability (umbrella) coverage.
   (b)   Prior to receiving a permit for the construction or installation of
any work for others within the streets, any contractor must first execute a
performance and payment bond in an amount equal to the total cost of work to be
performed, signed by a surety company. In lieu thereof, the contractor may give
bond to the city in the amount of $10,000 covering all work to be done during
the year in which the bond is given. Any bond required by this section shall
provide that the contractor shall faithfully perform the contract, pay all
permit and other associated city fees, promptly pay all persons supplying him
or her with labor or material in the prosecution of the work provided for under
the permit, and replace any defective work within a period of three years from
the time of completion of the project which in the opinion of the city was not
installed in accordance with the required specifications.
(1992 Code, § 38-28) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 49-03, passed 6-9-
2003)
§ 96.031 CERTIFICATE OF SELF-INSURANCE.
   In lieu of any insurance policy required under §
96.030, government agencies and public utilities may provide a certificate of
self-insurance. The certification shall provide assurances that reserves in
support of the self-insurance program are adequate to provide coverage at the
levels required of insurance policies in §
96.030. The form of the certificate shall be provided in the engineering design
standards of the city. The certificate shall be filed in the office of the city
engineer.
(1992 Code, § 38-29) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.032 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC.
   Any person working in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground
shall, during the progress and continuance of the work, erect and maintain
around the work both by day and night suitable barricades, fences, signs and
signals, in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, so
as to prevent injury to persons, animals or vehicles on account of the work.
(1992 Code, § 38-30) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.033 FRONT FOOT ASSESSMENTS FOR STREET MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   The city council, prior to the assessment of real property within the
city for the next fiscal year, may levy annually for the purpose of maintaining
or repairing street surfacing or pavement a special front foot assessment not
to exceed $1 per front foot upon the lots fronting and abutting the street.
   (b)   (1)   The assessment shall be apportioned on a front foot basis and
levied in the following manner:
         A.   The city council, prior to the assessment of real property, may
by resolution designate the lot or portion of lots against which the assessment
is to be levied and the amount of the assessment against each lot or portions
thereof for those purposes;
         B.   Notify the director of equalization to add the assessment to the
general assessment against the property; and
         C.   Certify the assessment together with the regular assessment to
the county auditor to be collected as taxes for the city for any general
purposes.
      (2)   The assessment is subject to review and equalization the same as
assessments or taxes for general purposes. Front foot, for the purposes of this
section, means the actual front of the premises as established by the buildings
thereon, record title and use of the property regardless of the original plat.
(1992 Code, § 38-31) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 98-04, passed 9-20-
2004; Ord. 102-05, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 123-06, passed 10-2-2006; Ord. 100-
07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 79-08, passed 6-16-2008)
§ 96.034 ASSESSMENT FOR LOCAL/ COLLECTOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   When the city council deems it necessary to construct or improve a
local or collector street by special assessment where the streets are not
improved or do not meet city design standards, the total cost of the
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of acquisition of
right-of-way and easements, grading, paving, curb and gutter, storm sewer,
intersection improvements, utilities, utility relocation, engineering and
testing, inspection, publication and legal expenses. Engineering, testing and
inspection expenses shall not exceed the amounts shown in the following table:
 
Construction Contract Value Professional Fee
Under $500,000              Actual cost up to 20%
$500,001 to $1,000,000      Actual cost up to 18%
$1,000,001 to 5,000,000     Actual cost up to 16%
$5,000,001 and greater      Actual cost up to 14%
 
   (b)   A property owner who donates the necessary land for right-of-way and
easement purposes in accordance with city design standards shall not be
assessed for the cost of acquisition of right-of-way and easements. Property
owners who do not donate necessary right-of-way may be assessed for costs
associated for the acquisition of the property, necessary utility relocation or
easements necessary to construct the street.
   (c)   Property owners abutting the local or collector street improvement
shall be assessed for actual costs of the street and utilities as limited to
local and collector street standards.
(1992 Code, § 38-32) (Ord. 103-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 9-02, passed 2-11-
2002; Ord. 66-04, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 97-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 10-09,
passed 1-12-2009)
§ 96.035 ASSESSMENT FOR ARTERIAL STREET SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Owners of property platted prior to January 1, 2009, with direct
access to an abutting arterial street will be assessed for the required
sidewalk improvements if the owner does not construct the sidewalks.
   (b)   Property with direct access to the arterial street shall be assessed
for sidewalk improvements based on the frontage of each platted lot which has
direct access. Assessments for properties with shared driveways will be based
on the total frontage of property sharing the driveway.
(1992 Code, § 38-32.1) (Ord. 103-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 9-02, passed 2-11-
2002; Ord. 66-04, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 97-07, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 10-09,
passed 1-12-2009)
SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY APPROACH CONSTRUCTION
§ 96.050 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The construction of a permanent sidewalk fronting or abutting all streets,
highways and avenues shall be accomplished by the builder, owner or developer
of all new or relocated residential and commercial buildings within the city.
(1992 Code, § 38-39) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.051 SPECIFICATIONS AND SUPERVISION.
   (a)   The construction, repair, or alteration of all sidewalks, curb ramps,
and driveway approaches within the public right-of-way shall be done under the
direction of the city engineer or the city engineer's designee and strictly in
accordance with the city's design standards and specifications for sidewalks,
curb ramps, and driveway approaches. The city engineer or the city engineer's
designee shall have full power to condemn work and material not in accordance
with the requirements of those specifications.
   (b)   In addition, the city engineer or the city engineer's designee shall
provide notice on behalf of the governing body to adjoining property owners to
construct or repair sidewalks as required by state law.
(1992 Code, § 38-42) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 28-17, passed 3-21-
2017)
§ 96.052 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Before any sidewalk or private driveway approach is constructed within
the right-of-way by any contractor or person for the owners of abutting
property, the contractor or person must first secure a permit from the city
engineer unless the sidewalk or driveway approach will be constructed as part
of a plan covered by a building permit. In these instances, the sidewalk and
driveway approach construction will be covered by the building permit.
   (b)   Any person installing or constructing a sidewalk within the right-of-
way and in front of or along property owned by him or her shall obtain a
permit. The sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with city
specifications. If the city determines that the sidewalk was not constructed in
accordance with city specifications, it shall be replaced by the property
owner. The persons shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 96.030 and 96.031.
Driveway approach permits will only be granted to bonded and insured
contractors.
(1992 Code, § 38-43) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 28-17, passed 3-21-
2017)
§ 96.053 APPROVAL AND INSPECTION.
   (a)   An inspection shall be made after the installation of any sidewalk or
driveway approach in the public right-of-way. Inspection requests shall be made
within two business days of completion of the work. If an inspection request is
not made, an administrative citation may be issued.
   (b)   The construction of sidewalks and driveway approaches within the
public right-of-way shall be approved by the city prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy as provided by the building code, except where
conditions exist which in the opinion of the city engineer or the city
engineer's designee justify waiver.
(1992 Code, § 38-41) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 28-17, passed 3-21-
2017)
§ 96.054 SIDEWALKS IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   In approved planned unit developments including large scale residential
developments as defined in chapter 160 of this Code, permanent sidewalks shall
be located in a manner and in those areas as shall best provide access to the
residents thereof, including utilization of open spaces and substantially as
shown on approved development plans, all subject to §§
96.051 through
96.054.
(1992 Code, § 38-46) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 28-17, passed 3-21-
2017)
§ 96.055 PROPERTY OWNER(S) DUTY TO REPAIR AND MAINTAIN SIDEWALK.
   Pursuant to city ordinance, owners of real property abutting or adjoining a
sidewalk shall maintain such sidewalk in such condition that the sidewalk will
not endanger persons or property; will not interfere with the public
convenience in the use of the sidewalk; and will not create a public nuisance.
(Ord. 50-22, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 96.056 FAILURE TO REPAIR SIDEWALK DEFECTS AND DAMAGE PROHIBITED.
   Any owner of real property who fails to keep the sidewalks abutting or
adjoining such property properly maintained and in repair creates or maintains
a public nuisance, which shall be unlawful. The owner(s) of such real property
shall be liable to the city for any and all damage or injury caused by such
neglect and shall be responsible for the costs of abating the public nuisance.
Examples of sidewalk defects constituting a public nuisance include, but are
not limited to:
   (a)   Vertical separations that result in a trip hazard;
   (b)   Horizontal separations between panels or cracks to the extent it is a
potential danger to the public;
   (c)   Holes or depressions in the concrete;
   (d)   Excessive spalling (exposed rock causing depressions in the concrete);
   (e)   A panel of sidewalk that is cracked to the extent it constitutes a
potential danger to the public;
   (f)   A panel of sidewalk missing concrete that has broken off to the extent
it is a potential danger to the public;
   (g)   Missing sidewalk panel(s);
   (h)   Pooling of water caused by inadequate drainage;
   (i)   Uneven or loose sidewalk panels; and
   (j)   Other damage to a sidewalk that presents a dangerous condition to
human traffic.
(Ord. 50-22, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 96.057 FAILURE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Upon failure of owner(s) to abate a public nuisance by accomplishment of the
required repairs or maintenance within the time frame indicated in the written
notice provided by the city, city shall have the right to abate the public
nuisance by accomplishing the required remediation and pursue full
reimbursement from owner(s) pursuant to city ordinance. Notwithstanding the 14-
day time restriction applicable to abatement of other types of nuisances, the
city is authorized to extend the time frame provided for abatement of any and
all nuisances addressed in this chapter beyond such 14-day period.
(Ord. 50-22, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 96.058 CITY'S RIGHT TO REPAIR OR MAINTAIN.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the city shall have
the right to repair or maintain any existing sidewalk and pursue reimbursement
for such repair or maintenance costs from owner(s), pursuant to city ordinance.
(Ord. 50-22, passed 5-4-2022)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 96.070 SUPERVISION.
   The city engineer shall supervise all excavations made for any purpose in
the streets, alleys or public grounds, and shall require compliance with all
the requirements of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 38-56) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.071 REFILLING EXCAVATIONS.
   Excavations shall be backfilled or refilled, and pavement, or other street
surfacing, shall be replaced pursuant to the requirements of the city’s
standard specifications and design standards.
(1992 Code, § 38-57) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.072 RESTORING PAVEMENTS OR STREET SURFACING TO FORMER CONDITION.
   The city shall keep on file all copies of permits issued under this
subchapter and to inspect from time to time all pavement, or other street
surfacing, disturbed pursuant to those permits. If the pavement or surfacing is
not restored and maintained as nearly as possible to the original condition,
notice shall be given the permittee, who shall put the pavement or surfacing in
good condition within three days. If the permittee fails after notice given to
restore and maintain the pavement or the surface thereof, the city may make the
necessary repairs and the permittee shall pay the costs thereof, and until the
costs are paid, no other permit shall be issued to him or her or to any person
in his or her behalf.
(1992 Code, § 38-58) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.073 EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREET.
   No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation on any lot adjacent
to any street, alley, public ground or traveled road, or roadway, except the
excavations be securely guarded so as to prevent the injury of any person or
animal passing upon or along the street, alley, ground or road.
(1992 Code, § 38-59) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
PERMIT REQUIRED
§ 96.085 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or under any
street, parking, sidewalk, alley or public ground or remove any earth, soil,
paving, gravel or material therefrom without first having obtained a permit for
the work therefor from the city
(1992 Code, § 38-60) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.086 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   The work permit application shall state where the work is to be the extent
thereof, in front of which lots and the purpose of the work.
(1992 Code, § 38-61) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.087 PERMIT FEE.
   The following fees shall be charged for permits. The city shall compute the
amount of the fee which shall be paid to the city. No fee provided for by this
section shall be charged for work for city purposes by departments of the city.
Permit Fee
Permit                                                                           Fee
Construction permit (installation of public improvements; including street
grading, curb and gutter, roadway subbase, base and surface, drainage and flood  $50
control, water, and sanitary sewer in proposed subdivisions)
Excavation and grading permit (grading outside the street right-of-way in
proposed subdivisions and individual lots as defined by the Uniform Building     $50
Code)
Other fees:
   Permanent repair during winter when weather permits usage of permanent patch
      0–16 square feet                                                   $180
      For each additional square foot                                      $8
   Replacing asphaltic surface cuts, permanent repair when hot asphalt is
available
      0–16 square feet                                                   $140
      For each additional square foot                                      $4
   A mobilization charge of $50 will be assessed if the patch area is not      
properly prepared and the city patch crew has been requested to the site.
   The city reserves the right to require the contractor to provide their own
qualified asphalt contractor for patching of the street. All expenses incurred    
are to be paid by the contractor.
Sewer, water and sump pump permit (installation, removal, repair or maintenance
of sanitary sewer services, water services, storm sewer services and sump pump   $50
services)
Sidewalk and driveway permit (new access points from private property to city
streets including construction or repair of driveways and sidewalks. Any person
who repairs or replaces a sidewalk within the right-of-way and in front of or    $15
along a residential property owned by him or her shall be exempt from the
sidewalk and driveway permit fee.)
Street cut permit (installation, removal, repair or maintenance of private
facilities other than sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer services in the      $30
public right-of-way or easement)
Sump pump collection system permit (connection to an existing collection system  $454
not constructed by the developer of lot connecting to the system)
Sump pump connection permit (installation of sump pump discharge line from       $10
building to storm sewer or collection system)
Contractors and utility companies will be billed monthly, payable within 30 days
after the billing date.
 
(1992 Code, § 38-62) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999; Ord. 106-00, passed 12-
12-2000; Ord. 13-05, passed 2-14-2005; Ord. 91-06, passed 7-24-2006; Ord. 91-
24, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 96.088 CONDITION OF ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If any permit required by this subchapter is for excavating in or under any
street, parking or sidewalk, the permit shall contain a statement and shall be
issued only upon the express condition that the permittee shall refill the
excavation in accordance with the instructions of the city engineer and restore
the pavement or surfacing, as the case may be, to its former condition and
maintain it in that condition for a period of three years from the time of the
completion of the work authorized by the permit.
(1992 Code, § 38-64) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
§ 96.089 RAILROAD COMPANY’S REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF STREET CROSSINGS, DITCHES
AND DRAINS, LIGHTING AND CROSSING ALARMS.
   (a)   Any railroad company maintaining or operating any railroad onto or
across any street, avenue or alley within the city shall construct thereat a
crossing and shall keep open, maintain and repair all crossings as required by
the city. All railroads shall make, keep open and repair ditches, drains,
sewers and culverts along and under their tracks, so that drainage of adjacent
property shall not be impeded and the right-of-way shall be properly drained.
   (b)   In all cases where, in the opinion of the city, it is necessary for
the safety and protection of the public that street or avenue crossings over
railway tracks be lighted or street crossing alarms, signs or automatic signals
installed to notify the public of approaching trains, the city may cause the
railroad company over whose line the street or avenue crosses to install
lights, crossing alarms or automatic signals for the purpose of notifying the
public of approaching trains in a manner and by the method, as, in the opinion
of the city, will be most suitable for the protection of the public.
   (c)   Whenever the city shall deem it necessary to order the construction,
reconstruction or repair of any street or avenue crossing or of ditches, drains
and sewers or the installation of lights, crossing alarms or automatic signals
at any crossing it shall declare in a proposed resolution the necessity of the
construction, repair or improvement, describing therein the crossing ditch,
drain or sewer to be improved and the nature of the improvement and the time
and place at which the city council will meet to consider the adoption of the
resolution. The resolution shall be published once a week for three consecutive
weeks prior to the time specified in the resolution for the consideration of
the adoption of the resolution. A copy of the resolution shall also be served
upon the railroad company involved at least 15 days prior to the meeting in the
manner provided by law for the service of a summons upon a railroad
corporation. At the time of the meeting or hearing or at any adjournment
thereof, the council shall investigate and consider the matter and shall hear
the evidence and testimony of all parties appearing or interested therein. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the council may reject or adopt the resolution
with or without amendment as it shall deem proper.
   (d)   The resolution shall be published, take effect and be subject to
referendum as other resolutions, and upon taking effect a copy of the
resolution duly certified by the city finance director shall be served upon the
railroad company involved in the manner provided by law for the service of a
summons upon a railroad corporation. Thereafter, and within 20 days or a longer
time as may be granted by the council as set forth in the resolution, the
railroad company shall do and perform all acts required by the resolution. Any
railroad company neglecting to comply with the requirements of any resolution
duly enacted in accordance with this section shall be liable to a penalty of
$25 for each day the neglect shall continue, to be recovered in a civil action
in the name of the city and paid into the general fund of the city.
(1992 Code, § 38-65) (Ord. 104-99, passed 10-14-1999)
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 96.100 DUTY TO REMOVE SNOW.
   (a)   The owner or person in possession of any property abutting on any
sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk free from snow and ice and shall remove any
snow or ice from the sidewalk within 48 hours after the termination of any snow
fall, snow or ice accumulation.
   (b)   The owner or person in possession of any property abutting upon any
sidewalk which ends at an intersection or crosswalk shall maintain the sidewalk
free from snow and ice to the edge of the street. Snow and ice deposited on the
sidewalk in the street removal process shall be removed within 48 hours of
being deposited.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.801; 1992 Code, § 38-76) (Ord. 2395, passed 12-20-1965;
Ord. 101-92, passed 11-16-1992; Ord. 76-93, passed 10-18-1993)
§ 96.101 NOTICE.
   The city shall notify all owners or persons in possession of property
abutting on sidewalks to keep the sidewalks free from snow and ice and to
remove the same within 48 hours after every fall or accumulation of snow or
ice. The notice need not be given personally but may be given generally through
the official newspaper annually. The notice shall provide that each owner or
person in possession is required to keep the sidewalk in front of the premises
free and clear from snow and ice. It shall further provide that if the owner or
person in possession fails to remove the snow or ice within 72 hours of the
falling or accumulation hereof, that the city may cause the snow or ice to be
removed and charge the cost to the abutting property.
(1992 Code, § 38-77) (Ord. 101-92, passed 11-16-1992)
§ 96.102 DISPOSAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
   The property owner, person in possession or person removing snow or ice from
any sidewalk, public or private driveway, parking lot or parking area shall
dispose of accumulated snow and ice upon the property as follows.
   (a)   Snow and ice shall not be deposited on any sidewalk or in any park.
   (b)   Snow and ice shall not be deposited so as to obstruct or interfere
with the passage or vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (c)   In the area designated zone 1 for snow alerts, snow and ice shall not
be deposited upon any public street or alley that has been cleared of snow by
the grading of snow away from the curb or the picking up and carrying away of
snow by the city. Snow and ice may be deposited on the street until it has been
cleared.
   (d)   In all areas outside zone 1, no snow may be blown, pushed, or
otherwise placed on any street at any time (both before and after the street
has been plowed).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.802; 1992 Code, § 38-78) (Ord. 2395, passed 12-20-1965;
Ord. 2662, passed 1-12-1970; Ord. 1-84, passed 1-3-1984; Ord. 101-92, passed
11-16-1992; Ord. 28-93, passed 4-12-1993; Ord. 35-94, passed 4-25-1994)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.103 CITY MAY REMOVE.
   If the owner or person in possession of property fails to remove the snow or
ice from the sidewalks within the time specified, the city may have the snow or
ice removed and charge the cost thereof against the abutting property each time
the snow or ice is removed.
(1992 Code, § 38-78.1) (Ord. 101-92, passed 11-16-1992)
§ 96.104 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   (a)   The cost to the city for the removal of snow and ice each year shall
be certified to the city finance director on or before the first day of June of
each year.
   (b)   The finance director shall prepare an estimate of the assessment
against each lot for the removal of snow and ice for the preceding season
including the expense of levying the special assessment against each lot. The
estimates shall be submitted to the city council.
   (c)   Upon the filing of the assessment roll with the finance director, the
governing body shall fix a time and place of hearing upon the same, not less
than 20 days from the date of filing. The finance director shall than publish a
notice of the time and place of hearing in the official newspaper at least one
week prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall describe the
reason why the special assessment is levied, the date of filing of the
assessment roll, the time and place of the hearing thereon, and that the roll
will be open for public inspection at the office of the finance director, and
shall refer to the special assessment roll for further particulars.
   (d)   The finance director shall also mail a copy of the notice, by first-
class mail, to the owner or owners of any property to be assessed for the snow
and ice removal, at the address as shown on the records of the assessor. The
mailings shall be at least one week prior to the date set for the hearing. The
owner or person in possession may appear at the hearing to protest the
assessment and to give reasons why the assessment should not be levied.
   (e)   Pursuant to the hearing, the council shall approve and file the
assessment roll with the finance director. After approval and filing with the
finance director, the assessment roll shall be a special lien against the
property described and shall be collected in a like manner as for special
assessments for public improvements.
(1992 Code, § 38-78.2) (Ord. 101-92, passed 11-16-1992)
§ 96.105 VIOLATION.
   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 38-78.3) (Ord. 101-92, passed 11-16-1992) Penalty, see §
10.999
PARKING ON CITY STREETS DURING SNOW REMOVAL
§ 96.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SNOW REMOVAL ALERT. Those times as there is a snow accumulation on the
public streets of two inches or more, or those times as the public works
director, or the director’s designee declares that snow removal operations on
the public streets will commence and that the provisions of this subchapter in
regard to parking on public streets during snow removal operations are
effective and will be enforced.
   STREET. The entire width of any public roadway within the city and it shall
not be limited to those roadways designated as a STREET, but include avenues
and all other names by which public roadways are designated.
   ZONE 1. Phillips Avenue from Falls Park Drive to Fifth Street, Main Avenue
from Falls Park Drive to Fourth Street, Sixth Street from Weber Avenue to
Phillips Avenue, Eighth Street from Phillips Avenue to Cliff Avenue and that
area of the city enclosed within the boundaries of Minnesota Avenue on the
west, Fourth Street on the north, Third Avenue on the east and Fourteenth
Street on the south.
   ZONE 2. The area of the city enclosed within the boundaries of Russell
Street on the north, Cliff Avenue on the east, Thirty-Third Street on the
south, and Western Avenue on the west, except Zone 1, including the entire
roadway of those designated streets and avenues.
   ZONE 3. That area of the city not included in Zone 1 or Zone 2.
(1992 Code, § 38-79) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999; Ord. 109-04, passed 11-8-
2004)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 96.121 DECLARATION OF SNOW REMOVAL ALERT.
   When the public works director, or the director’s designee, determines that
snow removal from the public streets will commence, the director or designee
will announce the declaration of a snow removal alert through local news media
and whatever other sources are available. The announcement shall indicate that
the provisions of this subchapter will be effective and be enforced. It shall
also designate the date and time when the alert begins. The determination to
declare a snow removal alert will be based on the then existing weather
conditions, and the amount of snow then on the ground or expected according to
forecasts from weather forecasting services.
(1992 Code, § 38-80) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999)
§ 96.122 PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL ALERT—ZONE 1.
   During a snow removal alert within zone 1, as that term is defined by §
96.120, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
public street between the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(1992 Code, § 38-81) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999)
§ 96.123 PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL ALERT—ZONE 2.
   During a snow removal alert within Zone 2, during the hours 8:00 a.m. to 5:
00 p.m., no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
public street which runs north and south until the street is plowed curb to
curb, and during the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., no person shall park or
allow to remain parked any vehicle on any public street which runs east and
west until the street is plowed curb to curb.
(1992 Code, § 38-82) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999)
§ 96.124 PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL ALERT—ZONE 3.
   Parking on any public street in Zone 3 is completely prohibited, on both
sides and regardless of the directional run of that street, until the street is
plowed curb to curb.
(1992 Code, § 38-83) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999)
§ 96.125 AUTHORIZATION FOR OTHERWISE PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED PARKING.
   Nothing in this subchapter authorizes parking a vehicle where otherwise
prohibited or restricted, by signs or otherwise, to include emergency snow
route signs.
(1992 Code, § 38-84) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999)
§ 96.126 DETERMINATION OF STREET DIRECTION.
   The director of public works shall determine, when not obvious, which
streets run north and south and which streets run east and west, and shall
provide that information upon request.
(1992 Code, § 38-85) (Ord. 105-99, passed 10-18-1999)
§ 96.127 SNOW GATES.
   The City of Sioux Falls shall use snow gates or other devices to prevent
snow, in an amount that prevents usual access, from being plowed or placed into
driveways or their openings to public streets from and after November 1, 2013.
This section shall cover City employees and contract employees. Snow gates are
discretionary upon the declaration of a snow emergency on routes that have been
declared snow emergency routes.
(Ord. IM01-14, approved by the voters on 4-8-2014)
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 96.140 DESIGNATION.
   Buildings on the east or north side of any street or avenue shall be given
even numbers, and the buildings on the west or south side thereof shall be
given odd numbers.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.201; (1992 Code, § 38-94)
§ 96.141 CENTRAL POINT.
   All buildings on the streets and avenues of the city shall be numbered,
commencing from Phillips Avenue and Ninth Street, and shall be numbered north,
south, east and west from Phillips Avenue and Ninth Street, as the case may be,
as far as the streets or avenues may be extended.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.202; 1992 Code, § 38-95)
§ 96.142 NUMBERING NORTH AND SOUTH STREETS.
   On all streets and avenues intersecting Ninth Street and running north and
south the first block to the north or south of Ninth Street shall be numbered
100, north or south as the case may be, and the numbers shall be increased at
the rate of 100 for each block or space between two streets, north or south of
Ninth Street. The first number to the north or south of any intersection of the
streets and avenues running north and south shall be a multiple of 100, and
therefrom within each block the buildings or lots shall be numbered
consecutively to the north or south as the case may be. To designate the
numbers on streets or avenues running north and south of Ninth Street, the word
“north” or “south” shall be placed between the number and name of the street or
avenue, as the street may be north or south of Ninth Street.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.203; 1992 Code, § 38-96)
§ 96.143 NUMBERING EAST AND WEST STREETS.
   On all streets and avenues intersecting Phillips Avenue and running east and
west the first block to the east or west of Phillips Avenue shall be numbered
100, east or west as the case may be, and the numbers shall be increased at the
rate of 100 for each block or space between two streets, east or west of
Phillips Avenue. The first number to the east or west of any intersection of
the streets and avenues running east and west shall be a multiple of 100, and
therefrom within each block the buildings or lots shall be numbered
consecutively to the east or west as the case may be. To designate the numbers
on streets or avenues running east and west of Phillips Avenue the word “east”
or “west” shall be used between the number and the name of the street or
avenue, as the street may be east or west of Phillips Avenue.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.204; 1992 Code, § 38-97)
§ 96.144 ISSUANCE.
   The city engineer is hereby authorized and directed to issue numbers for
each building, business place, dwelling house or lot fronting on a street or
avenue in the city in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 11.205; 1992 Code, § 38-98)
§ 96.145 NUMBERING INTERVALS.
   From the corner of each block nearest its respective central point, each
building lot shall be assigned a specific number.
(1992 Code, § 38-99)
§ 96.146 DISPLAY OF NUMBERS.
   (a)   Every person having a home or business establishment within the city
is required to display in a prominent place upon the front of his or her home
or business establishment the street number assigned by the city engineer as
provided in this subchapter.
   (b)   Prior to commencing construction of any new home or business
establishment within the city, the assigned address number shall be placed on
the lot on which construction will take place and shall be clearly visible from
the street, avenue or roadway and shall be maintained until a permanent address
number is placed on the structure.
   (c)   Prior to issuance of any occupancy permit, the permanent address
number of the size specified by this subchapter shall be affixed on the
structure.
(1992 Code, § 38-100) (Ord. 70-78, passed 6-26-1978)
§ 96.147 SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMBERS.
   Each numeral of the street number displayed by each person pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall not be less than two inches in width with a
minimum stroke width of one-half inches and not less than four inches in
height. The street number shall be so located on the structure on a contrasting
background so that it is clearly visible from the street. Multi-building
campus/complex developments addressed on private or public streets shall be
provided with signage at the entrance to the campus/complex indicative of the
address ranges within.
(1992 Code, § 38-101) (Ord. 70-78, passed 6-26-1978; Ord. 35-07, passed 2-20-
2007)
§ 96.148 COST ASSESSED.
   If the owner or occupant of any dwelling house, building, business
establishment fronting on a street or avenue within the city shall fail, refuse
or neglect to place the number, or replace the number, when necessary, the
chief building services official may cause a notice to be served by registered
mail on the owner or occupant at the owner or occupant’s last known address,
ordering the appropriate correction. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant to fail to comply with the notice within ten days after the date of
service. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(1992 Code, § 38-102) (Ord. 70-78, passed 6-26-1978)
BUS PASSENGER SHELTERS AND COURTESY BENCHES
§ 96.160 AUTHORIZED.
   Bus passenger shelters and courtesy benches for the convenience of local bus
and transportation patrons and members of the general public may be installed
and maintained only in the manner and subject to the conditions and regulations
prescribed by this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 38-113) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980)
§ 96.161 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Approval must be obtained from the city for the installation of a bus
passenger shelter or courtesy bench.
(1992 Code, § 38-114) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980)
§ 96.162 SPECIFICATIONS AND ADVERTISING.
   All bus passenger shelters and courtesy benches shall conform to the
specifications as to size and construction as shall be specified at the time of
the issuance of the approval. Advertising material placed thereon shall be
limited to that permitted by the city planning department.
(1992 Code, § 38-115) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980)
§ 96.163 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL PROCESS.
   Approval required by this subchapter shall be submitted to the engineering
division in the form prescribed by it disclosing the name and address of the
applicant, together with other necessary information required by the
engineering division. Approval may be made for one or more bus passenger
shelters or courtesy benches.
(1992 Code, § 38-116) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980)
§ 96.164 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If the engineering division shall find that the applicant has complied with
the prerequisites of this subchapter and that the installation and maintenance
of a bus passenger shelter or courtesy bench at the specified location will not
encumber or interfere with the free use of the public way in the vicinity
thereof, the engineering division shall approve the application.
(1992 Code, § 38-118) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980; Ord. 103-82, passed 9-
27-1982)
§ 96.165 PERMIT NONASSIGNABLE.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
assignable.
(1992 Code, § 38-119) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980)
§ 96.166 REVOCATION OF APPROVAL.
   Any approval issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked
by the city council for the violation by the permittee of any applicable
provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.
(1992 Code, § 38-121) (Ord. 115-80, passed 11-24-1980)
ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
§ 96.180 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSEMBLY. Any block party, demonstration, rally, gathering or group of 25 or
more persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common
purpose, design or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other
public place, which assembly substantially inhibits the usual flow of
pedestrians or vehicular travel or which occupies any public area, but does not
rise to the definition of a special event.
   PARADE. Any scheduled walk, demonstration, procession, motorcade consisting
of 25 or more persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a
common purpose, design, designation or goal upon any public place, which does
not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations and controls.
   RESTRICTED EXHIBITION DRIVING EVENT. A city-permitted event that features a
vehicle(s) driving in a manner that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise,
tires to squeal, skid, or slide upon acceleration or stopping, or that
simulates a temporary race or causes the vehicle(s) to turn abruptly or sway.
   SPECIAL EVENT.
      (1)   Any of the following activities involving 25 or more persons,
animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, open to the general public
taking place on public space that involves a temporary and exclusive use of
public space involving a substantial deviation from current legal land use or
legal nonconforming use and may include, but not be limited to:
         A.   Amusements or carnivals;
         B.   Entertainment;
         C.   Music by way of sound amplification;
         D.   Dancing;
         E.   Dramatic or theatrical productions;
         F.   Festivals;
         G.   Parades;
         H.   Runs, walks, triathlons and bicycle races or rides that will not
comply with the normal or usual traffic regulations or controls or are likely
to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with free flow of traffic;
         I.   Any activity involving the sale of merchandise, food or alcohol;
         J.   Any activity making use of structures not already present on the
public space such as stages, booths, canopies, awnings, risers, bleachers,
fences, partitions, stands or similar constructions; and
         K.   Any activity taking place on public space that may require for
its successful execution city services to a degree significantly over and above
that routinely provided under ordinary circumstances, as determined by the
special events committee.
   SPECIAL EVENTS. Shall not include the use of public space by governmental
agencies acting within the scope of their authority.
   SPONTANEOUS EVENT. An unplanned or unannounced coming together of persons,
animals or vehicles as described in this section, which was not contemplated
beforehand by any participants therein and which is caused by or in response to
unforeseen circumstances or events and which is neither a parade nor as
assembly, as defined in this section.
(1992 Code, § 38-133) (Ord. 70-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 55-03, passed 6-16-
2003; Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 96.181 PERMITS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Permit required; assembly. No person shall conduct, manage or
participate in any assembly without a valid permit or outside the provisions of
a permit as provided in this subchapter.
   (b)   Permit required; special event. No person shall hold, sponsor, aid or
cause to be held a special event without a valid permit or outside the
provisions of a permit as provided in this subchapter.
   (c)   Exceptions. The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to or
affect funeral processions.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 9.801, 9.805; 1992 Code, § 38-134) (Ord. 15-85, passed 2-
19-1985; Ord. 70-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 55-03, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 39-
12, passed 6-19-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Driving through procession, see §
76.085
   Offenses against public peace, see
ch. 131
   Offenses, see title XIII
   Traffic, see title VII
§ 96.182 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Special event organizers shall provide occurrence form contractual, personal
injury, bodily injury and property damage liability coverage with limits of at
least $1,000,000 per occurrence, $2,000,000 general aggregate and $2,000,000
aggregate products and completed operations. The required limit may include
excess liability (umbrella) coverage. The policy shall name the city and its
representatives as an additional insured. If “occurrence form” insurance is not
available, “claims made” insurance will be acceptable. The city attorney and
the office of risk management shall review the insurance coverage and may
reject insurance that does not comply with this section. The permittee shall
provide the declarations page or a copy of any policy, complete with
endorsements, upon the request of the city attorney or the office of risk
management.
(Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012)
§ 96.183 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; HOLD HARMLESS.
   Any person desiring to conduct an assembly or special event shall not less
than 60 days prior to the start date of a Class 2 or higher special event, not
less than 30 days prior to the start date of a Class 3 or lower special event,
not less than 14 days prior to the start date of a restricted exhibition
driving event, and not less than 48 hours prior to the start of an assembly,
file an application with the city upon a form to be furnished by the city,
which application shall set forth the following:
   (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for
the assembly, restricted exhibition driving event or special event. If the
sponsor includes a sponsoring organization or corporation of any kind, the
applicant shall provide the name and address of the person within the
sponsoring organization who will be responsible for the assembly, restricted
exhibition driving event or special event requested as well as the name,
address and telephone number of the organization;
   (b)   The nature of the proposed assembly or special event;
   (c)   The date, hours and location requested;
   (d)   An agreement to save and keep the city free and harmless from any and
all loss or damages or claims for damages, including attorney’s fees and
litigation costs, arising from or out of the assembly, restricted exhibition
driving event or special event;
   (e)   An agreement to comply with all related municipal ordinances, rules,
regulations and other applicable laws; and
   (f)   For a restricted exhibition driving event, the application shall be
accompanied with written authorization from the property owner or authorized
agent.
   (g)   Other pertinent information as may be requested.
(1992 Code, § 38-135) (Ord. 15-85, passed 2-19-1985; Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-
2012; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 96.184 APPLICATION FEES; SPECIAL EVENT.
   Applicants for any special event shall at the time of making application pay
to the city an application fee, which will be used to defray the costs related
to the issuance of the permit. This application fee is nonrefundable and in
addition to any other permits and fees required by law. The amount of the
application fee will be classified on the following basis:
 
Special Event Classification                         Cost
Class 1: 10,000 or more participants                 $500
Class 2: 2,500 to 9,999 participants and all parades $250
Class 3: 500 to 2,499 participants                   $100
Class 4: Under 500 participants                      $25
 
(Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012)
§ 96.185 APPLICATION; REVIEW; REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued if the proposed assembly, restricted
exhibition driving event or special event:
      (1)   Will cause unreasonable injury or damage to either the space
requested or any space;
      (2)   Conflicts with a prior permit, or a prior application that is
likely to be granted, for the same space and for the same time;
      (3)   Will continue for a duration longer than seven days, including any
setup or teardown time;
      (4)   Will involve such a number of persons or activities as will exceed
the reasonable capacity of the space requested;
      (5)   Will interfere with the provision of proper fire and police
protection to the area adjacent to the space requested or any other area within
the city;
      (6)   Will adversely affect adjacent or neighboring properties by causing
excessive noise or creating a nuisance;
      (7)   Will unreasonably interfere with the safe, orderly and expeditious
movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
      (8)   Will be conducted primarily for the purpose of private monetary
gain or commercial advertisement. This subsection does not apply to an
application for a restricted exhibition driving event; and
      (9)   Will fail to comply in any respect with the provisions of this
subchapter or any other applicable law.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant that has unpaid or past due
fees under this subchapter for any prior special event.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued for any assembly or special event to be held
on any arterial street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., 11:30 a.m.
to 1:00 p.m., and 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, without
provision being made for an adequate number of police officers to provide for
the safe, orderly and expeditious movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued for any restricted exhibition driving event
to be held between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (e)   In determining whether an application should be approved, the city may
consider:
      (1)   Whether in holding any previous assembly, restricted exhibition
driving event or special events, the applicant has conformed to all permit
requirements and the provisions of this subchapter; and
      (2)   The financial and practical ability of the applicant to conduct the
proposed assembly, restricted exhibition driving event or special event in
conformance with the provisions of the permit and this subchapter.
   (f)   No permit shall be issued for an event within 60 days in the case of a
Class 2 or higher special event, 30 days in the case of a Class 3 or lower
special event, 14 days in the case of a restricted exhibition driving event or
48 hours in the case of an assembly after the application was filed with the
city.
(Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 96.186 PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   Upon consideration of the general requirements as set forth in §
96.185, the city may issue a permit for an assembly, restricted exhibition
driving event or special event and may, as part of the permit, include those
conditions as deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare and for the protection of the public space to be utilized or
otherwise affected by the assembly, restricted exhibition driving event or
special event.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued until the compliance bond and insurance
required under this chapter, if any, have been filed with the city.
   (c)   Issuance of a permit shall not constitute city endorsement or
sponsorship of the event, and no permittee shall represent, advertise, promote
or otherwise publish any claim whatsoever related to city endorsement or
sponsorship of the event.
(Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 96.187 SPECIAL EVENT FEES.
   If the permittee fails to provide necessary equipment reasonably required
for a special event, the city may arrange for the same and charge the permittee
for any cost related thereto. Necessary equipment shall include, but not be
limited to, equipment related to sanitation requirements, toilet facilities,
traffic control and barricading.
(Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012)
§ 96.188 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall have the permit in his or her possession during the activity permitted
thereby and shall display the permit upon the request of any law enforcement
officer. Failure to display the permit shall be unlawful.
(1992 Code, § 38-141) (Ord. 15-85, passed 2-19-1985; Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-
2012) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 96.189 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The city may immediately revoke any permit issued under this
subchapter if it is found that the assembly, restricted exhibition driving
event or special event:
      (1)   Is being conducted in violation of any of the terms and conditions
of the permit, the provisions of this subchapter, or any applicable;
      (2)   Is substantially interfering with fire or police protection;
      (3)   Is causing physical damage to persons or property;
      (4)   Is causing a disturbance of the peace;
      (5)   Is causing a health hazard; and
      (6)   Is not conducted in a manner consistent with the representation set
forth in the application therefor.
   (b)   The city may immediately revoke any permit issued under this
subchapter:
      (1)   If an emergency arises making it impossible to assign necessary
personnel to the assembly or special event required to protect the public
safety; and
      (2)   If information is obtained after the permit is issued from which
the city may reasonably conclude that the permit should have been denied.
   (c)   The city may also immediately revoke any permit issued under this
subchapter if it finds that the required compliance bond or insurance has
lapsed or has been cancelled.
(1992 Code, § 38-142) (Ord. 70-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-
2012; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 96.190 [RESERVED].
§ 96.191 APPEAL.
   (a)   Any person who is aggrieved by the denial or granting of a permit as
provided in this subchapter may appeal pursuant to the procedures established
by the administrative code provisions of this code according to the procedures
set forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
   (b)   If the city denies an application or revokes an assembly, restricted
exhibition driving event or special event permit, the city shall subsequently
notify the applicant or permittee of the denial or revocation in writing,
delivered in person or by mail to the applicant’s address stated in the
application. The notice shall include the reasons for the denial or revocation
and shall advise the applicant or permittee that the decision may be appealed
through the procedures established by the administrative code provisions of
this code according to the procedures set forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 38-144) (Ord. 70-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 55-03, passed 6-16-
2003; Ord. 39-12, passed 6-19-2012; Ord. 15-25, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 96.192 RESIDENTIAL PICKETING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in picketing before or about the residence or
dwelling of any individual in the city.
(1992 Code, § 38-145) (Ord. 118-88, passed 12-5-1988; Ord. 55-03, passed 6-16-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.999
PLAN REVIEW FEES
§ 96.205 CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW FEE.
   A charge of $100 shall be made for filing a construction plan.
(1992 Code, § 38-146) (Ord. 96-07, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 96.206 FINAL PLAN REVIEW FEE.
   A charge of $300 shall be made for filing a final plan; plus a fee of $10
for each lot.
(1992 Code, § 38-147) (Ord. 96-07, passed 6-18-2007)
ARTERIAL STREET PLATTING FEE
§ 96.220 ARTERIAL STREET PLATTING FEE.
   (a)   The purpose of this subchapter is to impose an arterial street
platting fee on real property to recover the platted or replatted developed
real property’s proportionate share of the costs to expand and sustain the
arterial street system.
   (b)   The arterial street system is defined as the system of roadways for
the city, classified as arterials on the Sioux Falls Major Street Plan and
areas of joint jurisdiction as detailed in Sioux Falls Subdivision Ordinance §
157.004 and built to city design standards, as amended from time to time.
   (c)   It is the intent of this subchapter to charge platted or replatted
real property its proportionate share of the increased costs of expanding and
sustaining the arterial street system necessitated by the development of such
real property.
   (d)   The city council finds the amount of the arterial street platting fee
based on rational nexus and rough proportionality standards has been
appropriately determined according to the analysis described in the Nexus Study
for Arterial Street and Water Distribution Platting Fees, prepared by Duncan
Associates (revised May 2015).
   (e)   This subchapter incorporates the Development Area Maps as set forth in
the city’s comprehensive plan.
   (f)   (1)   For the platted or replatted real property located in Tier I and
Tier II of the city’s comprehensive plan, the arterial street platting fee
shall be paid prior to approval of any plat or replat.
      (2)   For platted or replatted real property located outside of Tier I
and Tier II but within the joint jurisdiction area detailed in subsection (e),
the owner may defer payment of arterial street platting fees. Any deferred
payment of arterial street platting fees shall be due and payable for the
platted or replatted real property at the earliest of:
         A.   Annexation of such platted or replatted real property or such
platted or replatted real property’s location within Tier I or Tier II; or
         B.   The owner’s application of request for rezoning or other required
city conditional use permit or license on such platted or replatted real
property; or
         C.   The city’s provision of arterial streets to or immediately
adjacent or adjoining the platted or replatted real property.
   The amount of such platting fee shall be the fee amount in effect at the
time of the event triggering the platting or replatting fee. Unpaid and
deferred platting and replatting fees shall constitute an encumbrance and lien
running with the land upon the platted or replatted real property and the
obligation to pay shall be binding upon the owner, and the owner’s successors,
successors in title, and assigns.
      (3)   The city may increase, waive, reduce or defer the payments if: (a)
the plat or replat is a minor plat or replat; (b) the plat or replat is a
transfer of ownership; (c) as set forth in a Development Agreement; or (d)
based on the city’s individualized determination as to the nature and extent of
the impact of the development.
      (4)   The city may condition approval of zoning or other city required
conditional use permits and licenses until all platting fees are paid in full
or arrangements for payment are made.
      (5)   A.   For any property platted or replatted the plat or replat shall
contain a note identifying the zoning classifications in effect at the time of
plat or replat submittal. The owner's certificate of compliance for the plat or
replat shall indicate the plat or replat is subject to the arterial street
platting fee and shall provide that arterial street platting fees shall be paid
by an applicant requesting rezoning of the plat or replat in accordance with
this section.
         B.   For rezonings of property platted or replatted, where the zoning
classification noted in the plat or replat on which the arterial street
platting fee converts to a higher per acre trip generator such as from RS to
RA-1, an additional arterial street platting fee shall be paid at the time of
the rezoning application, with the money to be refunded if the rezoning is
denied. The additional arterial street platting fee shall be the difference
between the fee for the previous zoning classification as noted on the plat or
replat and the fee for the new zoning classification. Half of the right-of-way
of any local or collector street adjacent to the rezoned property shall be
included in the calculation of the arterial street platting fee.
   (g)   (1)   The arterial street platting fee is hereby established for fees
paid in the following years:
 
              Arterial     Arterial      Arterial     Arterial     Arterial
              Street       Street        Street       Street       Street
Areas Zoned   Platting Fee Platting Fee  Platting Fee Platting Fee Platting Fee
              (effective   (effective    (effective   (effective   (effective
              January 1,   January 1,    January 1,   January 1,   January 1,
              2017)        2018)         2019)        2020)        2021)
AG, CN, or    $0 per acre  $0 per acre   $0 per acre  $0 per acre  $0 per acre
REC
C-2, C-3, or  $17,330 per  $17,763 per   $18,207 per  $18,663 per  $19,129 per
C-4           acre         acre          acre         acre         acre
I-1, I-2, and $4,019 per   $4,119 per    $4,222 per   $4,328 per   $4,436 per
AP            acre         acre          acre         acre         acre
O, C-1, LW,   $7,455 per   $7,641 per    $7,832 per   $8,028 per   $8,229 per
S-1, or S-2   acre         acre          acre         acre         acre
RA-1, RA-2,   $4,854 per   $6,510 per    $8,730 per   $8,948 per   $9,172 per
or RA-3       acre         acre          acre         acre         acre
RS, RT-1, RT-
2, RD-1, RD-  $2,024 per   $2,075 per    $2,126 per   $2,180 per   $2,234 per
2, RHP, RR,   acre         acre          acre         acre         acre
or MH
 
      (2)   The number of acres in local and collector street right-of-way
shall be included in the arterial street platting fee calculation according to
the adjacent zoning classifications. Where opposite sides of the road are of
different zoning classifications, half of the right-of-way shall be allocated
to each zoning classification. For subareas zoned with multiple zoning
classifications, such as RCD-PUD, V-PUD, DT-PUD, and PO-PUD, the higher trip
generating zoning classification shall govern for the entire subarea for
purposes of calculating the arterial street platting fee.
   (h)   The amount to be paid shall be determined by multiplying the arterial
street platting fee per acre by the relevant number of acres contained within
the plat or replat, including local and collector street right-of-way, less the
following:
      (1)   Land dedicated or to be dedicated to the city for right-of-way for
an arterial street; and
      (2)   Areas zoned REC recreation, AG agricultural or CN conservation.
   (i)   The value of contributions made by the owner or fee payer toward the
cost of expanding the arterial street system shall be subtracted from the
amount of arterial street platting fees otherwise due for the real property.
The value of the contribution shall be determined by the city engineer, based
on information submitted by the fee payer and shall be in compliance with
applicable law. No credit will be given for the value of land dedicated or to
be dedicated to the city for right-of-way or areas zoned REC or CN. No credit
will be given for facilities to the extent they exceed city requirements.
Credit for the contributions not claimed prior to payment of the arterial
street platting fee shall be waived.
   (j)   Arterial street platting fee revenues shall be deposited into an
interest-bearing account and segregated from other funds of the city. The
revenues collected and interest earned shall be used solely for expanding and
sustaining the arterial street system.
   (k)   Periodically, the Nexus Study for Arterial Street and Water
Distribution Platting Fees, prepared by Duncan Associates, will be updated. The
updates shall review fees and recommend adjustments based on the then current
costs of construction. If an amendment is necessary, the information shall be
provided to the city council together with a proposed ordinance amendment.
Pending any such adjustments, the platting fees shown in the table above shall
increase by 2.5 percent per year for years after 2021.
   (l)   A person harmed by an administrative decision of the city under this
subchapter may appeal the decision through the procedures provided in
Administrative Appeals subchapter, §§ 30.040 et seq. of this Code, as that
subchapter may be amended from time to time, except as modified below.
      (1)   The appeal shall be heard in a closed hearing by a hearing examiner
with substantial experience in land development, and the cost shall be divided
equally between the city and the appellant.
      (2)   The hearing examiner may amend, remand, or reverse the decision of
the city only if clear error is found in:
         A.   The determination of the number of acres subject to the arterial
street platting fee;
         B.   The determination of the applicable zoning classification for
determination of the arterial street platting fee;
         C.   The value of any credit;
         D.   Any mathematical computation; or
         E.   Determining or applying any other objective fact on which the
decision was based.
      (3)   If the hearing examiner finds an error and has adequate facts to
correct the error (such as correcting the number of acres used in the
computation or correcting a mathematical error), the hearing examiner shall
amend the decision accordingly and the decision shall be binding as amended.
Otherwise, the hearing examiner shall reverse the decision or remand it with
instructions for correcting the error(s) found.
      (4)   The provision for appeals under this division (l) is not intended
to serve as a provision for variances or waivers; issues of hardship or other
factors that might be considered in granting a zoning variance shall not be
considered by the hearing examiner in reaching a decision.
      (5)   Unless the hearing examiner finds clear error, the hearing officer
shall affirm the original administrative decision.
      (6)   The decision of the hearing examiner may be subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 38-150) (Ord. 115-08, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 12-13, passed 3-19-
2013; Ord. 31-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 63-24, passed 7-16-2024)
RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 96.235 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (a)   Title. This body of regulations shall be known as the “Sioux Falls
Public Rights-of-Way Utility Construction and Administration Ordinance.”
   (b)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   In order to provide for the health, safety and well-being of its
citizens, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the
use of the right-of-way, the city strives to keep its right-of-way in a state
of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. Although the general
population bears the financial burden for the upkeep of the right-of-way, a
primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its right-of-way is
the frequent excavation by persons whose equipment is located therein.
      (2)   Right-of-way obstruction is a source of frustration for merchants,
business owners and the general population which must avoid these obstructions
or change travel plans because of them. Persons whose facilities are located
within the right-of-way are the primary cause of these frequent obstructions.
      (3)   The city and other public entities have invested millions of
dollars in public funds to build and maintain the right-of-way. The city
recognizes that some persons, by placing their equipment in the right-of-way
and charging the citizens of the city for goods and services delivered thereby,
are using this property held for the public good. Although these services are
often necessary or convenient for the citizens, those persons receive revenue
and/or profit through the use of public property.
      (4)   Where roads are being constructed or reconstructed to city
standards, existing facilities within the right-of-way which conflict with the
proposed construction may have to be modified or relocated.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-1) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.236 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct or
construct in a right-of-way. APPLICANT does not include commercial vehicles or
materials regulated by §
77.009 of this Code.
   APPLICATION. The process by which an applicant submits a request to locate,
maintain or remove facilities in the right-of-way.
   CITY COST. The direct and indirect costs, including loss of pavement life,
borne by the city for pavement management, traffic management, risk management,
financial management, cost recovery, infrastructure oversight, budget analysis,
record keeping, legal assistance, systems analysis, application processing and
checking, issuing permits, inspecting job sites, creating and updating mapping
systems and performing all of the other tasks required by this Code, including
other costs the city may incur in managing the provisions of this Code.
   CONSTRUCT. To excavate, install poles, install signs or install facilities,
other than landscaping, on, above or under any part of the right-of-way.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT or PERMIT. The permit which must be obtained before a
person may excavate, obstruct, construct, repair or remove facilities in a
right-of-way.
   EMERGENCY. An occurrence which demands immediate action to prevent
significant environmental damage or loss of life, health, property or essential
public services including the re-erecting of critically needed traffic control
signs or devices.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   FACILITIES. Any tangible thing located in any right-of-way; but shall not
include sidewalks and private driveway approaches regulated under §§
96.001 through
96.011,
96.025 through
96.035,
96.050 through 96.057,
96.070 through
96.073,
96.085 through
96.089,
96.100 through
96.105,
96.120 through
96.126,
96.140 through
96.148,
96.160 through
96.166,
96.180 through
96.192,
96.205,
96.206 and
96.220, water sprinkler systems, invisible dog fences, mailboxes, boulevard
plantings or gardens in the right-of-way.
   IN. When used in conjunction with right-of-way, means over, above, in,
within, on or under a right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to construct, excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city.
   PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association, or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing or any other
legal entity.
   PRIVILEGE. The legal entitlement of a person to use the right-of-way in the
city for the purposes of carrying on its business. A PRIVILEGE for the purpose
of this chapter does not include, and does not refer to, a license, permit or
franchise. PRIVILEGE shall not include the use of the right-of-way for purposes
not in furtherance of the furnishing of utility services.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission or any
successor organization thereto.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Has or seeks to have its facilities located in any right-of-way; or
      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or any facilities located in the right-of-way.
   RESTORATION. The process by which a right-of-way is returned to a condition
as good as or better than its condition before the construction.
   RESTORATION FEE. An amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to cover
the cost of restoration.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface and space above and below any real property in
which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other
estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited
to any section line right-of-way, public street, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge,
park or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the control
of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the standard ten-foot utility easement
platted in the front ten feet of platted lots or any easements acquired by the
city through the platting process or any other acquisition.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY BOND. A bond posted to ensure proper and complete construction
and repair of a permitted facility pursuant to a permit.
   SERVICE DROPS. Those segments of a utility system that connect the end user
of that utility to the utility distribution system. These SERVICE DROPS are
normally radial in nature and serve individual sites or structures.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to construct, excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than was allowed in the permit, or to extend
a permit that had already been issued.
   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. All lines, cables, conduits, posts, tanks and any
other facilities owned or operated by persons other than the city which are
located wholly or partially underneath right-of-way.
   UTILITY. Any water, sewer, gas, drainage or culvert pipe and any electric
power, telecommunication, signal, communication or cable television conduit,
fiber, wire, cable or operator thereof, other than utilities operated by the
city.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-2) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 96.237 RIGHT-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Registration and right-of-way occupancy. Each person who occupies,
uses or seeks to occupy or use the right-of-way for any facilities located in
the right-of-way, or who has or seeks to have facilities located in any right-
of-way shall register annually with the city. Any person that currently
maintains facilities in the right-of-way on the effective date of this chapter
shall register pursuant to division (d) below with the city within 90 days of
the effective date of this chapter. Any person whose facilities use the right-
of-way to connect two or more facilities which are not part of a continuous
utility system shall register prior to installation of the facilities, but are
not required to file an annual registration.
   (b)   No construction without registration. No person may construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on or use any
facilities or any part thereof located in any right-of-way without being
registered with the city. Planting and maintaining vegetation in the right-of-
way is exempt from the requirements of this section.
   (c)   Grant of privilege.
      (1)   Any person required to register under division (b) above, that
furnishes utility services or that occupies, uses or places its facilities in
the right-of-way, is hereby granted a privilege to do so as long as it complies
with all other requirements of law.
      (2)   This division (c) does not apply to established franchise holders.
      (3)   The granting of the privilege is expressly conditioned on, and is
subject to, continuing compliance with all provisions of law.
   (d)   Registration information.
      (1)   The information provided to the city at the time of registration
shall include, but not be limited to:
         A.   The registrant’s name, address, telephone, e-mail address and
facsimile number;
         B.   The name, address, telephone, e-mail address and facsimile number
of a local representative who shall be available at all reasonable times;
         C.   Proof that the registrant has secured the insurance specified
below. All insurance secured by the registrant under the provisions of this
section shall be issued by insurance companies acceptable to the city. The
insurance specified in this section may be in a policy or policies of
insurance, primary or excess. Certificates of all required insurance shall be
provided to the city.
            1.   Workers’ compensation insurance with statutory limits of the
workers’ compensation laws of the state and Coverage B–Employer’s
Liability–covering operations of the registrant. This shall include “other
states insurance” so as to include all states not named on the “declarations”
page of the insurance policy, but excepting monopolistic state fund states. The
available limits for Coverage B–Employer’s Liability–shall be not less than
$1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000 disease–policy limits;
            2.   Commercial general liability insurance providing coverage not
less than that of the standard commercial general liability insurance policy
(“occurrence form”) for operations of the registrant. If the “occurrence form”
is not available, “claims made” coverage shall be maintained for three years
after completion of this agreement. The policy shall include contractual,
personal injury, bodily injury and property damage liability coverages with
total available limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, not less than
$2,000,000 general aggregate and $2,000,000 aggregate products and completed
operations. This commercial general liability insurance policy shall name the
city and its duly authorized representatives as an additional insured. The city
shall be provided with a copy of the certificate and the policy endorsement
prior to or upon execution of this agreement;
            3.   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, non-owned
and hired automobiles, trucks and trailers. The insurance shall provide
coverage at least as broad as that found in the standard comprehensive
automobile liability policy with limits of not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit each occurrence;
            4.   Registrant will provide the city with at least 30 days written
notice of an insurer’s intent to cancel or not renew any of the insurance
coverages. Registrant agrees to hold the city harmless from any liability,
including additional premium due because of registrant’s failure to maintain
the coverage limits required; and
            5.   The city’s approval or acceptance of certificates of insurance
does not constitute city assumption of responsibility for the validity of any
insurance policies nor does the city represent that the above coverages and
limits are adequate to protect any individual/group/business, its consultants’
or subcontractors’ interests and assumes no liability therefore.
         D.   Proof that the person is a corporation, including written
evidence that it is authorized to do business in the state, as recorded and
certified to by the Secretary of State; and
         E.   Proof that the registrant has posted the bonds required by this
code.
      (2)   The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above
current at all times by providing to the city information of changes within ten
days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
   (e)   Reporting obligations.
      (1)   A.   Each registrant shall, by April 1 of each year, file a
construction and major maintenance plan with the city. The plan shall be
submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the
information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the
coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of
right-of-way.
         B.   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
            1.   The general locations and the estimated beginning and ending
dates of all planned construction projects to be commenced during the next
calendar year; and
            2.   The tentative locations for all construction projects
contemplated for the five years starting with the next calendar year. This
information is not a public record and shall be governed by SDCL 9-34-19.
      (2)   Each registrant shall maintain the records of the locations of its
facilities in the right-of-way within the city, and any other records as the
city may reasonably require. Upon a showing of cause and upon reasonable notice
the city may require a registrant to perform a record audit at its sole
expense.
      (3)   Each registrant shall submit a monthly list of the status of its
active permits.
   (f)   Unregistered facilities.
      (1)   Any facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been
registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
      (2)   The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to:
         A.   Abating the nuisance; or
         B.   Taking possession of the facilities, and/or restoring the right-
of-way to a useable condition.
   (g)   Future uses. In permitting any facilities to be placed, in the right-
of-way, the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any
registrant’s facilities that are already in place.
   (h)   Abandoned and unused facilities. Any registrant who has abandoned
facilities in any right-of-way that are interfering with construction or
reconstruction projects shall remove them from that right-of-way when requested
by the city.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-3) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.238 RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.
   (a)   Permit requirement.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may construct
in any right-of-way without first having obtained a permit.
      (2)   A construction permit allows the holder to construct in that part
of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder free and open passage
in the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities as described
therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
   (b)   Permit applications.
      (1)   No permit shall be issued unless the following information has been
provided:
         A.   Evidence that the applicant is a registrant or is authorized to
apply for a permit on behalf of a registrant;
         B.   Submission of a completed permit application in the form required
by the city, including all required attachments, and dimensioned, dated
drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location
of all existing and proposed facilities;
         C.   If the applicant is proposing to rebuild or install overhead
facilities, the utility shall provide evidence that surplus space is not
available on existing utility poles along the proposed route;
         D.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the right-of-way, information in sufficient
detail to identify:
            1.   The excess capacity currently available in the ducts or
conduits before installation of applicant’s facilities; and
            2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in the ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant’s facilities.
         E.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within
new ducts or conduits to be constructed in right-of-way:
            1.   The location, depth, size and quantity of proposed new ducts
or conduits;
            2.   The excess capacity that will exist in the ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant’s facilities;
         F.   A construction schedule and completion date; and
         G.   Payment of all money due to the city for:
            1.   Prior construction permits issued to applicant;
            2.   Any loss, damage or expense suffered by the city as a result
of applicant’s prior construction in the right-of-way or any emergency actions
taken by the city; and
            3.   Any franchise or license issued to the registrant whose
facilities are being constructed.
      (2)   No permits for service drops or minor maintenance work of short
duration or limited scope shall be issued unless:
         A.   Conditions of divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(1)F. and (b)(1)G. above are
met; and
         B.   Street locations of service drops or minor maintenance work are
transmitted or called into the city, noting if paved surface removal or street
crossings are involved.
   (c)   Issuance of permit; conditions.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of any permit, excluding permits for service
drops or minor maintenance work of short duration or limited scope, the
applicant shall conduct, at its expense, a subsurface utility study on the
proposed route of construction or extension. The study shall include the
following tasks:
         A.   Secure all available “as-built” plans, plats and other location
data indicating the existence and approximate location of all underground
facilities along the proposed construction route;
         B.   Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any
above-ground features of all underground facilities along the proposed
construction route, including, but not limited to, manholes, valve boxes,
utility boxes, posts and visible street cut repairs;
         C.   Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the
tasks described in divisions (c)(1)A. and (c)(1)B. above on the permittee’s
proposed system route maps, and plan sheets. The permittee shall provide the
city with this information.
      (2)   A permittee shall belong to the one call line location system.
      (3)   The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the
permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the
structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of
other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and
inconvenience to the traveling public. Protective measures and devices will be
employed which are consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control
Devices.
      (4)   The requirements of this division (c) shall apply to new
construction only if the construction is located outside the area designated by
the city’s design standards.
   (d)   Permit fees.
      (1)   The city may require prior payment of permit fees.
      (2)   Permit fees paid for a permit that has been revoked are not
refundable.
   (e)   Joint applications.
      (1)   Applicants who make joint application for construction permits, for
which construction is not performed by the city, may share in the payment of
the permit fee.
      (2)   Applicants who apply for permits for the same construction, which
is not performed by the city, may share in the payment of the permit fee.
Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and so
indicate on their applications.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-4) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.239 CONSTRUCTION AND RESTORATION.
   (a)   Location of facilities. The city may prohibit or limit the placement
of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if it determines there
is insufficient space to accommodate the facilities. Factors to be considered
in determining space availability include the public interest, the condition of
the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the
protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way and future city plans for
public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be
in the public interest.
   (b)   Least disruptive technology. Construction or maintenance of facilities
shall use all reasonable means to lessen damage and disruption of the right-of-
way. A permittee may not intrude into the right-of-way without a specific
written finding by the city that the permittee will use methods to lessen
disruption to the right-of-way.
   (c)   Special exceptions. The city may grant an exception to the
requirements of divisions (a) and (b) above if the permittee, upon application,
demonstrates with written evidence that:
      (1)   The exception will not create any threat to the public health,
safety or welfare;
      (2)   The increased economic burden and the potential adverse impact on
the permittee’s construction schedule resulting from the strict enforcement of
the requirement actually or effectively prohibits the ability of the permittee
to provide utility services in the city; and
      (3)   The requirement unreasonably discriminates against the permittee in
favor of another person.
   (d)   Relocation of facilities.
      (1)   A registrant shall promptly and at its own expense, with due regard
for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities
in the right-of-way whenever the city requests removal and relocation, and
shall restore the right-of-way. The city may make the request only when the
facilities interfere with:
         A.   A present or future city use of the right-of-way;
         B.   A public improvement or a development project in which the city
has an interest or investment; or
         C.   The safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-
way.
      (2)   Unless otherwise agreed by the city engineer, if, in the reasonable
judgment of the city, a registrant fails to commence removal of its facilities
within 30 days after the city’s removal order, or if a registrant fails to
substantially complete the removal, including all associated repair of the
right-of-way of the city, within 180 days thereafter, the city may:
         A.   Declare that all rights, title and interest to the facilities
belong to the city with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited to,
the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a transfer of all
rights, title, and interest in the facilities to another person for operation;
or
         B.   Authorize removal of the facilities installed by a registrant on,
over or under the right-of-way, at the registrant’s cost and expense, by
another person; and
      (3)   Any portion of a registrant’s facilities on, over or under the
right-of-way designated by the city for removal and not timely removed by a
registrant shall belong to and become the property of the city without payment
to the registrant and the registrant shall execute and deliver those documents,
as the city shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the city, to
evidence the ownership by the city.
   (e)   Right-of-way restoration.
      (1)   The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of the
right-of-way, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit,
giving due regard to seasonal working conditions. In addition to its own work,
the permittee must restore the general area of the work, including the paving
and its foundations, to reasonably the same condition that existed before the
commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the work and use
reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 12 months thereafter.
      (2)   In approving an application for a construction permit, the city may
permit the permittee to restore the right-of-way or it may restore the right-
of-way itself.
      (3)   If the city restores the right-of-way itself, the permittee shall
pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, during the 24 months
following the restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
the cost of repairing the pavement.
      (4)   If the city allows the permittee to restore the right-of-way,
permittee shall at the time of application of a construction permit post a
performance bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to cover
the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, 12
months (24 months for pavement) after completion of the restoration of the
right-of-way, the city determines that the right-of-way has been properly
restored, the surety on the performance bond shall be released. The bond may be
in the form of an annual right-of-way bond covering all construction permits
issued by the city during that year, or an irrevocable unconditional letter of
credit.
      (5)   The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and
with the materials specified by the city. The city may prescribe the manner and
extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general
application or on a case-by-case basis.
      (6)   By restoring the right-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its
work and shall maintain it for 12 months (24 months for trench settlement)
following its completion. During this period, it shall, upon notification from
the city, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using the method
required by the city. The work shall be completed within 30 calendar days of
the receipt of the notice from the city.
      (7)   If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all repairs required by the city, the city, at its option, may
do the work. The permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
   (f)   Damage to other facilities.
      (1)   When the city performs work in the right-of-way which requires
maintaining, supporting or moving a registrant’s facilities to protect them,
and the registrant does not perform the work, the costs associated therewith
will be billed to the registrant and shall be paid within 30 days from the date
of billing.
      (2)   Each registrant shall pay for repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damage.
   (g)   Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, restoration
and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance
with city specifications.
   (h)   Inspection.
      (1)   The permittee shall notify the city in advance of the time the work
under any permit hereunder is started.
      (2)   The permittee shall make the work site available to the city for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of
the work.
      (3)   At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate
cessation of any work which threatens the life, health, safety or well-being of
the public.
      (4)   The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work which
does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order
shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation
of the permit. Within five days after issuance of the order, the registrant
shall present proof to the city engineer that the violation has been corrected.
If the proof has not been presented within the required time, the city engineer
may revoke the permit pursuant to §
96.240(c).
   (i)   Other obligations. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve
permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and
authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state or
federal rules, laws or regulations.
      (1)   A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all
applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for
all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who
performs the work.
      (2)   Except in the case of an emergency, or with the approval of the
city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for the work.
      (3)   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural
free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with.
      (4)   Any permittee shall contact all abutting property owners to
identify any existing private facilities in the right-of-way, including, but
not limited to sprinklers and other utility lines.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-5) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.240 ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION.
   (a)   Denial of permit.
      (1)   Mandatory denial. Except in the case of an emergency, no right-of-
way permit will be granted:
         A.   To any person required to be registered who has not done so;
         B.   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation
of a permit; and
         C.   If the issuance of a permit for the particular date and/or time
would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival
or any other event. The city shall be guided by the safety and convenience of
ordinary travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations
relating to the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   Discretionary denial. The city may deny a permit to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its users. The city, in its discretion, may
consider one or more of the following factors:
         A.   The extent to which the right-of-way space where the permit is
sought is available;
         B.   The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-
way;
         C.   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in
other right-of-way for the facilities of the particular company;
         D.   The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the
right-of-way that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way;
         E.   The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and
conditions of its franchise, this Code and other applicable ordinances and
regulations;
         F.   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and
businesses that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;
         G.   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when
it is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction;
         H.   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage
to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by
the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way; and
         I.   Whether the applicant has, over the previous two years, complied
with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (b)   Work done without a permit.
      (1)   Emergency situations.
         A.   Each registrant shall immediately notify the city of any
emergency involving its facilities. The registrant shall take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency.
         B.   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant’s facilities, the city may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
         C.   Any person who obstructs or excavates a right-of-way in an
emergency shall subsequently obtain a permit.
      (2)   Non-emergency situations. Except in the case of an emergency, any
person who obstructs or excavates a right-of-way without a permit must
subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal permit fee, pay double all
the other fees required by the Code, deposit with the city the fees necessary
to correct any damage to the rights-of-way and comply with all requirements of
this Code.
   (c)   Revocation of permits.
      (1)   Any permit may be revoked pursuant to the license revocation
procedures in §
110.009 of this Code.
      (2)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall reimburse the city for
its reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection
and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the revocation.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-6) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.241 RIGHT-OF-WAY BONDS.
   (a)   Right-of-way bond. Prior to beginning construction, a permittee shall
deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or
surety bond equal to 100% of the anticipated costs or those other lesser amount
established by the city.
   (b)   Purposes. The right-of-way bond shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee or registrant of the
requirements of this Code, including restoration of the right-of-way;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee’s or registrant’s violation of this Code or its failure to comply
with all rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city
issued pursuant to this Code;
      (3)   The payment of all compensation due to the city, including permit
fees;
      (4)   The payment of premiums for the required liability insurance;
      (5)   The payment to the city of any amounts for which the permittee or
registrant is liable that are not paid by its insurance; and
      (6)   The payment of any other amounts which become due to the city
pursuant to law.
   (c)   Form. The right-of-way bond shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not
renewed by the surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated by
the surety until 30 days after completion of construction of the facilities
and, notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled or not renewed
by the surety until at least 30 days written notice to the city of surety’s
intention to cancel or not renew this bond.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-7) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.242 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   (a)   City does not accept liability. By reason of the acceptance of a
registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the city does not assume
any liability:
      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service
claims by parties other than the registrant or the city; or
      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of facilities by registrants
or activities of registrants.
   (b)   Registrant or permittee indemnifies city. By registering with the
city, a registrant agrees, or by accepting a permit a permittee is required, to
defend, indemnify and hold the city whole and harmless from all costs,
liabilities and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction,
presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its facilities, or
out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way
permit. It further agrees that it will not bring, nor cause to be brought, any
action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief
against the city for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence,
installation, maintenance or operation of its facilities, or any activity
undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether the act or omission complained of
is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a right-of-way permit. The foregoing
does not indemnify the city for its own negligence except for claims arising
out of or alleging the city’s negligence where negligence arises outdoors and
is primarily related to the presence, installation, construction, operation,
maintenance or repair of the facilities by the registrant or on the
registrant’s behalf, including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits and
inspection of plans or work. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver
of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant or to the
city; and the registrant, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall
be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city
could assert in its own behalf.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-8) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 96.243 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Non-exclusive remedy. The remedies provided in this Code are not
exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have at law
or in equity. The city may seek legal and equitable relief for actual or
threatened injury to the right-of-way, including damages to the right-of-way.
   (b)   Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by the granting
of a permit, or by registering a person under §
96.237(b), does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair or lessen
the lawful powers and rights which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the
city under the Constitution and statutes of the state and under the city
charter to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the permittee. The permittee
by its acceptance of a right-of-way permit, or registrant by registration under
§
96.237(b), must agree that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power,
police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested
in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to
the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A permittee or registrant is
deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police
powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the
safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to those
powers.
   (c)   No lessening of responsibility. This subchapter shall not be construed
to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any registrant for damages to
persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city be held as assuming
any liability by reason of the issuance of any permits.
(1992 Code, § 35.5-9) (Ord. 55-99, passed 5-17-1999)
CHAPTER 97: ADVERTISING
Section
General Provisions
   
97.001   Posting on public property
   
97.002   Exemption for official governmental or utility notices
   
97.003   Exceptions
Distribution of Handbills
   
97.015   Definitions
   
97.016   Exemption for official governmental notices, mail and newspapers
   
97.017   Restricted in public places
   
97.018   Placing on vehicles
   
97.019   Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises
   
97.020   Prohibited where properly posted
   
97.021   Inhabited private premises
Advertising Vehicles
   
97.035   License required
   
97.036   Chapter 110 applicable
   
97.037   Refusal of right to operate on certain streets
   
97.038   Speed
   
97.039   Sound trucks
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Escort services,
ch. 118
   Food and food handlers,
ch. 112
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems, see
ch. 116
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Pest control, see
ch. 120
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of distribution of handbills, see SDCL 9-30-3
   Signs and advertising in public places, see SDCL 9-30-3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.001 POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall nail, paste, paint or otherwise affix in any manner any
sign, advertisement, picture or design whatever upon any bridge, viaduct,
sidewalk, parking, parkway, boulevard, crosswalk, curb or street or upon the
railing or approaches of any bridge, viaduct or sidewalk or upon any telephone,
electric light or fire alarm pole or post.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.810; 1992 Code, § 3-1)
§ 97.002 EXEMPTION FOR OFFICIAL GOVERNMENTAL OR UTILITY NOTICES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the posting of official
governmental notices or signs nor to the posting of official utility notices or
signs.
(1992 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. 106-89, passed 10-2-1989) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 97.003 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to street address numbers
which are painted on the curb directly in front of the appropriate building,
provided that the street number is painted as follows: four-inch high black
stencil numbers upon a white background no more than two feet in length, with
one set of numbers per address. The person painting the street numbers must
obtain prior written approval of the property owner or tenant.
(1992 Code, § 3-3) (Ord. 80-90, passed 8-13-1990)
DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
§ 97.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance
with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with
any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto means
and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not
less than four issues per year and sold to the public and shall mean and
include any other copyrighted material.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(1992 Code, § 3-17)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 97.016 EXEMPTION FOR OFFICIAL GOVERNMENTAL NOTICES, MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the posting of official
governmental notices, the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to
newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in a
manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
(1992 Code, § 3-18) (Ord. 28-87, passed 5-4-1987)
§ 97.017 RESTRICTED IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any
handbill in any public place; except that a handbill may be personally
delivered to any person willing to accept the handbill.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.809; 1992 Code, § 3-19) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Handbills and signs in parks, see §
95.011
   Litter, see §§
57.001 through
57.006
§ 97.018 PLACING ON VEHICLES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.809; 1992 Code, § 3-20) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Traffic code, see title VII
§ 97.019 DEPOSITING ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or
upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant.
(1992 Code, § 3-21) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 97.020 PROHIBITED WHERE PROPERLY POSTED.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on
the premises a sign bearing the words: “no trespassing,” “no peddlers or
agents,” “no advertisement” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner
that the occupants of those premises do not wish to have their right of privacy
disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon the premises.
(1992 Code, § 3-22) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 97.021 INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any handbill
directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon the
private premises. However, for inhabited private premises which are not posted,
the person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to do so, may
place or deposit any handbill in or upon the premises if the handbill is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the handbill from being blown or
drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, but
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or
regulation.
(1992 Code, § 3-23) Penalty, see §
10.999
ADVERTISING VEHICLES
§ 97.035 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No automobile, truck or other vehicle shall be operated on the streets for
the sole or principal purpose of advertising without a license to so operate.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.501; 1992 Code, § 3-34) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 97.036 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of chapter 110 of this Code, insofar as the chapter may be
applicable and not in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance of any
license under the provisions of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 3-35)
§ 97.037 REFUSAL OF RIGHT TO OPERATE ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   At times when there is heavy traffic on the streets, the police chief may
refuse all advertising automobiles, trucks and vehicles the right to operate on
the streets designated by him or her.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.502; 1992 Code, § 3-36)
§ 97.038 SPEED.
   The speed at which advertising automobiles, trucks or other vehicles shall
move on the streets shall be regulated by the police chief.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.503; 1992 Code, § 3-37)
§ 97.039 SOUND TRUCKS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
upon the streets or public places in the city a sound truck with sound
amplifying equipment in operation.
   (b)   The term SOUND TRUCK as used in this section, means any vehicle having
thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment.
   (c)   The term SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT as used in this section, means any
machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other
sound, but shall not include radios or warning devices on authorized vehicles
or horns or other warning devices on vehicles used for traffic warning
purposes.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.505; 1992 Code, § 3-38) (Ord. 2468, passed 2-13-1967)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Noise control, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
CHAPTER 98: HUMAN RELATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
98.001   Definitions
   
98.002   Declaration of policy and purpose
   
98.003   Act of discrimination
   
98.004   Contracts with city
   
98.005   Responsibilities and duties of city employees
   
98.006   Good faith accommodation of disabled
Commission on Human Relations
   
98.020   Created
   
98.021   Composition
   
98.022   Appointment
   
98.023   Terms
   
98.024   Filling of vacancies
   
98.025   Compensation
   
98.026   Officers
   
98.027   Meetings
   
98.028   Quorum
   
98.029   Rules, regulations
   
98.030   Appointment of committees
   
98.031   Substantive and procedural powers and duties
   
98.032   Filing complaint
   
98.033   Service of respondent and answer
   
98.034   Determination of probable cause
   
98.035   Conciliation
   
98.036   Public hearing
   
98.037   Dismissal of complaint
   
98.038   Depositions and discovery
   
98.039   Prosecution of violation
   
98.040   Rights of parties to seek judicial determination
   
98.041   Application to other handicaps
   
98.042   Time limit for filing complaint
Disability Awareness and Accessibility Review Board
   
98.085   Created
   
98.086   Composition
   
98.087   Terms
   
98.088   Filling of vacancies
   
98.089   Compensation; expense
   
98.090   Officers
   
98.091   Meetings; quorum; staff
   
98.092   Duties and responsibilities
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title VII
Statutory reference:
   Local commission on human relations, see SDCL 20-12-5 et seq.
   Municipal power to investigate discriminatory practices, see SDCL 20-12-4
   State commission of human rights, see SDCL 20-13-2 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADA. The Americans with Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
   COMPLAINANT. A person for or on whose behalf a complaint alleging unlawful
discrimination has been filed or issued.
   DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment of a person resulting from
disease, injury, congenital condition of birth or functional disorder which
substantially limits one or more of the person’s major life functions; a record
of having an impairment; or being regarded as having an impairment which:
      (1)   For purposes of §
98.003(a) through (c), inclusive, is unrelated to an individual’s ability to
perform the major duties of a particular job or position, or is unrelated to an
individual’s qualifications for employment or promotion;
      (2)   For purposes of §
98.003(d) and (h) is unrelated to an individual’s ability to acquire, rent, or
maintain property; and
      (3)   For purposes of §
98.003(e) and (f) is unrelated to an individual’s ability to utilize and
benefit from opportunities, programs, and facilities of the accommodations and
services.
   DISCRIMINATION. Any unlawful act or attempted unlawful act which, because of
race, color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status
or disability, results in the unequal treatment or separation or segregation of
any person or denies, prevents, limits or otherwise adversely affects or if
accomplished would deny, prevent, limit or otherwise adversely affect the
benefit or enjoyment by any person of employment, membership in a labor
organization, ownership or occupancy of real property, a public accommodation,
a public service or an educational institution. The DISCRIMINATION is unlawful
and is a violation of this chapter.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Any university, college or school operating within
the city including any school, institution or organization for vocational
training, but the term shall not apply to the students of, or the education
provided by, any school maintained and operated by a religious corporation, or
association solely for the benefit of its own membership.
   EMPLOY. To use or be entitled to the use and benefit of the services of a
person as an employee.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons who perform services for any employer for
compensation, whether in the form of wages, salary, commission or otherwise.
   EMPLOYER. Any person within the city who hires or employs any employee, and
any person wherever situated who hires or employs any employee whose services
are to be partially or wholly performed in the city, but the word EMPLOYER
shall not include any person with respect to the hiring or employment of a
household domestic servant, or any religious corporation, association or
society with respect to the hiring or employment of individuals of a particular
religion, when religion shall be a bona fide occupational qualification for
employment, provided the selection is not based on race, color, ancestry or
national origin or disability.
   EMPLOYMENT. The state of being employed as an employee by an employer.
   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY. Any person regularly undertaking, with or without
compensation, to procure employees for any employer or to procure for employees
opportunities to work for any employer and includes any agent of the person.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. The relationship of individuals by birth, adoption or
guardianship who are domiciled together.
   HIRE. To engage or contract for or attempt to engage or contract for the
services of any person as an employee.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any person, employee representation committee or plan in
which employees participate and which exists wholly or in part for the purpose
of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates
of pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment and shall include any
conference, general committee, joint or system board or joint council.
   LAWYER. A person duly authorized and licensed by the state to engage in the
practice of law.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, unincorporated organizations, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trusts, agents, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, labor organizations, public bodies, public corporations
and the state and all political subdivisions and agencies thereof.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS. The services and facilities of any and all places of
business within the city engaged generally in the provision of services or
goods to the public or soliciting generally the public patronage, including,
without limitation, theaters, hotels, motels, restaurants, taverns,
barbershops, beauty shops, insurance companies, lending organizations,
financial institutions and carriers.
   PUBLIC SERVICES. The services or facilities provided within the city to the
general public including those provided by any public facility, department,
agency, board or commission, owned, operated or managed by or on behalf of the
state, any political subdivision thereof, or any other public corporation.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. A real estate broker and a
real estate salesperson as defined by state law.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any right, title, interest in or to the possession,
ownership, enjoyment or occupancy of any parcel of land, any building situated
thereon, or any portion of the building in the city.
   RESPONDENT. A person against whom a complaint alleging unlawful
discrimination has been filed or issued.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1802; 1972 Code, § 13-1; 1992 Code, § 21.5-1) (Ord. 2700,
passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980;
Ord. 63-86, passed 6-23-1986; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-1991)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 98.002 DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   It is the public policy of the city and the purpose of this chapter:
   (a)   That discriminatory practices based on race, color, sex, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status or disability with respect
to employment, labor union membership, housing accommodations, property rights,
education, public accommodations and public services, or any of them, tend to
create and intensify conditions of poverty, ill health, unrest, lawlessness and
vice and adversely affect the public health, safety, order, convenience and
general welfare; the rights, privileges and opportunities threatened by those
discriminatory practices are hereby declared to be civil rights;
   (b)   To declare as civil rights the rights of all persons to the fullest
extent of their capacities, and without regard to race, color, sex, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status or disability, equal
opportunities with respect to employment, labor union membership, housing
accommodations, property rights, education, public accommodations and public
services;
   (c)   To prevent and prohibit any and all discriminatory practices based on
race, color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status
or disability, with respect to employment, labor union membership, housing
accommodations, property rights, education, public accommodations or public
services;
   (d)   To protect all persons from unfounded charges of discriminatory
practices; and
   (e)   To effectuate this policy by means of public information and
education, mediation and conciliation, and enforcement.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1801; 1972 Code, § 13-2; 1992 Code, § 21.5-2) (Ord. 2700,
passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 63-86, passed 6-23-1986;
Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 98.003 ACT OF DISCRIMINATION.
   Without limitation, the following are declared to be discrimination:
   (a)   For an employer, because of race, color, sex, creed, religion,
ancestry, national origin or disability, to fail or refuse to hire, to
discharge an employee, or to accord adverse, unlawful or unequal treatment to
any person or employee with respect to application, hiring, training,
apprenticeship, tenure, promotion, upgrading, compensation, layoff, discharge,
or any term or condition of employment;
   (b)   For an employment agency, because of race, color, creed, religion,
sex, ancestry, disability or national origin, to accord adverse or unequal
treatment to any person in connection with any application for employment, any
referral or any request for assistance in procurement of employees, or to
accept any listing of employment on that basis;
   (c)   For any labor organization, because of race, color, sex, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin or disability, to deny full and equal
membership rights to an applicant for membership or to a member; to expel,
suspend or otherwise discipline a member; or to accord adverse, unlawful or
unequal treatment to any person with respect to his or her hiring,
apprenticeship, training, tenure, compensation, upgrading, layoff or any term
or condition of employment;
   (d)   For any owner of rights to housing or real property, or any person
acting for an owner, with or without compensation, including any person
licensed as a real estate broker or salesman, attorney, auctioneer, agent or
representative by power of attorney or appointment, or to any person acting
under court order, deed of trust, or will, because of race, color, sex, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status or disability, to fail or
refuse to sell, rent, assign or otherwise transfer any real property to any
other person, or to accord adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to any
person with respect to the acquisition, occupancy, use and enjoyment of any
real property. The provisions of this section do not apply to rooms or units in
dwellings that contain living quarters for no more than two families living
independently of each other, if the owner maintains and occupies one of the
living quarters as his or her residence.
      (1)   For the purposes of determining discrimination based on familial
status, a FAMILY is one or more individuals under the age of 18 who are
domiciled with their parent, legal custodian or person granted custody with
permission of the parent or custodian. This definition includes a person who is
pregnant or in the process of securing custody of a person under the age of 18.
Discrimination based on familial status applies to housing accommodations only.
      (2)   The provisions of this section as they refer to familial status do
not apply to residences publicized as specifically designated for older or
disabled residents and if:
         A.   A state or federal program has designated the residence for
elderly;
         B.   The residences are intended for and solely occupied by persons 62
years of age or older; or
         C.   Facilities and services for the residence are designed to meet
the needs of the elderly, and at least 80% of the units occupied or intended to
be occupied by one or more persons 55 years of age or older.
      (3)   It is an unfair or discriminatory practice to design or construct
for first occupancy any multi- family dwelling with more than four units for
sale, rent, lease, assignment, sublease or transfer that does not enable
accessibility to ground floor common areas and usability of ground floor
housing units by disabled persons or by wheelchairs. If the building has
elevators, all housing units and common areas shall be usable by disabled
persons and persons in wheelchairs. The accommodations may include widened
doors, lowered electrical switches and outlets, lowered environmental controls,
grab bars or reinforcements, kitchens and bathrooms usable by the disabled.
Nothing in this division (d)(3) may be construed to require prior approval of
plans for construction by the commission on human relations.
      (4)   It is also discriminatory to refuse to permit at the expense of the
disabled person reasonable modifications of existing property that may be
necessary to afford full enjoyment of the property. The landlord may, where it
is reasonable to do so, condition permission for remodification on the renter’s
agreeing to restore the premises to the condition that existed prior to the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
   (e)   For any person engaged in the provision of public accommodations,
because of race, color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, or
disability, to fail or refuse to provide to any person access to the use of and
benefit from the services and facilities of those public accommodations; or to
accord adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to any person with respect to
the availability of the services and facilities, the price or other
consideration therefor, the scope and quality thereof, or the terms and
conditions under which such are made available, including terms and conditions
relating to credit, payment, warranties, delivery, installation and repair;
   (f)   For any person engaged in the provision of public services, because of
race, color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin or disability, to
fail or refuse to provide to any person access to the use and benefit thereof,
or the terms and conditions under which such are made available;
   (g)   For any person, because of race, color, sex, creed, religion,
ancestry, national origin or disability, directly or indirectly, to conceal any
unlawful discrimination; to aid, abet, compel, coerce, incite or induce another
person to discriminate; or by any means, trick, artifice, advertisement or
sign, to use any form of application, or make any record or inquiry, or device
whatsoever to bring about or facilitate discrimination; or to engage in or
threaten to engage in any reprisal, economic or otherwise, against any person
because of the latter’s filing a charge, testifying or assisting in the
observance and support of the purposes and provisions of this chapter;
   (h)   For any person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company,
insurance company or other financial institution or lender to whom application
is made for financial assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real property or any
agent or employee thereof to discriminate against any person or group of
persons, because of the race, color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national
origin or disability of the person or group of persons or of the prospective
occupants or tenants of the real property in the granting, withholding,
extending, modifying, renewing or in the rates, terms, conditions and the
extension of services in connection therewith;
   (i)   Wherever religious organizations or bodies are exempt from any of the
provisions of this chapter, the exemption shall apply only to religious
qualifications for employment or residence in church-owned or church-operated
property, and the organizations shall not be exempt from any provisions of this
chapter relating to discrimination based upon race, color, sex, ancestry,
national origin, familial status or disability.
   (j)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to any business or
enterprise on or near an Indian reservation with respect to any publicly
announced employment practice of the business or enterprise under which a
preferential treatment is given to any individual because the individual is an
Indian living on or near a reservation;
   (k)   Nothing in this chapter requires the following people to modify
property in any way, incur any additional expenses, or exercise a higher degree
of care for persons having a disability than for a person who does not have a
disability nor does this chapter relieve any person of any obligations
generally imposed on all persons, regardless of any disability, in a written
lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions,
including, but not limited to, financial obligations of the lease, agreement or
contract.:
      (1)   Employer;
      (2)   Provider of public accommodations;
      (3)   Provider of public services;
      (4)   Person selling, renting, or leasing real property;
      (5)   Person acting on behalf of any of the persons listed in divisions
(a)(11)A. through D. above, with or without compensation, including but not
limited to any person licensed as a real estate broker or salesman, attorney,
auctioneer, agent, or representative by power of attorney or appointment; and
      (6)   Person acting under court order, deed of trust or will.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1803; 1972 Code, § 13-3; 1992 Code, § 21.5-3) (Ord. 2700,
passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980;
Ord. 63-86, passed 6-23-1986; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 98.004 CONTRACTS WITH CITY.
   The city and all of its contracting agencies, departments, and units shall
include in all contracts entered into or renewed or extended provisions whereby
each other contracting party agrees that:
   (a)   With respect to any and all business conducted or acts performed
pursuant to the contract, the other contracting party shall be deemed an
employer within the meaning of this chapter and shall be subject to the
provisions of this subchapter;
   (b)   If the other contracting party fails to perform the contractual
provisions, the contract may forthwith be terminated and cancelled in whole or
in part by the city, and the other contracting party shall be liable for any
costs or expense incurred by it in obtaining from other sources the work and
services to be rendered or performed or the goods or properties to be furnished
or delivered to the city under the contract so terminated or cancelled;
   (c)   Should the commission on human relations in a proceeding brought as
provided in this chapter find that the contracting party has engaged in
discrimination in connection with any contract and issue a cease and desist
order with respect thereto, the city shall withhold up to 15% of the contract
price until a time as the commission’s order has been complied with or the
other contracting party has been adjudicated not guilty of discrimination;
   (d)   Other contracting party will permit access to any and all records
pertaining to hiring and employment and to other pertinent data and records for
the purpose of enabling the commission on human relations, its agencies or
representatives, to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the other contracting party; and
   (e)   This section shall be binding on all subcontractors or suppliers.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1804; 1972 Code, § 13-4; 1992 Code, § 21.5-4) (Ord. 2700,
passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.005 RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   All officials, commissioners, agents, employees and servants of the city,
elected and appointed, including civil service employees, and whether serving
with or without compensation, shall observe the terms and provisions of this
chapter and shall, except as expressly prohibited by law, respond promptly to
any and all requests by the commission on human relations for information and
for access to data and records for the purpose of enabling the commission to
carry out its responsibilities under this chapter. The failure of any official,
commissioner, agent, employee or servant of the city to comply with any
provision of this chapter relating to any matter within the scope of his or her
official duties shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1805; 1972 Code, § 13-5; 1992 Code, § 21.5-5) (Ord. 2700,
passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.006 GOOD FAITH ACCOMMODATION OF DISABLED.
   For the purposes of employment, public accommodation, public service, and
education or housing, good faith efforts shall be made to reasonably
accommodate the disabled person unless the accommodation would impose undue
hardship.
(1972 Code, § 13-6; 1992 Code, § 21.5-6) (Ord. 63-86, passed 6-23-1986)
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS
§ 98.020 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a commission on human relations of the city for the
purpose of carrying forward the policies of the city in the field of human
relations, to promote civil rights and to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-16; 1992 Code, § 21.5-16) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.021 COMPOSITION.
   The commission on human relations shall consists of 11 voting members. The
chair of the disability awareness commission shall act as a non-voting member.
Each member of the commission shall be a resident of the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-17; 1992 Code, § 21.5-17) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 11-88, passed 2-8-1988; Ord. 90-88, passed 10-17-
1988; Ord. 100-95, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 13-01,
passed 2-12-2001)
§ 98.022 APPOINTMENT.
   The members of the commission on human relations shall be appointed by the
mayor with due regard being given to representation of minorities on the
commission.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-18; 1992 Code, § 21.5-18) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 58-87, passed 7-27-1987; Ord. 153-95, passed 12-
18-1995)
§ 98.023 TERMS.
   Members of the commission on human relations shall be appointed for five-
year staggered terms to expire on May 1 of the fifth year of their terms and
shall serve no more than two consecutive or partial terms of office.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-19; 1992 Code, § 21.5-19) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 153-95, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 98.024 FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the commission on human relations
occasioned by resignation, death or removal shall be filled for the balance of
the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original appointment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-21; 1992 Code, § 21.5-21) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.025 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the commission on human relations shall serve as such without
compensation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-22; 1992 Code, § 21.5-22) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.026 OFFICERS.
   At the first regular meeting of the commission on human relations in May of
each year, the commission shall designate from its number a chair, a vice-chair
and a secretary, each of whom shall serve until the first meeting of the
commission in May of the following year. The vice-chair shall act in the
absence or disability of the chair.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-23; 1992 Code, § 21.5-23) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980; Ord. 153-95, passed 12-
18-1995)
§ 98.027 MEETINGS.
   The commission on human relations shall meet at those times and places as
may be determined by the commission, by standing or special rule, or on call of
the chair.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-24; 1992 Code, § 21.5-24) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.028 QUORUM.
   Five members of the commission on human relations shall constitute a quorum
for probable cause determination pursuant to §
98.034. Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for public
hearing panels pursuant to §
98.036. A majority of the voting members then holding a current appointment
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all other business.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-25; 1992 Code, § 21.5-25) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 19-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 13-01, passed 2-12-
2001)
§ 98.029 RULES, REGULATIONS.
   The commission on human relations, with the approval of the city council,
shall adopt suitable rules and regulations for the conduct of its operations
and the effectuation of the purposes of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-26; 1992 Code, § 21.5-26) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980)
§ 98.030 APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES.
   The commission on human relations shall designate and appoint those
additional committees as it may from time to time deem appropriate. The
membership of the committees may consist of both members and nonmembers of the
commission or may consist entirely of nonmembers of the commission. The
committees shall assist and advise the commission in carrying out the
objectives of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806 ; 1972 Code, § 13-27; 1992 Code, § 21.5-27) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.031 SUBSTANTIVE AND PROCEDURAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The commission on human relations shall:
   (a)   Seek to prevent and eliminate bias and discrimination because of race,
color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status or
disability by means of education, persuasion, conciliation and enforcement, and
utilize all the powers at its disposal to carry into execution the provisions
of this chapter;
   (b)   Conduct or direct a program of research and study for the purpose of
ascertaining how the objectives of this chapter may best be attained and
sustained;
   (c)   Disseminate the results of the research and studies;
   (d)   Advise the mayor, the city council and departments or agencies of
government with respect to matters relating to the commission’s purposes;
   (e)   Cooperate with and seek to advise and coordinate the activities of
persons or groups interested in the objectives of this chapter;
   (f)   Receive or, on the basis of its own information, initiate complaints
alleging discrimination and conduct those investigations and inquiries as may
reasonably appear necessary to find the facts with respect thereto;
   (g)   Conduct public meetings and hearings, gather and disseminate
information to governmental agencies and to the public;
   (h)   Utilize the records and services of municipal, state and federal
governmental departments and agencies to the extent permitted by law, and
pursuant to agreement with departments and agencies may refer matters for
preliminary inquiry, conciliation, hearings and findings;
   (i)   Furnish to any appropriate state or federal agency having jurisdiction
in the premises a transcript of the proceedings and findings in any case in
which a court of competent jurisdiction or the commission has, after hearings,
found that any person has unlawfully discriminated; and
   (j)   Execute programs of compliance review designed to determine whether
persons who contract with the city are observing the terms of this chapter; and
to that end the commission shall have power to require the persons to submit
periodic reports concerning hiring, compensation, promotion and discharge
policies and the racial, religious, and national composition of their work
forces as they shall deem necessary, and failure to provide the information
shall constitute grounds for the city to revoke any contract in effect between
the city and the person so failing to comply.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1806; 1972 Code, § 13-28; 1992 Code, § 21.5-28) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973)
§ 98.032 FILING COMPLAINT.
   (a)   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice may
file with the commission on human relations a verified written complaint which
shall state the name and address of each person complained against (respondent)
and shall set forth the pertinent facts as known to the complainant. Whenever
the commission has information indicating that any person has discriminated, it
may issue and file a verified complaint.
   (b)   The city may, however, dismiss a complaint if the complainant fails to
state a claim upon which relief can be granted or if the city determines the
complaint has been abandoned or withdrawn.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807 ; 1972 Code, § 13-29; 1992 Code, § 21.5-29) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 89-01, passed 10-9-
2001)
§ 98.033 SERVICE OF RESPONDENT AND ANSWER.
   Promptly upon the filing of any complaint, the commission on human relations
shall serve a copy thereof, by personal service or registered or certified
mail, upon the respondent. Respondent shall file a written answer thereto
within ten calendar days after receipt thereof or within any period of
extension granted by the representative of the city as designated by the human
relations commission.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-30; 1992 Code, § 21.5-30) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-
1976; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980; Ord. 52-81, passed 6-15-1981; Ord. 53-88,
passed 6-27-1988; Ord. 153-95, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 98.034 DETERMINATION OF PROBABLE CAUSE.
   (a)   The commission on human relations shall proceed to make the
investigation as it may deem appropriate to determine whether there is probable
cause to believe that the allegations of discrimination are well founded. If
there is no probable cause to believe that the allegations of discrimination
are well founded, the commission shall dismiss the complaint. If, after
investigation, it is found that probable cause to believe that the allegations
of discrimination are well founded, the commission shall transmit the finding
of probable cause, along with the reasons for the finding and a recitation of
the evidence and names of witnesses that support the finding, to both
complainant and respondent. Both complainant and respondent shall be permitted
to inspect any documents not prepared by the commission in the files of the
commission that are relevant to the determination of probable cause. If there
is probable cause to believe that the allegations of discrimination are well
founded, and the matter has not been satisfactorily resolved, the parties shall
be served notice of the time and place of a conciliation conference by personal
service or registered or certified mail at least five business days prior
thereto.
   (b)   No later than 20 days after notice of the finding of probable cause
and prior to hearing, the complaining party or the respondent may elect to have
the claims asserted in the complaint decided in a circuit court in lieu of a
hearing before the commission. Parties shall be notified of their right to this
election in the notice of the finding of probable cause. Upon receipt of notice
of election, the commission on human relations shall have no further
jurisdiction over the parties concerning the charge filed. In a civil action,
if a court or jury finds that an unfair or discriminatory practice has
occurred, it may award the charging party compensatory damages. The court may
grant as relief any injunctive order including affirmative action. Punitive
damages may be awarded under SDCL 21-3-2 for a violation of this chapter as
they pertain to housing. Attorney’s fees and costs may be awarded to the
prevailing party for housing matters.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-31; 1992 Code, § 21.5-31) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-
1980; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 98.035 CONCILIATION.
   The conciliation conference shall be conducted by a representative of the
city, who shall attempt to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that
the respondent will eliminate unfair or discriminatory practices and take
appropriate affirmative action. The settlement terms shall be set forth in a
conciliation agreement which shall be signed by the complainant, respondent and
the human relations commission chairperson.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807 ; 1972 Code, § 13-32; 1992 Code, § 21.5-32) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-
1980; Ord. 153-95, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 98.036 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (a)   If the matter before the commission on human relations cannot be
resolved by the conciliation conference panel, it shall be set down for public
hearing. The parties shall be served notice of the time and place of a public
hearing by personal service or registered or certified mail at least ten days
prior thereto. The notice shall include a statement informing the parties of
their right to transfer the matter to the circuit court as provided in §
98.034(b). The public hearing shall be conducted by a public hearing panel
which shall be composed of three commissioners, none of whom shall have been
involved in the investigation, determination of probable cause or conciliation.
   (b)   The public hearing panel shall have authority to conduct prehearing
conferences, to subpoena witnesses to appear, testify and produce records,
books, papers and other documents, to administer oaths, to take testimony, to
receive evidence, to examine and cross examine witnesses and issue orders
authorized by this chapter.
   (c)   Both complainant and respondent shall appear in person at the hearing
and may be represented by counsel. Both may, in accordance with the order of
procedures as may be determined by the public hearing panel, present evidence,
call witnesses and present arguments bearing upon the facts alleged in the
complaint.
   (d)   All witnesses, including complainant and respondent, may be examined
and cross examined. The public hearing panel shall not be bound by the strict
rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings, but its findings must be
based upon competent evidence. Each witness at the hearing shall testify under
oath. A stenographic record shall be made of the proceedings or an electronic
device may be used. In a judicial review, the commission may, upon request,
furnish the complainant and respondent each with a copy of the transcript of
the hearing without charge.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-33; 1992 Code, § 21.5-33) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-
1976; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-1991)
§ 98.037 DISMISSAL OF COMPLAINT.
   (a)   If the commission on human relations determines that allegations of
discrimination are not well founded, that the unlawful act or practice
complained of has been satisfactorily eliminated and that further proceedings
are unnecessary, or the allegations complained of are being processed or have
been decided upon, to the satisfaction of the commission by another agency or
court, it may order the dismissal of the complaint. It shall within five days
of the determination serve notice of the order upon the complainant and
respondent by personal service or registered or certified mail.
   (b)   The public hearing panel may also take and direct the affirmative
action as in the judgment of the public hearing panel will effectuate its
purposes. The powers of the public hearing panel are coextensive with the
powers of the state human rights commission as set forth in SDCL 20-13-42.
These powers include awarding compensation incidental to the violation other
than pain and suffering, punitive or consequential damages; costs allowed under
SDCL ch. 15-17 and any other appropriate relief including reasonable attorney
fees for housing matters as in the judgment of the public hearing panel will
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
   (c)   Further, the public hearing panel may order the respondent to cease
and desist from discriminatory or unfair practices and to take the affirmative
action including hiring, reinstatement, or upgrading of employees with or
without back pay, the referring of applicants for employment by any respondent
employment agency, and the remittance or restoration of membership by any
respondent labor organization.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-34; 1992 Code, § 21.5-34) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-
1991; Ord. 68-00, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 98.038 DEPOSITIONS AND DISCOVERY.
   The commission on human relations, through the city attorney’s office, shall
have power to cause the deposition of witnesses to be taken or other discovery
procedure to be conducted upon notice to the interested person and like manner
that depositions of witnesses are taken or other discovery procedure is to be
conducted in civil actions pending in court in any manner concerning contested
cases.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-35; 1992 Code, § 21.5-35) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-
1980; Ord. 153-95, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 98.039 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   If a respondent fails to comply with a conciliation agreement or fails
to obey an order issued by the public hearing panel, the commission on human
relations may request the city attorney to prosecute the respondent in a court
of competent jurisdiction for violation of the terms of this chapter. The
failure of a person to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this chapter may be
punished as a contempt of court. The commission shall render to the city
attorney that assistance as requested in connection with any prosecution.
   (b)   The commission or a party may obtain an order of the court for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The court may allow the
prevailing party reasonable attorney’s fees and costs against the respondent.
The court may also assess a civil penalty against the respondent in an amount
not to exceed $10,000 for willful or repeated violations or refusal to comply
with the order of the commission.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-36; 1992 Code, § 21.5-36) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 55-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 51-91, passed 6-10-
1991)
§ 98.040 RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SEEK JUDICIAL DETERMINATION.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to limit the right
of the complainant to make and file a complaint, nor to preclude, abridge or
restrict the right of appeal or the right of anyone concerned or affected to a
review of the facts and issues in the courts of competent jurisdiction on the
evidence and merits in any matter involved.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-37; 1992 Code, § 21.5-37) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970)
§ 98.041 APPLICATION TO OTHER HANDICAPS.
   The commission on human relations, as permitted by law, is authorized to
apply any portion of this chapter which it may deem applicable to deal with
discriminatory actions and practices against individuals or groups
disadvantaged by reason of physical, mental or social handicap and not
otherwise within the purview of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.1807; 1972 Code, § 13-38; 1992 Code, § 21.5-38) (Ord.
2700, passed 8-17-1970; Ord. 22-81, passed 3-16-1980)
§ 98.042 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING COMPLAINT.
   Any complaint filed under this chapter shall be filed within six months
after the alleged discriminatory or unfair practice occurred.
(1972 Code, § 13-39; 1992 Code, § 21.5-39) (Ord. 52-73, passed 6-25-1973)
DISABILITY AWARENESS AND ACCESSIBILITY REVIEW BOARD
§ 98.085 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a disability awareness and accessibility review
board.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.086 COMPOSITION.
   The disability awareness and accessibility review board shall consist of
nine members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. Membership shall include people with disabilities.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.087 TERMS.
   The appointment of each member of the disability awareness and accessibility
review board shall be for a term of three years, with three members to
initially serve a one-year term, and three members to initially serve a two-
year term, so that there will be a staggering of terms.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.088 FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   Any vacancy on the disability awareness and accessibility review board shall
be filled for the unexpired term of the member vacating the board in the same
manner as is required for a regular appointment.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.089 COMPENSATION; EXPENSE.
   All members of the disability awareness and accessibility review board shall
serve without compensation.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.090 OFFICERS.
   At its first regular meeting of the year, the board shall elect from its
members a chair, a vice-chair, and a secretary, each of whom shall serve until
the first regular meeting of the board the following year. The vice-chair shall
act in the absence of the chair. A successor shall be elected immediately, as
determined by the board, if a vacancy creates an unfilled officer position.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.091 MEETINGS; QUORUM; STAFF.
   The disability awareness and accessibility review board shall meet at those
times and places as may be determined by the board, by standing or special
rule, or on call of the chair. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum.
The city ADA coordinator or designee shall act as staff to the board.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
§ 98.092 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The disability awareness and accessibility review board shall act as
an advisory body to the mayor and city council on disability awareness and
universal accessibility matters.
   (b)   Its duties may include:
      (1)   Public education to heighten the awareness of barriers for people
with disabilities, and the role, function and activities of the disability
awareness and accessibility review board;
      (2)   Organize public awareness activities;
      (3)   Develop recommendations on the future role of the disability
awareness and accessibility review board;
      (4)   Monitor the progress of the city transition plan and self-
evaluation plan, and make recommendations, as needed, in prioritizing the
resolution of access issues;
      (5)   Survey city buildings, programs and services for potential
accessibility problems, and recommend to the mayor proposed resolutions of
these problems in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act;
      (6)   Encourage the incorporation of universal access into the design of
city facilities; and
      (7)   Advise other public or private entities on disability awareness and
universal access issues where it appears the board can make a positive
contribution to resolution of the issues in the city.
(Ord. 40-20, passed 4-15-2020)
CHAPTER 99: AIRPORTS
Section
General Provisions
   
99.001   Unlawful to enter restricted areas within municipal airport
   
99.002   Conducting business or soliciting on municipal airport without
authority
Airport Authority Board
   
99.015   Appointment
   
99.016   Terms
   
99.017   Records, reports
   
99.018   Records as evidence
   
99.019   Annual report
   
99.020   Report on demand
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Airport approach zones, see §
158.279
   Airport limousines, see §§
77.063 through
77.065
   Annual licenses issued by fire department, see §
110.033
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
   Traffic code, see title VII
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
Statutory reference:
   Aviation, see SDCL title 50
   Powers of municipalities as to airports and landing fields, see SDCL 9-12-14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.001 UNLAWFUL TO ENTER RESTRICTED AREAS WITHIN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
   In order to protect the property of the city and that of its airport leasees
and to comply with provisions of federal aviation regulations for airport
security, the regional airport authority is authorized to exclude persons and
vehicles from the parts of the municipal airport as may be deemed necessary.
The regional airport authority shall cause to be posted in conspicuous places
at, in and on the areas from which traffic and persons are excluded notices to
that effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, walk or drive upon
the posted areas without permission from the airport manager.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.811; 1992 Code, § 4-2) (Ord. 27-72, passed 5-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 99.002 CONDUCTING BUSINESS OR SOLICITING ON MUNICIPAL AIRPORT WITHOUT
AUTHORITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or commercial
activity of any nature whatsoever or to solicit fares, alms or funds for any
purpose on the municipal airport property, without the prior permission and
approval of the regional airport authority, and under the terms and conditions
as the authority may prescribe.
(1992 Code, § 4-3) (Ord. 43-76, passed 5-24-1976) Penalty, see §
10.999
AIRPORT AUTHORITY BOARD
§ 99.015 APPOINTMENT.
   The five members of the regional airport authority board shall be appointed
by the mayor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.801; 1992 Code, § 4-21) (Ord. 1930, passed 11-4-1957;
Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-1999)
§ 99.016 TERMS.
   The term of each member of the board shall be for five years, or until a
successor is appointed and qualified.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.801; 1992 Code, § 4-22) (Ord. 1930, passed 11-4-1957)
§ 99.017 RECORDS, REPORTS.
   The secretary of the regional airport authority board shall keep a record of
its proceedings and make those reports as may be required by the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.804; 1992 Code, § 4-28) (Ord. 1930, passed 11-4-1957)
§ 99.018 RECORDS AS EVIDENCE.
   The records of the regional airport authority board kept by its secretary or
copies of any records when duly certified by the secretary shall be competent
evidence of the proceedings of the board.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.804; 1992 Code, § 4-29) (Ord. 1930, passed 11-4-1957)
§ 99.019 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The regional airport authority board shall distribute an annual report to
the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.806; 1992 Code, § 4-37) (Ord. 1930, passed 11-4-1957)
§ 99.020 REPORT ON DEMAND.
   The city council may require a report from the regional airport authority
board at any time and the books, records, papers and accounts of the board
shall at all times be subject to inspection by the city council or its officers
or agents.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.806; 1992 Code, § 4-38) (Ord. 1930, passed 11-4-1957)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
   
110.   LICENSES
   
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
112.   FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS
   
113.   AMUSEMENTS
   
114.   HOSPITALS
   
115.   [RESERVED]
   
116.   PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
   
117.   PEDDLERS AND VENDORS
   
118.   ESCORT SERVICES
   
119.   ALARM SYSTEMS
   
120.   PEST CONTROL
   
121.   MEDICAL CANNABIS REGULATIONS
   
122.   TATTOOING
   
123.   CABLE SERVICE
   
124.   TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.001   Required
   
110.002   Payment of fee
   
110.003   Application for license
   
110.004   Issuance
   
110.005   Approval of bonds
   
110.006   Term
   
110.007   Display required
   
110.008   Displaying license unlawfully
   
110.009   Suspension, revocation
   
110.010   Change of name
Fee Schedule
   
110.025   Levied generally
   
110.026   Licenses issued by city attorney’s office
   
110.027   Licenses issued by parks, recreation and forestry department
   
110.028   Licenses issued by planning and development services
   
110.029   Licenses issued by public health director
   
110.030   Health department follow-up inspection fee
   
110.031   Health department temporary event fee
   
110.032   Licenses issued by police department
   
110.033   Annual licenses issued by fire department
   
110.034   One-time permits issued by fire department
   
110.035   Fire department inspection for licenses issued by other city
departments
   
110.036   Licenses issued by the public works department
   
110.037   Health department inspections for licenses issued by other city
departments
Cross-reference:
   Advertising vehicles, see §§
97.035 through
97.039
   Airports, see
ch. 99
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
   Arborist’s license, see §§
94.060 through
94.068
   Classes of electrical licenses, see §
150.206
   Courtesy benches, see §§
96.160 through
96.166
   Escort services, see
ch. 118
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   License for pest control, see §§
120.020 through
120.027
   Licensing of certain animals, see §§
90.075 through
90.077
   Manufactured home park license, see §§
152.030 through
152.032
   Pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems, see
ch. 116
   Peddler’s permit, see §§
117.020 through
117.030
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Plumbing, see
ch. 131
   Retail sales and service tax, see §§
37.001 through
37.007
   Revenues and special funds, see §
36.002
   Sales, see
ch. 117
   Sign and outdoor advertising licenses, see
ch. 155
   Surface ambulance services, see §§
124.080 through
124.082
   Taxation, see
ch. 37
   Use tax, see §§
37.020 through
37.023
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
Statutory reference:
   Municipal trade regulation and licenses, see SDCL ch. 9-34
   Professions and occupations, see SDCL title 36
   Trade regulation, see SDCL title 37
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.001 REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in any activity for which a license is required
without first having obtained a license therefor as required by this Code or
city ordinance.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.108; 1992 Code, § 23-1)
§ 110.002 PAYMENT OF FEE.
   Except as may be otherwise provided, an applicant for license shall pay the
amount of the license fee to the city department issuing the license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.101; 1992 Code, § 23-2)
§ 110.003 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   Except as may be otherwise provided, an applicant for a license shall
make and file application in writing with the city department responsible for
issuing the license on the form prescribed. The application shall contain that
information as required by the department or as provided by this Code or city
ordinance and must show that the applicant is eligible for the license for
which application is made. If required, the applicant shall verify the
application.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, an application for license shall state the
following:
      (1)   The name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Trade name if any under which the license is to be exercised;
      (3)   If a partnership, the name and address of each partner;
      (4)   If a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers;
      (5)   Place of business or location where the license is to be exercised;
      (6)   Description of the activity to be carried on under the license;
      (7)   The information as required by this Code, city ordinance or by the
city council showing the applicant is entitled to the license and that he or
she is a proper person, and the proper place for the exercise thereof will be
licensed;
      (8)   The information as required by this Code or city ordinance as may
be necessary for determination of the amount of the license fee;
      (9)   If the application is for the license described in §
110.026, the application shall contain in addition:
         A.   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 21 years;
         B.   One photograph of the applicant at least two inches by two inches
and a complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints shall be taken by the police
chief or his or her agent; and
         C.   All previous addresses during the past five years immediately
prior to the present address of the applicant.
      (10)   The local address and telephone number where the applicant may be
reached while doing business within the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.102; 1992 Code, § 23-3) (Ord. 19-78, passed 2-27-1978;
Ord. 21-78, passed 3-6-1978; Ord. 69-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 110.004 ISSUANCE.
   Licenses shall be issued by the responsible city department if the applicant
has complied with all requirements for issuance of the license. All licenses
shall be signed by the responsible department. If a license is denied by the
responsible city department, the applicant may appeal, pursuant to §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.103; 1992 Code, § 23-4) (Ord. 112-96, passed 10-7-1996;
Ord. 43-07, passed 3-5-2007)
§ 110.005 APPROVAL OF BONDS.
   Any bond, liability insurance or deposit required in the condition
prerequisite to the issuance of any license shall be subject to the approval of
the city finance director. If the finance director deems the security
inadequate, additional security may be required.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.104; 1992 Code, § 23-5)
§ 110.006 TERM.
   Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall take effect when issued and
shall terminate on December 31 in the year for which issued. Except as
otherwise provided, the license fee or charge shall be paid on the basis of a
full year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.105; 1992 Code, § 23-6)
§ 110.007 DISPLAY REQUIRED.
   Every person to whom a license is issued shall keep the license posted in a
conspicuous place in the licensed place of business or vehicle. If there is no
place of business or vehicle, the license shall be displayed on request by any
interested person.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.106; 1992 Code, § 23-7)
§ 110.008 DISPLAYING LICENSE UNLAWFULLY.
   No person shall carry or display any city license or permit which has been
terminated or revoked or which has not been lawfully procured and issued.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.907; 1992 Code, § 23-8)
§ 110.009 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.
   The city official issuing a license may suspend or revoke any license issued
under the provisions of this Code or city ordinance for the violation by the
licensee of any applicable provision of this Code, city ordinance, rule or
regulation or state law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.107; 1992 Code, § 23-9) (Ord. 38-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 110.010 CHANGE OF NAME.
   If the licensee changes its business name or form of organization, the
license may be so changed by the city without payment of an additional fee
except as otherwise provided by law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.109; 1992 Code, § 23-10)
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 110.025 LEVIED GENERALLY.
   A license fee is hereby levied in the amounts specified on the trades,
occupations, businesses and professions listed in this subchapter and conducted
or pursued within this city.
(1992 Code, § 23-21)
§ 110.026 LICENSES ISSUED BY CITY ATTORNEY’S OFFICE.
   The following licenses will be issued by the city attorney’s office:
License Term Fee
License                                      Term                         Fee
Circus, menagerie, combined circus and
menagerie, Wild West show, carnival or other Per continuous engagement    $100
exhibition given under canvas
Escort                                       Annual fee                   $50
Escort runner                                Annual fee                   $50
Escort service                               Annual fee                   $100
Fortuneteller, clairvoyant, palmist,
astrologer, or any person practicing
mesmerism, phrenology, necromancy,
divination, mediumship, magic or life or
character reading, or any person practicing
hypnotism who is neither a licensed          Annual fee                   $35
practitioner of the healing arts as defined
in SDCL 36-2-1(6) and 36-2-2 nor under the
direct supervision of a licensed
practitioner, who demands or receives a fee
for exhibition or exercise of his or her art
or profession
Livery vehicles                              First vehicle, per year      $25
                                             Additional vehicles          $10
Motion picture theaters; seats or seating
capacity (per theater or total for theater   Seating capacity per theater
complex)
                                             500 or under                 $50
                                             501 to 1,000                 $75
                                             1,001 to 1,500               $100
                                             1,501 to 1,750               $175
                                             1,751 to 2,000               $200
                                             Over 2,000                   $225
Pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, or      Annual fee                   $25
dealer in precious metals or precious gems
Vehicles for hire; a bus, motorbus,          First vehicle, per year      $50
limousine, taxicab or wheelchair transport
                                            Each additional vehicle      $25
 
(1992 Code, § 23-22) (Ord. 96-94, passed 10-31-1994; Ord. 77-98, passed 8-3-
1998; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 161-06, passed 12-11-2006; Ord. 3-
10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 69-19, passed 7-2-2019;
Ord. 20-24, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 46- 24, passed 5-14-2024; Ord. 67-24, passed
8-13-2024; Ord. 102-24, passed 12-3-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Dealers in precious metals and gems, see
ch. 116
   Escort services, see
ch. 118
   License required for vehicle for hire, see §§
124.025 through
124.034,
124.045 through
124.048
   Pawnbrokers, see
ch. 116
   Shooting gallery location, see §
113.002
   Sidewalk vendors, see §§
117.040 through
117.046
§ 110.027 LICENSES ISSUED BY PARKS, RECREATION AND FORESTRY DEPARTMENT.
   The following licenses shall be issued by the parks, recreation and forestry
department:
 
License                                                                        Fee
Arborist
   Application fee; the fee shall be used to defray the cost of examination $150
and shall not be refunded to an unsuccessful applicant
   Annual license fee                                                       $100
 
(1992 Code, § 23-23) (Ord. 85-18, passed 9-18-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
§ 110.028 LICENSES ISSUED BY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.
   The following licenses shall be issued by planning and development services:
License Fee
License                                                                       Fee
Electricians. The biennial license fee for the various classes of electricians
licensed by the city shall be as follows:
   Apprentice electrician                                                  $20
      Renewal                                                           $20
   Class I maintenance, new                                                $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Class II maintenance, new                                               $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Class B electrician, new                                                $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Electrical contractor                                                   $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Inactive electrical contractor (Class B, Sign Wiring)                   $20
   Journeyman electrician                                                  $40
      Renewal                                                           $40
   Sign wiring contractor, new                                             $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
Mechanical contractors. The biennial license fee for various classes of mechanics
licensed by the city shall be as follows:
   Fireplace contractor, new                                               $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Inactive master mechanic                                                $20
      Renewal                                                           $20
   Mechanical contractor, new                                              $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Inactive refrigeration mechanic                                         $20
      Renewal                                                           $20
   Refrigeration contractor, new                                           $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
Plumbers. The biennial license fee for various classes of plumbers licensed by the
city shall be as follows:
   Apprentice registration                                                 $20
   Journeyman plumber
      Inactive journeyman license                                       $20
      License                                                           $40
      Renewal                                                           $40
   Landscape irrigation contractor
      License                                                           $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
   Master plumber
      Inactive master plumber license                                   $20
      License                                                           $200
      Renewal                                                           $100
Residential building contractors and residential roofing and repair contractors.
The triennial license fee for various classes of residential building contractors
and residential roofing and repair contractors licensed by the city shall be as
follows:
      Inactive construction supervisor                                  $25
      Residential building contractor or residential roofing and repair $300
contractor, new
         Renewal                                                     $150
   The following licenses shall be issued by planning and development services:
Sign and outdoor advertising contractors. Advertising signs; includes
engaging in the commercial billboard or advertising board business by
erecting or maintaining ground, roof, wall, or other signs
         Biennial fee                                                $200
      Manufactured home park
         Annual fee                                                  $100
      Vendor
         Annual fee                                                  $35
 
(1992 Code, § 23-24) (Ord. 93-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 113-94, passed 12-19-
1994; Ord. 81-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 73-00,
passed 8-14-2000; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 123-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 22-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 25-04,
passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 37-06, passed 3-20-2006;
Ord. 30-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 50-13, passed
8-20-2013; Ord. 32-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 14-21, passed 2-2- 2021; Ord.
111-23, passed 11-21-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
§ 110.029 LICENSES ISSUED BY PUBLIC HEALTH DIRECTOR.
   The following licenses shall be issued by the public health director:
License Fee
License                                                                           Fee
Convalescent homes
   Annual fee                                                                  $24
Food processing and sales
   Grocery store. An establishment selling prepackaged food other than food eaten
upon the premises or in the establishment without further preparation
      Annual fee for area greater than 250 square feet                      $181
      Annual fee for area equal to or less than 250 square feet             $92
   Food processing. Manufacturing, cutting, cleaning, packaging, bottling,
canning, preserving, mixing or processing food in any way to be offered for sale,
whether wholesale or retail
      Annual fee                                                            $181
   Additional fee based on square footage.
                                                                                  No
      Area less than 1,000 square feet                                      additional
                                                                                  fee
      1,000 to 5,000 square feet                                            $92
      Over 5,000 square feet                                                $181
   Late application. Annual review of grocery store and food processing        $75 late
applications received after December 31 of each year                              fee
Food service establishments
   Annual license fee
      Size (square feet)
      0 to 2,500                                                            $181
      2,501 to 5,000                                                        $271
      5,001 and above                                                       $362
   Annual renewal of food service establishment applications received after    $75 late
December 31 of each year                                                          fee
   Plan review fee for new or remodeled food service establishments
      Size (square feet)
      0 to 2,500                                                            $52
      2,501 to 5,000                                                        $209
      5,001 and above                                                       $302
   The fee for food services that are part of a grocery store complex shall be
based on the actual square footage of the kitchen and eating area.
   The annual license fee charged includes one full service food preparation
area. Additional food preparation areas shall be charged an additional $92 each.
   A $30 discount will be offered on the yearly invoice as a discount to an
establishment that qualifies with an average of 94% or above compliance level for
the preceding year’s routine inspections and the annual permit application is
received prior to January 1 of each year.
Hospital
   Annual fee                                                                  $24
Pest control, extermination, fumigation
   Annual fee to engage in pest control, extermination or fumigation           $24
Tattoo artist
   Annual fee                                                                  $60
Tattoo establishment
   Annual fee                                                                  $173
 
(1992 Code, § 23-25) (Ord. 66-93, passed 8-16-1993; Ord. 77-93, passed 10-25-
1993; Ord. 96-94, passed 10-31-1994; Ord. 142-95, passed 11-20-1995; Ord. 75-
01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 124-08, passed 10-14-
2008; Ord. 57-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 52-10, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 44-11,
passed 6-20-2011)
Cross-reference:
   Commercial garbage hauler required to have license, see §
57.065
   Convalescent home license generally, see §§
114.030 through
114.034
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Hospital license required, see §
114.001
   License to engage in the processing and selling of food, see §
112.015
   Pest control license required, see §
120.020
§ 110.030 HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOLLOW-UP INSPECTION FEE.
   The following fees shall be paid by the owner of a food service, grocery,
food processor or other permitted establishment for health department follow-up
inspections to be conducted as follows:
 
Inspection           Fee
Follow-up inspection $92
 
(1992 Code, § 23-25.1) (Ord. 57-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 52-10, passed 6-21-
2010; Ord. 44-11, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 110.031 HEALTH DEPARTMENT TEMPORARY EVENT FEE.
   The following fee shall be paid by a food service establishment that
operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14
consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
 
Event               Fee
Temporary event fee $32
 
(1992 Code, § 23-25.2) (Ord. 57-09, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 52-10, passed 6-21-
2010; Ord. 44-11, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 110.032 LICENSES ISSUED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The following licenses shall be issued by the police department:
License Fee
License                                                                          Fee
Airport authority security officer
   Annual fee                                                                 $50
Alarm installation and/or monitoring company
   Annual fee                                                                 $35
   Application fee                                                            $75
Vehicle for hire driver (city transit drivers are exempt from this requirement)
   Annual fee (to be collected every 12 months following the original date of $35
purchase)
 
(1992 Code, § 23-26) (Ord. 103-00, passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 79-11, passed 10-11-
2011)
§ 110.033 ANNUAL LICENSES ISSUED BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The following licenses as defined by the fire code shall be issued by the
fire department. An annual inspection is included in the license fee. If the
actual time for a fire department inspection exceeds the cost covered by the
fee, the fee will be increased to cover the additional time at a rate of $35
per hour.
License Annual Fee
License                                                          Annual Fee
Aircraft repair hangars                                          $58
Dry cleaning operation                                           $58
Dust producing operations                                        $58
Explosives                                                       $58
Fireworks wholesaler                                             $58
Flammable and combustible finishes, spraying and dipping         $58
Flammable and combustible liquid bulk storage
   Total storage capacity:
1,000 to 5,000                                                   $46
5,001 to 10,000                                                  $58
10,001 to 20,000                                                 $69
20,001 to 40,000                                                 $81
40,001 to 100,000                                                $92
100,001 to 500,000                                               $121
500,001 and over                                                 $156
Flammable and combustible liquids–retail dealers
   Service station up to 4 dispensing devices                 $46
   Service station over 4 dispensing devices                  $58
Fruit ripening                                                   $58
Garages for repair of motor vehicles
   Up to 4 bays                                               $46
   Over 4 bays                                                $58
Heliport/helistop                                                $58
Liquefied petroleum retail dealer
   Service station
      Up to 4 dispensing devices                           $46
      Over 4 dispensing devices                            $58
LPG bulk storage
   Total storage capacity:
1,000 to 5,000                                                   $46
5,001 to 10,000                                                  $58
10,001 to 20,000                                                 $69
20,001 to 40,000                                                 $81
40,001 to 100,000                                                $92
100,001 to 500,000                                               $121
500,001 and over                                                 $156
Lumberyard                                                       $58
Tire recapping                                                   $58
Any other occupancy or operation requiring a license by the fire
chief because of its threat to the general public, or any city   $58
license that requires fire department approval
 
(1992 Code, § 23-27) (Ord. 82-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 80-02, passed 10-15-
2002; Ord. 34-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 39-14, passed 7-1-2014)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
§ 110.034 ONE-TIME PERMITS ISSUED BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   One-time permits shall be issued by the fire department for
installations and special activities as defined by the fire code. Permit fees
shall provide for initial plan review, rough-in, final inspection, and one
reinspection. Plan review and inspection fee increases shall be applicable as
follows.
      (1)   Plan review-increased fees. Where a permit-required item fails
initial plan review, a second plan review will not require increased fees.
Increased fees shall apply for reviews necessary beyond a second plan review. A
minimum plan check review fee of $125, or 50 percent of the original permit
fee, whichever is greater, shall be assessed and paid prior to issuance of a
permit. Plan review fee increases shall apply for expedited review requests.
Expedited plan check review fees shall be charged at a rate equal to 50 percent
of the calculated permit fees.
      (2)   Inspection-increased fees. Where a permitted item fails initial and
reinspection, a subsequent reinspection fee of $150 for each additional
inspection shall be assessed and paid prior to the reinspection occurring.
After-hours inspection fees shall be based upon current inspector overtime
rates with a two-hour minimum.
   (b)   Fees shall be as set forth in the following fee schedule:
Permit Fee
Permit                                                                              Fee
Bowling alley or pin refinishing and commercial floor finishing using flammable     $46
liquids
Fire alarm remote monitoring
   Leased line, digital communicator or other NFPA type                          $35
Fire alarms systems, new and existing equipment installation and/or modification
   Addressable/intelligent control panel                                         $35
   Conventional control panel                                                    $23
   Signal expanders/power supplies (each)                                        $23
      Plus:
   For each initiation or alarm device                                           $3
      Plus, each additional floor                                             $35
   Minimum fee for a fire detection system                                       $87
Flammable or combustible liquids tank or appurtenances, new installations
   Per storage tank                                                              $58
   Plus, per foot of liquid containing pipe                                      $1
   Minimum fee for any work                                                      $87
Flammable or combustible liquids tank or appurtenances, alterations or repairs
   Cathodic protection, per tank installation                                    $18
   Diking update or repair                                                       $29
   Leak detection, per tank installation                                         $18
   Overfill protection, per tank installation                                    $18
   Replace liquid containing pipe, per foot                                      $1
   Minimum fee for any work                                                      $87
Flammable or combustible liquids tank removal
   Per tank                                                                      $41
   Plus, review of site assessment                                               $35
   Minimum fee for any work                                                      $87
   Additional time due to site contamination or site assessment need, charge per $41
hour (billed to property owner)
LPG tank or appurtenances, new installations
   Per storage tank                                                              $41
   Plus, per vaporizer                                                           $35
   Minimum fee for any work                                                      $87
LPG tank removal
   Per storage tank                                                              $41
Nonsprinkler extinguishing system
   Clean agent system (per coverage area/room)                                   $87
   Dry or wet chemical system (per coverage area)                                $87
Open burning
   Minimum fee                                                                   $46
      Plus, costs associated with fire rescue equipment and personnel standby when
required
Pyrotechnic or open flame use, on stage                                             $46
      Plus, costs associated with required standby personnel
Pyrotechnic or fireworks use, outside displays                                      $46
      Plus, costs associated with fire rescue equipment and personnel standby when
required
Sprinkler systems
   Per head                                                                      $2
      Plus, for dry, pre-action, deluge and other types                       $58
   Or:
      Wet types                                                               $52
      Minimum fee                                                             $87
      Plus, each additional floor                                             $58
Standpipes
   Each standpipe riser                                                          $23
   Minimum fee                                                                   $87
Tent or air-supported structure                                                     $46
Use of explosives such as dynamite (not to exceed one year)                         $46
Any other operation requiring a permit not covered by this schedule                 $46
 
(1992 Code, § 23-28) (Ord. 82-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 80-02, passed 10-15-
2002; Ord. 34-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 39-14, passed 7-1-2014)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
§ 110.035 FIRE DEPARTMENT INSPECTION FOR LICENSES ISSUED BY OTHER CITY
DEPARTMENTS.
   The following fees shall be paid to the fire department for inspections
involved with licenses issued by other city departments:
Inspection Fee
Inspection                                                                 Fee
Alcoholic beverage licenses (off-sale)                                     $23
Alcoholic beverage licenses (on-sale)                                      $23
Auction stores                                                             $28
Bowling alleys                                                             $28
Circuses, carnivals, shows                                                 $34
Convalescent homes                                                         $51
Day care centers (state licenses)                                          $28
Group homes (state licenses)                                               $28
Hospitals                                                                  $150
Manufactured home parks                                                    $35
   Plus, per unit                                                       $1
Restaurants (no beverage license)                                          $28
Skating rinks                                                              $28
Shooting galleries                                                         $28
Tattoo establishment                                                       $28
Theaters                                                                   $28
Fee for any other establishment requiring a fire department inspection not $28
included in the above list
 
(1992 Code, § 23-29) (Ord. 96-94, passed 10-31-1994; Ord. 82-95, passed 6-5-
1995; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 80-02, passed 10-15-2002; Ord. 161-06,
passed 12-11-2006; Ord. 34-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3-10, passed 2-8-2010;
Ord. 39-14, passed 7-1-2014)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
§ 110.036 LICENSES ISSUED BY THE PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
        2023 Effective       Effective       Effective       Effective January
             January 1, 2024 January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 1, 2027
License Fee  Fee             Fee             Fee             Fee
                    Effective  Effective       Effective       Effective
               2023 January 1, January 1, 2025 January 1, 2026 January 1, 2027
                    2024
License        Fee  Fee        Fee             Fee             Fee
Building mover
Annual fee     $200 $200       $208            $216            $225
Garbage and construction and demolition hauler, business, commercial
Annual fee,
before         $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
expiration
Initial
application
fee;  annual
fee, within 30
days after
expiration; 30 $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
days after
expiration,
the license
will be
automatically
revoked
Garbage
hauling unit,
per unit, in
addition to    $25  $25        $26             $27             $28
the business
license fee
(annual fee)
Construction
and demolition
hauling unit,
in addition to $25  $25        $26             $27             $28
business
license fee
(one-time fee)
Initial year
or part of     $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
year
Reissuance fee
for return of
a business to  $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
the previous
owner
Transfer fee
for transfer
of the         $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
business
license
Liquid waste haulers*
Annual fee to
engage in the
pumping,       $50  $100       $104            $108            $112
hauling or
disposing of
liquid waste
Liquid waste disposal*
Fee charged to
the generator
of the liquid
waste for the  $15
disposal of
each discrete
liquid waste
discharge
Domestic
Liquid Waste        $35        $36             $38             $39
Disposal
Commercial/
Industrial          $70        $73             $76             $79
Waste Disposal
Medical waste hauler
Annual fee,
before         $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
expiration
Initial
application
fee; annual
fee, within 30
days after
expiration; 30 $200 $200       $208            $216            $225
days after
expiration,
the license
will be
automatically
revoked
Hauling unit,
per unit, in
addition to    $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
the business
license fee
Initial year
or part of     $200 $200       $208            $216            $225
year
Transfer fee
for the        $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
business
license
Recyclable collector
Annual fee     $25  $50        $52             $54             $56
Recycling collection facilitytable
Annual fee     $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
Recycling processing facility
Annual fee     $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
Solid waste or
regulated
medical waste
transfer or    $250 $250       $260            $270            $281
treatment
facility or a
solid waste
transfer site
Wastewater discharge permit annual maintenance fee*
Categorical    $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
process (each)
Industrial     $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
user
Liquid waste   $20  $20        $21             $22             $22
generator
Significant
industrial     $200 $200       $208            $216            $225
user
Wastewater discharge permit application fee*
Part I         $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
Part II        $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
Wastewater discharge permit development fee*
Categorical    $200 $200       $208            $216            $225
process (each)
Industrial     $300 $300       $312            $324            $337
user
Liquid waste   $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
generator
Significant
industrial     $400 $400       $416            $433            $450
user
Wastewater discharge permit inspection fees*
Compliance inspection:
Categorical    $25  $50        $52             $54             $56
process (each)
Industrial     $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
user
Liquid waste   $20  $20        $21             $22             $22
generator
Significant
industrial     $75  $150       $156            $162            $169
user
Site inspections
Compliance
monitoring
inspections.
This will
cover a one-
day event per  $50  $50        $52             $54             $56
sample point.
Specific
analytical
expenses will
be added to
fee.
This will cover a one-day event per sample point. Specific analytical expenses
will be added to fee.
Industrial     $25  $50        $52             $54             $56
user
Liquid waste   $10  $10        $10             $11             $11
generator
Significant
industrial     $40  $50        $52             $54             $56
user
Wastewater
discharge
permit         $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
modification
fee*
Wastewater
discharge
permit         $100 $100       $104            $108            $112
reissuance
fee*
*Non-Regional Wastewater Users will be assessed a fee that is 2.0 times the
listed fee. Regional Wastewater Users defined in §
53.001.
 
(1992 Code, § 23-30) (Ord. 96-94, passed 10-31-1994; Ord. 141-95, passed 11-6-
1995; Ord. 15-03, passed 2-10-2003; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 107-16,
passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 46-23, passed 6-20-2023)
110.037 HEALTH DEPARTMENT INSPECTIONS FOR LICENSES ISSUED BY OTHER CITY
DEPARTMENTS.
   The following additional fees shall be paid to the health department for
inspections involved with licenses issued by other city departments:
 
Inspection                              Fee
Manufactured home parks:
   Annual fee                        $25
   Additional fee per manufactured ho$0.50
 
(1992 Code, § 23-32) (Ord. 96-94, passed 10-31-1994; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995; Ord. 161-06, passed 12-11-2006)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Classifications and fees
   
111.003   On-sale dealers
   
111.004   License application requirements
   
111.005   Annual reports
   
111.006   License renewals
   
111.007   Only retail, on-sale service permitted
   
111.008   Smoking prohibited
   
111.009   Full-service restaurant license fees
   
111.010   Registry of full-service restaurant on-sale licenses
   
111.011   Issuance of new full-service restaurant licenses restricted
   
111.012   [Repealed]
   
111.012.1   Off-sale dealer liquor license sale and application procedure
   
111.012.2   [Repealed]
   
111.013   Off-sale dealers
   
111.014   Convention facility on-sale licenses
   
111.014.1   On-sale dealer liquor licenses for city-owned facilities
   
111.014.2   Municipal golf course on-sale licenses
   
111.015   [Repealed]
   
111.015.1   On-sale dealer liquor license sale and application procedure
   
111.015.2   [Repealed]
   
111.016   Traffic in alcoholic beverages
   
111.017   Unlicensed business prohibited
   
111.018   Unlawful to violate liquor laws
   
111.019   Place of business of licensee
   
111.020   Closing of premises of public facility on-sale and malt beverage
retail dealers
   
111.021   Restrictions on issuance of wine and malt beverage retailer licenses
   
111.022   Restrictions on issuance of malt beverage and wine licenses
   
111.023   Alcohol in public place
   
111.024   Persons to whom sale prohibited
   
111.025   Management plan required for reapplication after conviction
   
111.026   Purchase and use by persons under 21
   
111.027   [Repealed]
   
111.028   Indecent exposure or simulation thereof prohibited
   
111.029   [Repealed]
   
111.030   Video lottery machine licenses
   
111.031   Number of video lottery machine placements authorized
   
111.032   Video lottery placement application procedure
   
111.033   Procedure for additional video lottery machine placements
   
111.034   Applicability; effective date
   
111.035   Alcohol on library property
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Alcoholic beverages in parks, see §
95.029
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Traffic code, see title VII
   Unsealed container of alcoholic beverage in vehicle, see §
76.088
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, WINE, MALT BEVERAGE AND DISTILLED SPIRITS AND OTHER
WORDS AND TERMS. The same as the definitions given them by SDCL 35-1-1.
   BAR. Any permanently installed counter within the restaurant area from which
alcoholic beverages are regularly served to customers by a person who is
tending bar or drawing or mixing alcoholic beverages.
   FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT. Any restaurant at which a waiter or waitress
delivers food and drink offered from a printed food menu to patrons at tables,
booths or the bar. Any restaurant that only serves fry orders or foodstuffs
such as sandwiches, hamburgers or salads is not a FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT.
   PUBLIC CONVENTION HALL. A real estate site and building, structure, or
edifice which may be used by the general public or portions of the general
public for purposes of meetings, discussions, conventions, shows, displays,
amusements, and any other public purpose per SDCL 9-53-1(1).
   RESTAURANT. Any area in a building maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where individually priced meals are prepared and served
primarily for consumption in such area and where at least 60% of the gross
revenue of the restaurant is derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic
beverages. The RESTAURANT shall have a dining room or rooms, a kitchen and the
number and kinds of employees necessary for the preparing, cooking and serving
of meals.
(1992 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-
2008; Ord. 68-09, passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 53-18, passed 6-19-2018; Ord. 46-22,
passed 4-13-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 111.002 CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES.
   The following classifications and fees are established for dealers in
distilled spirits, wines, and malt beverages:
Classification Fee
Classification                                                  Fee
Full-service restaurant on-sale license
   Initial fee                                               $192,517
   Annual fee                                                $1,500
Malt beverage and wine produced by a farm winery license, being both on-sale dealers and package dealers
   Annual fee                                                $300
Off-sale dealers
   Initial fee                                               An amount not less than $500 and as otherwise determined by §
                                                               111.012.1
                                                               $500
   Annual fee
Off-sale delivery
   Annual fee                                                $150
On-sale dealers, including convention facility on-sale
   Initial fee                                               An amount not less than $240,646 and as otherwise determined by §
                                                                111.015.1
   Annual fee                                                $1,500
On-sale dealers at publicly operated airports
   Annual fee                                                $250
Special one-day off-sale package wine dealers
   Per day, not to exceed 15 consecutive days                $50
Special one-day malt beverage retailers license
   Per day, not to exceed 15 consecutive days                $25
Special one-day wine retailers license
   Per day, not to exceed 15 consecutive days                $25
Special one-day on-sale license
   Fee for first day                                         $100
   Fee for each subsequent day, not to exceed 15 consecutive $50
days
Wine and cider retailers, being both package dealers and on-sale dealers
   Annual fee                                                $500
 
(1992 Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 136-95, passed 10-16-
1995; Ord. 45-01, passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 160-06, passed 12-11-2006; Ord. 106-
08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 23-09, passed 3-9-2009; Ord. 68-09, passed 7-13-
2009; Ord. 32-11,passed 5-16-2011; Ord. 26-15, passed 3-17-2015; Ord. 76-17,
passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 53-18, passed 6-19-2018; Ord. 126-19, passed 12-10-2019;
Ord. 148-21, passed 12-7-2021; Ord. 52-23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 111.003 ON-SALE DEALERS.
   The number of on-sale dealers in alcoholic beverages other than wine
retailers and malt beverage retailers and dealers licensed by the city shall be
issued based on the maximum number of on-sale licenses allowed by SDCL 35-4-11.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.1) (Ord. 136-95, passed 10-16-1995; Ord. 46-01, passed 5-21-
2001; Ord. 95-06, passed 8-7-2006; Ord. 160-06, passed 12-11-2006; Ord. 106-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 46-22, passed 4-13-2022)
§ 111.004 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   An applicant for a full-service restaurant on-sale license shall provide
sufficient documentation to the municipality with an application form provided
by the municipality to prove that the primary source of revenue from the
operation of the restaurant will be derived from the sale of prepared food and
nonalcoholic beverages and not from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The
supporting documentation concerning the primary source of revenue submitted
pursuant to this section is confidential.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.2) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008)
§ 111.005 ANNUAL REPORTS.
   (a)   When renewing, the full-service restaurant on-sale licensee shall
submit an annual report and supporting documentation to the city on forms
provided by the city of the annual sales of the full-service restaurant, which
includes an oath verifying the validity of the information provided in the
report. The report and the supporting documentation submitted pursuant to this
section are confidential.
   (b)   The report shall contain the annual gross sales of the licensee for
the following two categories:
      (1)   Food and nonalcoholic beverage gross revenue; and
      (2)   Total gross revenues.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.3) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 68-09, passed 7-13-
2009)
§ 111.006 LICENSE RENEWALS.
   When reviewing a full-service restaurant on-sale license renewal, the city
shall condition the license renewal upon receiving the documentation that at
least 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the full-
service restaurant is derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages.
This percentage must be met or the license will not be renewed.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.4) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 68-09, passed 7-13-
2009)
§ 111.007 ONLY RETAIL, ON-SALE SERVICE PERMITTED.
   A full-service restaurant on-sale licensee may only serve alcoholic
beverages for on-premise consumption in the bar and dining room area of the
restaurant.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.5) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008)
§ 111.008 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   No licensee that has a full-service restaurant on-sale license may allow
smoking on the licensed premises.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.7) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008)
§ 111.009 FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSE FEES.
   Pursuant to state law, the city may issue additional on-sale licenses to
full-service restaurants for a fee of at least $1 for each person residing
within the municipality as measured by the last preceding decennial federal
census.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.8) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 126-19, passed 12-
10-2019)
§ 111.010 REGISTRY OF FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT ON-SALE LICENSES.
   The city shall maintain a registry of each full-service on-sale restaurant
license that is being offered for sale at the price established in this
chapter, and the city shall furnish a copy of the registry to anyone who
requests a new full-service restaurant on-sale license. The existing full-
service restaurant on-sale licensee is responsible for registering with the
city that the full-service restaurant on-sale license is for sale.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.10) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 53-18, passed 6-19-
2018; Ord. 126-19, passed 12-10-2019)
§ 111.011 ISSUANCE OF NEW FULL- SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSES RESTRICTED.
   The city may only issue a new full-service restaurant on-sale license
pursuant to this section if no on sale license is on the registry or a person
desiring to purchase an on-sale license listed on the registry provides
documentation showing that the person is unable to purchase the on-sale license
at the price established in §§
111.002 and
111.009, and on terms satisfactory to both the potential buyer and seller. Any
on-sale license registered as "for sale" with the city shall be sold at the
price set by the city pursuant to an ordinance adopted in accordance with §§
111.002 and
111.009.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.11) (Ord. 153-08, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 53-18, passed 6-19-
2018; Ord. 126-19, passed 12-10-2019)
§ 111.012 [REPEALED.]
§ 111.012.1 OFF-SALE DEALER LIQUOR LICENSE SALE AND APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   The following procedure will apply any time one or more off-sale dealer
liquor licenses become available to be issued per SDCL 35-4-10.
   (a)   The city shall cause to be published a notice of public sale at least
twice in a legal newspaper with general circulation in the area, with the first
publication not less than ten calendar days prior to the date of the sale. The
notice shall state the number of off-sale dealer liquor licenses to be sold by
sealed bid, the time, date, and place for the opening of bids, and that bids
shall be made on a form available from the city. The notice shall also state
that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids and that a bidder
must conform to the requirements of state law and city ordinance to qualify as
an alcoholic beverage licensee.
   (b)   Sealed bids shall be made using a form provided by the city, which
will require specifying the location where the off-sale dealer liquor license
will be used and the amount of the bid. Only one sealed bid will be accepted
per location. The sealed bids must be filed with the city prior to the time and
date specified in the notice. Each bid shall contain the bid form, along with a
nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $100.
   (c)   On the date and place for the opening of bids, all sealed bids will be
opened, and bidders will be listed in sequential order from highest to lowest
bid. The order for tie bids will be determined by the earliest date and time
the bid was received by the city.
   (d)   No bid may be less than the minimum established for off-sale dealer
liquor licenses in §
111.002.
   (e)   The bidder(s) providing the highest bids, based on the number of
available off-sale dealer liquor licenses as prescribed in §
111.013, shall be notified in writing of their conditional award. The issuance
of the license shall be conditioned upon the eligibility of the bidder to hold
the license, suitability of the proposed premises upon which alcoholic
beverages will be sold, active use of the license within 90 calendar days of
issuance, and compliance with all other state law and city ordinance
requirements, including but not limited to applicable zoning, building, and
property maintenance codes. The city council reserves the right to stipulate
such other and further conditions, based on suitable person and suitable
location, for issuance of the license as may be necessary and proper. All
conditionally awarded bids, including the name of the bidder and the amount of
the bid, shall be published online by the city within five business days of the
date of written notice of conditional award to the bidder.
   (f)   If no conditional use permit is required, conditionally awarded
bidders must submit a completed uniform alcoholic beverage license application
along with the off-sale dealer liquor license fee, in the amount of the
conditionally awarded bid, to the city within ten business days of the date of
written notice of conditional award.
   (g)   If a conditional use permit is required, conditionally awarded bidders
must submit a conditional use permit application within 30 calendar days of the
date of written notice of conditional award. The conditional use permit process
must be concluded within 60 calendar days of the date of written notice of
conditional award unless extended by the planning commission or city council.
Upon receiving the conditional use permit, the conditionally awarded bidder
must submit the uniform alcoholic beverage license application and the off-sale
dealer liquor license fee, in the amount of the conditionally awarded bid, to
the city within ten business days of receiving the conditional use permit.
   (h)   If one or more of the highest bidders receiving a conditional award do
not meet all conditions as prescribed in the ordinance, the next highest bid or
bids may be conditionally accepted in the same manner as the prior higher bid
(s). If a bidder voluntarily withdraws a conditionally awarded bid prior to
submitting the uniform alcoholic beverage license application, that bidder
shall be deemed ineligible to provide a bid for future off-sale dealer liquor
licenses from the city for a period of three years. In the case where a bidder
has provided multiple bids, lower bids must be voluntarily withdrawn prior to
higher bids, whether the bids are conditionally awarded or otherwise.
   (i)   After all new off-sale dealer liquor licenses have been approved by
the city council, the time period for executing these procedures shall be
closed. Any remaining off-sale dealer liquor license bids shall be deemed
ineligible for further consideration. Any additional off-sale dealer liquor
licenses that may become available shall require a new sealed bid process as
prescribed in §
111.012.1.
   (j)   Proceeds from the sale of the off-sale dealer liquor licenses, above
the minimum Initial Fee for off-sale dealer liquor licenses established in §
111.002, shall be utilized for the purposes of community betterment initiatives
which may include, but not limited to, addressing substance abuse, mental
health, safety, homelessness and the housing of at-risk populations.
(Ord. 46-22, passed 4-13-2022; Ord. 52-23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 111.012.2 [REPEALED]
§ 111.013 OFF-SALE DEALERS.
   The number of off-sale dealers in alcoholic beverages other than wine
retailers and malt beverage retailers and dealers licensed by the city shall
not exceed the maximum number allowed by SDCL 35-4-10.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.12) (Ord. 136-95, passed 10-16-1995; Ord. 47-01, passed 5-21-
2001; Ord.160-06, passed 12-11-2006; Ord. 106-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 153-
08, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 23-14, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 111.014 CONVENTION FACILITY ON-SALE LICENSES.
   The number of convention facility on-sale licenses issued by the city shall
not exceed two.
(1992 Code, § 5-2.13) (Ord. 136-95, passed 10-16-1995; Ord. 153-08, passed 12-
15-2008)
§ 111.014.1 ON-SALE DEALER LIQUOR LICENSES FOR CITY-OWNED FACILITIES.
   In accordance with SDCL 35-4-14.1, notwithstanding §
111.003 and the procedures set for in §
111.015.1, and as allowed by SDCL 35-4-14.1 the city may by resolution, without
an election but subject to referendum, issue an on-sale dealer liquor license
pursuant to SDCL 35-4-2(4) for use at any city-owned entertainment venue, event
venue, event center, arena, performance hall, theater, outdoor amphitheater,
convention center, stadium, athletic venue, recreation facility, municipal
auditorium operated pursuant to SDCL 9-52, or public convention hall operated
pursuant to SDCL 9-53. An on-sale dealer license issued pursuant to this
section must be used to support the primary public purpose of the city-owned
facility during the hours the city-owned facility is open for its primary
purpose, and such primary purpose for the city-owned facility shall not be to
exclusively provide food and beverage services. Licenses issued under this
section shall not be subject to the fees established in §
111.002. The city may contract with any person or entity to use the licenses
issued under this section for purposes of providing food and beverage services
at the city-owned facility. Licenses issued pursuant to this section may not be
transferred. No video lottery may be placed at city-owned facilities using a
license issued under this section.
(Ord. 46-22, passed 4-13-2022; Ord. 52-23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 111.014.2 MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE ON-SALE LICENSES.
   (a)   In accordance with SDCL 35-4-106, the city may, by resolution, without
an election, but subject to referendum, make application for the issuance of an
on-sale license at municipal golf courses.
   (b)   Notwithstanding §
111.015.1 through §
111.015.2, when new on-sale liquor license(s) become available to be issued per
SDCL 35-4-11, by resolution of the city council, the city may set aside up to
two on-sale liquor licenses from the on-sale liquor license lottery to make
application for use at municipal golf courses.
   (c)   The number of on-sale liquor licenses used for municipal golf courses
under this section shall not exceed two.
(Ord. 46-22, passed 4-13-2022)
§ 111.015 [REPEALED.]
§ 111.015.1 ON-SALE DEALER LIQUOR LICENSE SALE AND APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   The following procedures will apply any time one or more new on-sale dealer
liquor license(s) become available to be issued per SDCL 35-4-11.
   (a)   The city shall cause to be published a notice of public sale at least
twice in a legal newspaper with general circulation in the area, with the first
publication not less than ten calendar days prior to the date of the sale. The
notice shall state the number of on-sale dealer liquor licenses to be sold by
sealed bid, the time, date, and place for the opening of bids, and that bids
shall be made on a form available from the city. The notice shall also state
that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids and that a bidder
must conform to the requirements of state law and city ordinance to qualify as
an alcoholic beverage licensee.
   (b)   Sealed bids shall be made using a form provided by the city, which
will require specifying the location where the on-sale dealer liquor license
will be used and the amount of the bid. Only one sealed bid will be accepted
per location. The sealed bids must be filed with the city prior to the time and
date specified in the notice. Each bid shall contain the bid form, along with a
nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $100.
   (c)   On the date and place for the opening of bids, all sealed bids will be
opened, and bidders will be listed in sequential order from highest to lowest
bid. The order for tie bids will be determined by the earliest date and time
the bid was received by the city.
   (d)   No bid may be less than the minimum established for on-sale dealer
liquor licenses in §
111.002.
   (e)   The bidder(s) providing the highest bids, based on the number of
available on-sale dealer liquor licenses as prescribed in §
111.013, shall be notified in writing of their conditional award. The issuance
of the license shall be conditioned upon the eligibility of the bidder to hold
the license, suitability of the proposed premises upon which alcoholic
beverages will be sold, active use of the license for a minimum of 60 days
within two years of issuance or as otherwise required by SDCL 35-2-5.3, and
compliance with all other state law and city ordinance requirements, including
but not limited to applicable zoning, building, and property maintenance codes.
The city council reserves the right to stipulate such other and further
conditions, based on suitable person and suitable location, for issuance of the
license as may be necessary and proper. All conditionally awarded bids,
including the name of the bidder and the amount of the bid, shall be published
online by the city within five business days of the date of written notice of
conditional award to the bidder.
   (f)   If no conditional use permit is required, conditionally awarded
bidders must submit a completed uniform alcoholic beverage license application
along with the on-sale dealer liquor license fee, in the amount of the
conditionally awarded bid, to the city within ten business days of the date of
written notice of conditional award.
   (g)   If a conditional use permit is required, conditionally awarded bidders
must submit a conditional use permit application within 30 calendar days of the
date of written notice of conditional award. The conditional use permit process
must be concluded within 60 calendar days of the date of written notice of
conditional award unless extended by the planning commission or city council.
Upon receiving the conditional use permit, the conditionally awarded bidder
must submit the uniform alcoholic beverage license application and the on-sale
dealer liquor license fee, in the amount of the conditionally awarded bid, to
the city within ten business days of receiving the conditional use permit.
   (h)   If one or more of the highest bidders receiving a conditional award do
not meet all conditions as prescribed in the ordinance for approving their
application, the next highest bid or bids may be conditionally accepted in the
same manner as the prior higher bid(s). If a bidder voluntarily withdraws a
conditionally awarded bid prior to submitting the uniform alcoholic beverage
license application, that bidder shall be deemed ineligible to provide a bid
for future on-sale dealer liquor licenses from the city for a period of three
years. In the case where a bidder has provided multiple bids, lower bids must
be voluntarily withdrawn prior to higher bids, whether the bids are
conditionally awarded or otherwise.
   (i)   After all new on-sale dealer liquor licenses have been approved by the
city council, the time period for executing these procedures shall be closed.
Any remaining on-sale dealer liquor license bids shall be deemed ineligible for
further consideration. Any additional on-sale dealer liquor licenses that may
become available shall require a new sealed bid process as prescribed in §
111.015.1.
   (j)   Proceeds from the sale of the on-sale dealer liquor licenses, above
the minimum Initial Fee for on-sale dealer liquor licenses established in §
111.002, shall be utilized for the purposes of community betterment initiatives
which may include, but not limited to, addressing substance abuse, mental
health, safety, homelessness and the housing of at-risk populations.
(Ord. 46-22, passed 4-13-2022; Ord. 52-23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 111.015.2 [REPEALED]
§ 111.016 TRAFFIC IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall produce, transport, store or sell within the city, or within
one mile of its territorial limits, any alcoholic beverage, except as
authorized by SDCL title 35.
(1992 Code, § 5-3) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 111.017 UNLICENSED BUSINESS PROHIBITED.
   No person, unless he or she first obtains a license provided by SDCL title
35, shall transact the business authorized by the title to be conducted by the
licensee within the city or within one mile of its territorial limits.
(1992 Code, § 5-4) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 111.018 UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE LIQUOR LAWS.
   It is unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of the state alcoholic
beverage law, and this chapter, or other person to violate any of the
provisions of the law or of this chapter or to fail to comply therewith within
the city or within one mile of its territorial limits.
(1992 Code, § 5-5) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.019 PLACE OF BUSINESS OF LICENSEE.
   The place of business of an alcoholic beverage licensee shall be within the
premises as described in the legal description provided on the application for
the license. The premises must conform to all requirements of the state and the
city and be a safe and proper place.
(1992 Code, § 5-6) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 111.020 CLOSING OF PREMISES OF PUBLIC FACILITY ON-SALE AND MALT BEVERAGE
RETAIL DEALERS.
   (a)   Every public facility on-sale dealer in alcoholic beverages, including
distilled spirits, wines and/or malt beverages, that allows consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the licensed premise shall flash the lights of his or
her place of business at 1:45 a.m. each day as a warning that within 15 minutes
the licensed premises will close. By 2:00 a.m., every on-sale dealer in
alcoholic beverages, including distilled spirits, wines and/or malt beverages,
that allows consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premise shall
clear his or her premises of all persons except employees and shall lock all
doors to the premises. Each public facility on-sale dealer in alcoholic
beverages, including distilled spirits, wines, and/or malt beverages, which
allows consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premise, and his or
her employees shall leave the place of business or premises by 2:30 a.m. Each
public facility on-sale dealer in alcoholic beverages, including distilled
spirits, wines, and/or malt beverages, which allows consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the licensed premise may enter the premises or authorize one of
his or her employees to enter his or her premises at any time for the purpose
of reasonable maintenance of the premises. For the purpose of this section,
REASONABLE MAINTENANCE means only that maintenance as is necessary to prevent
the deterioration or destruction of the premises or any fixtures located
thereon. The purpose of this division (a) is that the premises of any public
facility on-sale  dealer in alcoholic beverages, including distilled spirits,
wines, and/or malt beverages, which allows consumption of alcoholic beverages
on the licensed premise shall be wholly vacant during the closed period, except
as provided in this section.
   (b)   Any of the public facility on-sale dealers having on their licensed
premises a duly licensed restaurant pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-18 and who comply
with all ordinances applicable thereto and which restaurant is operated in a
room separate and apart from the room wherein intoxicating liquor is or can be
dispensed may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
section, continue to operate exclusively as a restaurant, provided all
intoxicating liquor and the facilities for dispensing it are isolated and
contained in a separate room devoted principally to the use of dispensing and
consuming of alcoholic beverages and which room with its alcoholic contents is
vacated, closed and locked as provided in this section.
(1992 Code, § 5-7) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 6-89, passed 1-16-1989;
Ord. 116-89, passed 11-20-1989; Ord. 106-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 53-18,
passed 6-19-2018)
§ 111.021 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF WINE AND MALT BEVERAGE RETAILER LICENSES.
   (a)   No wine or malt beverage retailer license shall be issued in the same
building as an on-sale license or an off-sale license or another wine or malt
beverage retailer license, unless the licenses are intended for use by the same
licensee and licenses issued are for the same licensed premise (or legal
description) or there is provided the following:
      (1)   Licensed premise separation. Each licensed premises shall be
separated from each other by a wall extended from the floor to the underside of
the ceiling above, except there may exist openings, inaccessible to the public,
with dimensions no greater than 48 inches in width and 80 inches tall to
connect no more than three licensed premises. There may also exist an opening
within a refrigerated unit to allow refrigerated air to flow between no more
than three licensed premises so long as alcohol cannot pass between the
licensed premises. The portion of the wall located in the public areas of the
licensed premise shall contain no openings except for the necessary
penetrations of electrical, plumbing, or heating, ventilating, and air-
conditioning equipment between the three licensed premises.
      (2)   Access. Each licensed premise shall be entered and exited directly
from the exterior of the building; except that a building containing
multitenant licensed premises may have entrances and exits into a common area
so long as it is not part of the licensed premise.
      (3)   Visual separation. There shall be no visual connection in any
publicly accessible area between the separate licensed premises.
   (b)   Notwithstanding §
111.021(a)(1), if the number of wine and malt beverage premises sharing
connections for employees and refrigerated air exceed section §
111.021(a)(1), and were approved prior to the effective date of this chapter,
the licensed premises may continue to operate with the number of licensed
premises at the effective date of this chapter. Those licenses in operation
prior to the effective date of this ordinance at the existing premises as set
forth in this subsection may be transferred to a new licensee who operates at
the same, existing premises.
(1992 Code, § 5-8) (Ord. 38-88, passed 5-23-1988; Ord. 60-90, passed 6-25-1990;
Ord. 41-91, passed 5-13-1991; Ord. 15-01, passed 2-12-2001; Ord. 68-09, passed
7-13-2009; Ord. 60-16, passed 5-17-2016; Ord. 85-19, passed 8-20-2019; Ord.
101-19, passed 10-15-2019; Ord. 135-22, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 111.022 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE LICENSES.
   Applicants meeting the requirements of licenses as allowed in SDCL 35-4-124
and §
95.029 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota may be issued a
special malt beverage retailers license, special on-sale wine retailers
license, special on-sale license and/or a special off-sale package wine dealers
license if approved by the city council.
(1992 Code, § 5-8.1) (Ord. 42-03, passed 5-12-2003; Ord. 81-06, passed 7-10-
2006; Ord. 106-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 32-11, passed 5-16-2011; Ord. 53-18,
passed 6-19-2018)
§ 111.023 ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, attempt to drink or
consume, or have in their possession any open or unsealed distilled spirit,
wine or malt beverage, as defined by state laws, in any public place except
upon the licensed premises of an on-sale licensee, upon the location set forth
in a permit granted by SDCL 35-1-5.5, or upon the location set forth in a
furniture zone limited lease as defined in §
117.061. For purposes of this section, the term “public place” means any place,
whether in or out of a building, owned, leased, or managed by the city and any
public street, alley, highway or public sidewalk. For purposes of this section,
the term “public place” does not include city parks as defined in chapter 95 of
this Code. This section in no way abrogates or changes §
95.029 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 5-9) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 85-19, passed 8-20-2019;
Ord. 41-25, passed 7-15-2025) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
§ 111.024 PERSONS TO WHOM SALE PROHIBITED.
   No licensee of any class shall sell or give for use as a beverage any
alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years, notwithstanding any
of the provisions of state laws.
(1992 Code, § 5-10) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 111.025 MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIRED FOR REAPPLICATION AFTER CONVICTION.
   Any licensee under this chapter, its agents or employees or the manager or
contractual operators, or their agents or employees, of retail establishments
licensed under this chapter, who in the course of the operation of the license,
are convicted of a violation of any law, rule, regulation or ordinance relevant
to alcoholic beverage control, shall upon reapplication for a license submit
with the reapplication a management plan which sets forth the licensee’s policy
for correcting any and all defects in its operation that contributed to the
violation. The city council will review the adequacy of the plan as part of the
renewal process. Failure to submit a plan or submission of an inadequate plan
shall be considered by the city council in exercising its discretion to approve
or disapprove the application pursuant to SDCL 35-2-1.2.
(1992 Code, § 5-11) (Ord. 39-98, passed 4-6-1998; Ord. 53-18, passed 6-19-2018)
§ 111.026 PURCHASE AND USE BY PERSONS UNDER 21.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or attempt to purchase
alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person under the age of 21 years drink any
alcoholic beverage in a public place or have any alcoholic beverage in his or
her possession in a public place.
(1992 Code, § 5-12) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.027 [REPEALED.]
§ 111.028 INDECENT EXPOSURE OR SIMULATION THEREOF PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person on premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages, while in the presence of any other person, to:
      (1)   Fail to conceal, with a fully opaque covering, the sexual parts of
the person’s body, to include the genitals, pubic area and anus of any person,
or the nipple and areola of the female breast; and
      (2)   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of, or simulates, the genitals or pubic area of the male or female body, or the
nipple or areola of the breast.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any licensee in alcoholic beverages to cause, allow
or permit any person on the licensed premises to violate the provisions of
division (a) above.
(1992 Code, § 5-15) (Ord. 18-88, passed 3-7-1988) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.029 [REPEALED.]
§ 111.030 VIDEO LOTTERY MACHINE LICENSES.
   There is hereby imposed on any person who is licensed pursuant to SDCL 35-
4 and who is issued a video lottery establishment license pursuant to SDCL 42-
7A-41 an annual additional license fee for the privilege of locating video
lottery machines on the licensed premises. The fee for each video lottery
machine is $50 per year. This section shall be effective on January 1, 1993.
(1992 Code, § 5-17) (Ord. 48-92, passed 5-18-1992; Ord. 53-18, passed 6-19-
2018)
§ 111.031 NUMBER OF VIDEO LOTTERY MACHINE PLACEMENTS AUTHORIZED.
   There shall be 186 authorizations for video lottery machines placement under
SDCL 42-7A-64 available for the first 202,600 population. One authorization for
video lottery machine placement as provided in SDCL 42-7A-64 may be granted for
each additional 5,000 of population. For the purposes of this section,
population is equal to the population estimates published by the United States
Census Bureau for each even-numbered year, except for the decennial year. For a
decennial year, population is equal to the amount determined by the decennial
federal census.
(Ord. 134-22, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 111.032 VIDEO LOTTERY PLACEMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   All video lottery placement(s) lottery applications requests, as provided in
SDCL 42-7A-64, must be submitted to the city on forms prescribed by the city
and contain all the information required by the city to determine the
eligibility of the applicant, along with a nonrefundable application fee in the
amount of $100.
   (a)   A video lottery placement(s) lottery application requires:
      (1)   The legal name of the prospective applicant.
      (2)   The business address and legal description of the prospective
establishment requesting a video lottery placement.
      (3)   A floor plan of the applicant's proposed premises.
      (4)   The nonrefundable application fee payable to city of Sioux Falls.
   (b)   The city shall reject a video lottery placement(s) lottery application
if:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or insufficient regarding the
information required pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   The video lottery placement(s) lottery applicant fails to meet any
of the timelines pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Only one video lottery placement(s) lottery application per business
address will be accepted.
(Ord. 134-22, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 111.033 PROCEDURE FOR ADDITIONAL VIDEO LOTTERY MACHINE PLACEMENTS.
   Whenever population growth per §
111.031 allows the issuance of additional authorizations for video lottery
placements, or one becomes available per §
111.031, these special procedures will apply:
   (a)   Upon one or more video lottery placement(s) becoming available, the
city shall publish an invitation for video lottery placement(s) lottery
applications on the city's website stating the deadline to apply and the
location(s) to which applications are to be submitted. There shall be no less
than 30 days between the city's invitation to apply and the opening of the
video lottery placement(s) lottery application window. No video lottery
placement(s) lottery application will be accepted prior to the publication of
the invitation nor after the deadline established in the published invitation.
   (b)   Video lottery placement(s) lottery applications must be complete and
include the nonrefundable video lottery placement(s) lottery fee. Once the
deadline has passed, the city will utilize a lottery system to place all video
lottery placement(s) lottery applications into the sequential order in which
they will be considered for submission of a uniform video lottery placement(s)
lottery application. Prior to conducting the lottery, notice of the lottery
shall be posted on the city's website a minimum of seven days in advance of the
lottery being conducted and such lottery shall be open to the public.
   (c)   Applicants drawn by lottery and eligible to continue on with the
process will be notified by email that they have 30 days to submit a
conditional use permit application, if required. The conditional use permit
process must be concluded within 60 days of the email notification unless
extended by the planning commission or city council. Upon receiving the
conditional use permit, the applicant must submit the uniform alcoholic
beverage application and license fee to the city within ten business days. If
no conditional use permit is required, the applicant must submit the uniform
alcoholic beverage application and license fee to the city within 60 days of
the email notification. If applicant fails to meet any of the deadlines
established in this section, the applicant shall be ineligible to continue on
in the application process, and the next video lottery placement(s) lottery
application, in sequential order as drawn in the lottery, shall be considered
for submission of a uniform alcoholic beverage application.
   (d)   After all new video lottery placement(s) have been awarded and
approved by the city council, the time period for executing these special
procedures shall be closed. Any remaining video lottery placement(s) lottery
applications shall be deemed ineligible for further consideration. A new video
lottery placement(s) lottery application will be required when another video
lottery placement(s) becomes available and lottery held in accordance with §
111.031.
(Ord. 134-22, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 111.034 APPLICABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Any request for placement of video lottery pursuant to SDCL 42-7A-64 not
approved prior to the effective date of this chapter will be subject to this
chapter.
(Ord. 134-22, passed 11-15-2022)
§ 111.035 ALCOHOL ON LIBRARY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, attempt to drink or consume,
or have in their possession any open or unsealed alcoholic beverage in or upon
any property controlled or maintained by Siouxland Libraries.
(Ord. 89-24, passed 10-1-2024)
CHAPTER 112: FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   Definitions
   
112.002   Inspection of food
   
112.003   Follow-up inspection of food authorized
   
112.004   Handlers affected by communicable diseases
   
112.005   Cleansing of eating and drinking utensils
   
112.006   Protection against contamination
   
112.007   Unwholesome food
   
112.008   Disposal of food and drink unfit for human use
   
112.009   Disposal of garbage and waste food
   
112.010   Unsanitary food establishments
   
112.011   Exposure for sale
   
112.012   Sleeping accommodations
   
112.013   Bakeries, confectionery establishments, food manufactories; generally
   
112.014   Bakeries, confectionery establishments, food manufactories;
sanitation
   
112.015   License to engage in the processing and selling of food
   
112.016   Labeling
Food Service Establishments
   
112.030   Regulations adopted
   
112.031   Amendments
   
112.032   Conflicts
   
112.033   Violation
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Airports, see
ch. 99
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Garbage and recycling, see
ch. 57
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of meats and food products, see SDCL 9-32-3
   Regulation of food sales, see SDCL 9-34-5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD. Includes any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage
or ingredient used or intended for use or sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
   GROCERY ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment or section of an establishment
where food and food products are offered to the consumer without further
preparation. The term does not include establishments which handle only
prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods; road side markets that offer only
whole fresh fruits and whole fresh vegetables; or vending machines.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment in which food is
manufactured or packaged for human consumption. The term includes those
establishments that handle open food without changing its content or nature
such as the cutting and packaging of fresh produce, fresh meat or repackaging
food.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food is prepared and intended
for individual portion service. This includes the site at which the individual
portions are provided. The term includes any place regardless of whether
consumption is on- or off-premises and regardless of whether there is a charge
for the food. The term does not include private homes where food is prepared or
served for individual family consumption.
   TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food service establishment that operates at
a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in
conjunction with a single event or celebration.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1201; 1992 Code, § 17-1) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007;
Ord. 57-09, passed 6-15-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 112.002 INSPECTION OF FOOD.
   All food service providers, grocers and food processors, and their
employees, shall allow the health officer to inspect their facilities and food
offered or intended for sale or service as well as relevant records. They shall
answer accurately all reasonable and proper questions asked by the health
officer relative to the condition and source of the food and of the places
where it is kept.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1202; 1992 Code, § 17-2) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 112.003 FOLLOW-UP INSPECTION OF FOOD AUTHORIZED.
   The department shall conduct a follow-up inspection as needed of a food
service, grocery, food processor or any other permitted establishment to
ascertain compliance with previous written orders. When the department conducts
an inspection pursuant to this section, the owner of the permitted
establishment shall promptly remit, but not later than 30 days after the
follow-up inspection the fee as set forth in §
110.030 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 17-2.1) (Ord. 57-09, passed 6-15-2009)
§ 112.004 HANDLERS AFFECTED BY COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   No person shall be allowed to come in to contact with food or food contact
items intended for the public who is infected with any communicable disease in
a transmissible state.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1203; 1992 Code, § 17-3) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 112.005 CLEANSING OF EATING AND DRINKING UTENSILS.
   The owner or person in charge of any place where food or drink is sold or
served to the public shall cause to be thoroughly cleansed immediately after
being used by each person all dishes, cups, drinking glasses and eating
utensils by washing them in a solution of soap and hot water, and rinsing in
clean hot water, then immersing in a sanitizing solution or by some other
equally effective method which has been approved by the health department.
Paper cups, dishes or other single-service containers shall be used only once.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1204; 1992 Code, § 17-4) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 112.006 PROTECTION AGAINST CONTAMINATION.
   Every person engaged in the sale or transportation of food shall cause his
or her wares or those under his or her charge to be properly protected by
screens or otherwise against contamination by flies, dust or other
contaminating agency.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1205; 1992 Code, § 17-5)
§ 112.007 UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   No person shall sell or offer for human consumption any unwholesome,
spoiled, diseased or decaying meats, fruits, vegetables or other commodity
which is unfit for food or which is obtained from sources not approved by the
health officer or his or her authorized representative.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1210; 1992 Code, § 17-6) (Ord. 2763, passed 6-28-1971;
Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 112.008 DISPOSAL OF FOOD AND DRINK UNFIT FOR HUMAN USE.
   Whenever any substance intended as food or drink for human use is found
being offered or exposed for sale or held in possession with intent to sell,
which is unfit for human use or likely to cause or transmit any disease, the
health department shall pronounce it to be garbage and order it removed and
disposed of. The owner or person in charge of the substance shall immediately
remove and dispose of it at his or her own expense according to the directions
of the health department, and in case of failure to do so, it may be caused to
be removed by the health department at the expense of the owner or person in
charge.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1206; 1992 Code, § 17-7)
§ 112.009 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND WASTE FOOD.
   The owner or person in charge of any establishment where food for human use
is manufactured, prepared, handled, sold or served shall keep all garbage,
offal, scraps, waste food and all other refuse in watertight containers with
tightfitting covers and shall have the containers removed and disposed of twice
a week or more often if required, in a manner approved by the health
department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1207; 1992 Code, § 17-8)
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and recycling, see
ch. 57
§ 112.010 UNSANITARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any food service,
grocery or food processing establishment or any other place where food or drink
intended for human use is manufactured, prepared, handled, sold, stored or
served to keep or maintain the establishment or place of business in an unclean
or unsanitary condition or in violation of the state laws or applicable
sanitation requirements of §§
112.030 through
112.033 or other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the city governing
the establishments. The health department shall have the power to order the
place closed until it shall be put in a clean and sanitary condition or until
the food or drink or the sale of the food or drink shall be no longer likely to
cause or transmit disease. The owner or person in charge of any establishment
or place of business so ordered closed shall immediately comply with and obey
the order and conduct no further operations until permission therefor has been
granted by the health department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1208; 1992 Code, § 17-9) (Ord. 2763, passed 6-28-1971;
Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
§ 112.011 EXPOSURE FOR SALE.
   No food shall be exposed for sale upon any sidewalk without approval by the
health department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1209; 1992 Code, § 17-10) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
Cross-reference:
   Sales, see
ch. 115
§ 112.012 SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS.
   No store, room or other enclosure in which food is sold, prepared, handled,
stored or served shall be directly connected with any sleeping room or living
space of a dwelling, apartment or tenement.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1211; 1992 Code, § 17-11) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 112.013 BAKERIES, CONFECTIONERY ESTABLISHMENTS, FOOD MANUFACTORIES;
GENERALLY.
   (a)   All buildings occupied by food service, grocery or food processing
establishments or used for the manufacture of any food products intended for
human consumption shall be well drained. All plumbing therein shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with modern sanitary principles. The
rooms used for the manufacture of those food products shall be light in color,
well lighted, dry and well ventilated and shall have smooth, impermeable
ceilings, floors and walls so constructed as to exclude rats and other vermin,
and the ceilings, floors and walls shall at all times be free from moisture and
be kept in a good state of repair and clean.
   (b)   The utensils, equipment, furniture and room used for the manufacture,
storage, preparation, service or sale of food products shall at all times be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be so arranged that they may
be easily and properly inspected and cleaned.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1213; 1992 Code, § 17-12)) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-
2007)
§ 112.014 BAKERIES, CONFECTIONERY ESTABLISHMENTS, FOOD MANUFACTORIES;
SANITATION.
   (a)   No toilet room or garbage room shall communicate directly with a room
used to prepare, sell, store or serve food products.
   (b)   Employees shall not be permitted to sleep in those rooms. Employees of
a food service, grocery or food processing establishment shall wear clean
clothes. All food service, grocery and food processing establishments shall
provide ample sanitary facilities to enable the employees employed therein to
keep their persons clean.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1214; 1992 Code, § 17-13) (Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
§ 112.015 LICENSE TO ENGAGE IN THE PROCESSING AND SELLING OF FOOD.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a food service, grocery
or food processing establishment without first having secured an annual license
from the health department. The license shall be effective from January 1
through December 31, of each year and must be approved by the city health
department based on compliance with applicable sanitation requirements of the
provisions of state law, this Code or other ordinances of the city. However,
those establishments inspected by the United States Department of Agriculture,
Food and Drug Administration or the state department of agriculture need not
apply for the license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1215; 1992 Code, § 17-14) (Ord. 2763, passed 6-28-1971;
Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
Cross-reference:
   License fee for food processing and sales, see §
110.029
§ 112.016 LABELING.
   All uncooked meat containing artificial coloring, antioxidants,
preservatives or any other substance shall be plainly labeled to inform the
purchaser of the name, amount and purpose of whatever is added to the meat.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1217; 1992 Code, § 17-15) (Ord. 2763, passed 6-28-1971;
Ord. 183-07, passed 12-3-2007)
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 112.030 REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The definitions; the inspection of food service establishments; the
issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food service
establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink; and the enforcement of this subchapter shall be regulated in accordance
with chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 and appendixes A, B, C, D and E
of the 1976 edition of the Food and Drug Administration Food Service Sanitation
Ordinance, three certified copies of which shall be on file in the office of
the city clerk, provided, that the words “municipality of ________” in the
ordinance shall be understood to refer to City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
(1992 Code, § 17-27) (Ord. 52-83, passed 7-25-1983)
§ 112.031 AMENDMENTS.
   Sections 1-104 and 10-601 are hereby deleted from the 1976 edition of the
Food and Drug Administration Food Service Sanitation Manual.
(1992 Code, § 17-28) (Ord. 52-83, passed 7-25-1983)
§ 112.032 CONFLICTS.
   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by
this subchapter and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law
or city ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and
be controlling.
(1992 Code, § 17-29) (Ord. 52-83, passed 7-25-1983)
§ 112.033 VIOLATION.
   In addition to the penalties provided for by this Code, any person violating
the provisions of this subchapter may be enjoined from continuing the
violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate
violation.
(1992 Code, § 17-30) (Ord. 52-83, passed 7-25-1983) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.001   Musical instruments in public places
   
113.002   Shooting gallery location restricted
   
113.003   Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides
   
113.004   Chapter 110 applicable
 
   
113.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Arena, see §§
32.035 through
32.042,
32.055 through
32.060
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Licenses issued by city attorney’s office, see §
110.026
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Noise control, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Authority to license, tax and regulate exhibitions, shows and amusements,
see SDCL 9-34-13
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.001 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person having under his or her control any public place or store shall
play or allow to be played or operated any musical instrument, radio or
mechanical musical device in the store or place in a manner as to disturb and
annoy the public.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.807; 1992 Code, § 6-1) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.002 SHOOTING GALLERY LOCATION RESTRICTED.
   No person shall operate or maintain a shooting gallery within the city upon
any vacant lot or in any tent or other temporary structure or enclosure.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.304; 1992 Code, § 6-2) Penalty, see §
113.999
Cross-reference:
   License fee for shooting gallery, see §
110.026
§ 113.003 BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AMUSEMENT RIDE. Any mechanical device which carries or conveys passengers
along, around or over a fixed or restricted route or course for the purpose of
giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills or excitement. The term
AMUSEMENT RIDE does not include slides, playground equipment, coin-operated
devices or conveyances which operate directly on the ground or on the surface
or pavement directly on the ground or the operation of amusement devices of a
permanent nature.
   (b)   No person may own, operate or lease an amusement ride in this city
without first filing with the city’s licensing specialist a bond or certificate
of liability insurance, in the amount of at least $1,000,000, indemnifying the
public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of the ride. The
bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city
attorney. This section shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license is
required by any other provision of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 6-3) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.004 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the chapter may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 6-4)
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.999.
(1992 Code, § 6-79) (Ord. 87-05, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 96-15, passed 10-13-
2015)
CHAPTER 114: HOSPITALS
Section
License
   
114.001   Required
   
114.002   Chapter 110 applicable
   
114.003   Application
Convalescent Homes; General Provisions
   
114.015   Definition
   
114.016   Exceptions
   
114.017   Inspection
   
114.018   Report
   
114.019   Record
Convalescent Homes; License
   
114.030   Required
   
114.031   Application
   
114.032   Investigation
   
114.033   Contents
   
114.034   Issuance restricted
Cross-references:
   Communicable diseases, see §§
92.110 through
92.123
   Emergency management, see
ch. 33
   Fire department inspection for license issuance, see §
110.035
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   License fee for convalescent home, see §
110.029
   Surface ambulance services, see §§
124.080 through
124.082
   Quiet zones; noises prohibited, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
Statutory reference:
   Ambulance service, see SDCL 34-10-1 et seq.
   Disclosure of health care charges, see SDCL ch. 34-12E
   Medical research, see SDCL ch. 34-14
   Municipal hospitals, see SDCL 34-9-1 et seq.
   Regulation of hospitals and related institutions, see SDCL ch. 34-12
   State department of health, see SDCL ch. 34-1
LICENSE
§ 114.001 REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct, operate or maintain any hospital, sanitarium or
lying-in house without first obtaining a license to do so.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.301; 1992 Code, § 20-13)
Cross-reference:
   License fee for hospitals, see §
110.029
§ 114.002 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 20-14)
§ 114.003 APPLICATION.
   The application for a license required by this subchapter shall be in the
general form of an application for a license and shall show the purpose for
which the institution is to be conducted.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.301; 1992 Code, § 20-15)
CONVALESCENT HOMES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.015 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONVALESCENT HOME. Any institution, rest home, boarding home, place,
building or agency which furnishes services which meet some need beyond basic
provision of food, shelter and laundry to three or more persons not related by
blood or marriage to the proprietor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1601; 1992 Code, § 20-27)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 114.016 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any state
institution, children’s home, association or institution having the care of
children under its control, which is duly incorporated under the laws of this
state.
   (b)   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to hotels or other similar
places that furnish only board and room, or either, to their guests.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1601; 1992 Code, § 20-28)
§ 114.017 INSPECTION.
   Every convalescent home for which a license has been issued shall be
periodically inspected by duly appointed representatives of the health officer,
building, plumbing and electrical inspectors and fire chief, and the
inspections shall be made and conducted at any time inspection shall be
advisable in the opinion of the representatives, and every convalescent home
shall be at all times open to inspection.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1612; 1992 Code, § 20-30)
§ 114.018 REPORT.
   It shall be the duty of every person conducting, managing, maintaining or
operating a convalescent home to immediately report to the health officer all
cases of communicable diseases affecting any patient or employee in the home.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1613; 1992 Code, § 20-31)
§ 114.019 RECORD.
   (a)   Each convalescent home shall keep a complete and permanent record of
all patients admitted to the convalescent home, which register shall contain
the name in full, age, sex, home address, diagnosis, marital status, date of
admission and date of discharge or disposition of each patient and the disease
or injury for which the patient was or is being treated, together with any
complications which may arise from or during the treatment, the name and
address of physician in attendance in those cases where a physician is
attending, and the name and telephone number of nearest relative or the person
who placed the patient in the convalescent home. In case of a patient being
admitted on account of injury, insanity, drug addiction or contagious disease,
the records shall also show how and by whom the patient was brought to the
convalescent home.
   (b)   All records required in division (a) above shall be available at all
reasonable hours for inspection by the health officer.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1614; 1992 Code, § 20-32)
CONVALESCENT HOMES; LICENSE
§ 114.030 REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, maintain or operate within the city a
convalescent home without first having secured an annual license to do so from
the health department.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1602; 1992 Code, § 20-40)
§ 114.031 APPLICATION.
   Written application for a convalescent home license shall be made to the
health director. The application shall state the street address of the real
property on which the convalescent home is situated. There shall be attached to
the application the proposed layout and floor plan of rooms, wards, halls and
all sanitary conveniences therein.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1602; 1992 Code, § 20-41)
§ 114.032 INVESTIGATION.
   No licenses shall be granted under this subchapter unless it shall appear
upon investigation by the health officer, the chief of the fire department, the
building, plumbing and electrical inspectors that the premises desired to be
used for a convalescent home comply with the laws of this state, the ordinances
of the city and the requirements of this subchapter, and the officers shall in
their respective capacities note their approval or disapproval upon the
application.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1602; 1992 Code, § 20-42)
§ 114.033 CONTENTS.
   Each license issued under this subchapter shall set forth the name and
location of the convalescent home covered by the license, the names of those
persons to whom the license is issued and the number of patients authorized by
the license to be housed in the convalescent home.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1602; 1992 Code, § 20-43)
§ 114.034 ISSUANCE RESTRICTED.
   If the application for a license required by this subchapter is approved by
the investigating officers, the license shall be issued by the health director.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1602; 1992 Code, § 20-44)
CHAPTER 115: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 116: PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   Chapter 110 applicable
   
116.003   Certain purchases of the inventory of other businesses excluded
   
116.004   Trades against new, unused items with higher fair market value
   
116.005   Consigned goods
Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Goods Dealers,
and Dealers in Precious Metals and Precious Gems
   
116.020   Records required
   
116.021   Access to records
   
116.022   Holding period for purchased articles
   
116.023   Holding period for purchased articles inapplicable
   
116.024   Hold orders
   
116.025   Articles available for inspection
   
116.026   Purchase from minor
   
116.027   Fixed premises and license required
   
116.028   Effective period of license; renewal and suspension or revocation of
license
   
116.029   Change in location of licensed premises
   
116.030   Display of license
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
   License fee for pawnbroker, see §
110.026
Statutory reference:
   Power to license, tax, regulate or prohibit pawnbrokers, see SDCL 9-34-8
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   CASUAL PURCHASES OF PRECIOUS METALS OR PRECIOUS GEMS. The purchase of
precious metals or precious gems other than for resale or for the purchaser’s
own use and enjoyment. Any purchase from a dealer in precious metals or
precious gems shall be considered a CASUAL PURCHASE.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The chief officer of the city police department or his or
her designee who shall be an employee of the city police department or other
person designated by the chief; however, the nonemployee designee shall be with
advice and consent of the city council.
   DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS OR PRECIOUS GEMS. Any person who engages in a
business of purchasing or receiving, for resale, any precious metals or any
precious gems, which were previously sold at retail, or coins. This shall not
include any person who makes only casual purchases of precious metals or
precious gems nor any person who purchases only at wholesale nor any person who
purchases only occasionally at a coin show or antique show, the primary purpose
of which is showing, rather than buying or selling the regulated articles.
   MEDIA OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES, COMPUTERS, AND OTHER DIGITAL DEVICES. Any
device used in connection with an electronic device, computer, or other digital
device or any device which is used to record and/or store data including, but
not limited to, vinyl records, VHS tapes, 8mm tapes, cassette tapes, 8-track
tapes, digital audio tapes, hard or floppy discs, CDs, DVDs, laser discs, Blu-
Ray discs, USB storage devices, I-Pods, MP3 players, hard drives, memory
sticks, or secure digital (SD) cards.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge or personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the property back
again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property and by taking possession of the property or any part thereof
so mortgaged.
   PRECIOUS GEMS. Diamonds, emeralds, rubies, sapphires and pearls, and any
other gem of similar value, and any article made, in whole or in part, of the
gems.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Gold, silver, and platinum and any article made, in whole
or in part, of any of the metals.
   SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER. Any person other than a pawnbroker or dealer in
precious metals or gems, who, in the course of his or her economic activity,
buys, sells, deals in, or takes in trade for the purpose of resale, the
following secondhand goods: portable electric appliances; power tools; tools;
tool boxes; electronic devices; stereos, or components thereof; computers and
other digital devices; media of electronic devices, computers and other digital
devices; sporting goods; sporting equipment; serial numbered items; bicycles
and e-bicycles; and precious metals or precious gems. The following are exempt:
      (1)   Bona fide garage, rummage, yard, or moving sales which do not occur
at the same location more than four times per year for more than four days each
time;
      (2)   Any person, firm, or company that operates an automobile salvage
business;
      (3)   Transactions in secondhand goods at stores or events sponsored by
nonprofit corporations or associations or religious organizations;
      (4)   Transactions by SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS in goods or articles other
than those of the type listed under the definition of SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER;
however, any transaction as it pertains to a good or article of the type listed
under the definition of SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER is not exempt from the
requirements of this chapter; and
      (5)   Transactions by SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS in goods or articles of
the type listed under the definition of SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER to the extent
that the good or article is contained in and integrated into a motor vehicle
and the motor vehicle is the good or article actually being transacted.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.211; 1992 Code, § 28-1) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011;
Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 116.002 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110 of this Code, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not
in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the
provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 28-2) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 116.003 CERTAIN PURCHASES OF THE INVENTORY OF OTHER BUSINESSES EXCLUDED.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the purchase by a pawnbroker,
dealer in precious metals or precious gems, or secondhand goods dealer licensed
under this chapter of any regulated article from another pawnbroker, dealer in
precious metals or precious gems, or secondhand goods dealer licensed under
this chapter if the purchase is with the purpose of buying up the entire
inventory of the purchasee. Nor do the provisions of this chapter apply to the
purchase by a pawnbroker, dealer in precious metals or precious gems, or
secondhand goods dealer licensed under this chapter of any new, unused, not
previously sold at retail regulated article purchased by the pawnbroker, dealer
in precious metals or precious gems, or secondhand goods dealer from the
inventory of a business with a state sales tax license issued by the state or
any other state if the purchase is done with the purpose of buying up the
entire inventory of the purchasee.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.1102; 1992 Code, § 28-3) (Ord. 13-80, passed 3-10-1980;
Ord. 45-94, passed 5-23-1994; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 67-19, passed
6-18-2019)
§ 116.004 TRADES AGAINST NEW, UNUSED ITEMS WITH HIGHER FAIR MARKET VALUE.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any transaction in which a
person, firm or company sells new, unused articles, not previously sold at
retail, and receives or takes in used articles or trade from purchasers of the
new articles against the purchase price of the new articles which are sold for
their fair market value which is of higher value than the used or traded
article.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.1102; 1992 Code, § 28-4) (Ord. 45-94, passed 5-23-1994;
Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 116.005 CONSIGNED GOODS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any transaction involving
goods sold on consignment to the extent of that transaction that pertains to
those consigned goods so long as the sale of consigned goods constitutes more
than 50% of the gross business transacted by that establishment.
(1992 Code, § 28-5) (Ord. 23-81, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-
2011)
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS,
AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND PRECIOUS GEMS
§ 116.020 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (a)   All pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers, and dealers in precious
metals or precious gems within the city shall keep a record in English of all
loans made, of all articles received by them as security, on consignment or by
purchase, and of all other transactions where an item is received for value by
the regulated business, and shall make and maintain, in a manner prescribed or
approved by the chief of police, a record of all regulated transactions. The
records are to be completed at the time the regulated transaction takes place.
   (b)   The records shall specifically identify each article purchased or
received, and if available, the manufacturer’s name, style, model number,
serial number, engraved initials, and other identifying marks except that coins
may be described only by the number of each denomination and face type
purchased. The record shall also include the date of purchase, the amount paid
for the article, the name and address of the person from whom the article was
purchased or received, and the person’s non-expired driver’s license number and
state of issuance, or if unavailable, the identifying number from at least one
form of non-expired government-issued identification, and any other information
required by the chief of police.
   (c)    A copy of the records required shall be provided in the manner
prescribed by the chief of police into the possession of the chief of police
within seven days from the date of purchase or receipt.
(1992 Code, § 28-15) (Ord. 23-81, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-
2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 116.021 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   All records required shall be maintained for at least one year after the
date of purchase or receipt and shall be open to inspection by a member of the
property crimes section of the city police department or his or her supervisor.
The inspections shall be for purposes of determining compliance with this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 28-16) (Ord. 23-81, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-
2011)
§ 116.022 HOLDING PERIOD FOR PURCHASED ARTICLES.
   Any item purchased or received by a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, or
dealer in precious metals or precious gems shall be held on the licensed
premises of the dealer and shall not be offered for sale, sold, disposed of, or
altered from the form in which it was received for a period of 14 calendar days
from the time the required records are received by the city police or its
designee.
(1992 Code, § 28-17) (Ord. 23-81, passed 3-16-1981; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-
2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 116.023 HOLDING PERIOD FOR PURCHASED ARTICLES INAPPLICABLE.
   Section
116.022 shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Firearm(s) provided the purchase, receipt, and sale of the firearm(s)
are done by anyone required by federal law to have a firearms’ license to sell
or trade guns;
   (b)   Any item purchased or received by a pawnbroker, secondhand goods
dealer, or dealer in precious metals or precious gems if the item is first
inspected by an authorized city police officer and the alteration or
disposition approved; and
   (c)   Any item returned by a pawnbroker to the person pawning the same.
(1992 Code, § 28-18) (Ord. 46-96, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-
2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 116.024 HOLD ORDERS.
   Any law enforcement officer may place a hold order on property when there is
reasonable cause to believe the property in possession of a pawnbroker,
secondhand goods dealer, or dealer in precious metals or precious gems is
stolen property. This hold order requires the pawnbroker, secondhand goods
dealer, or dealer in precious metals or precious gems to hold the specified
property on the licensed premises and not dispose of or alter the property from
the form in which it was received during the hold order period. This hold order
shall not exceed a holding period of more than 45 days unless it is extended by
court order. Hold orders will be placed on property by written or electronic
notification to the pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, or dealer in precious
metals or precious gems in possession of the property. The hold order
notification will include a detailed description of the property subject to the
hold and the date and time of the hold order notification. Hold orders may be
removed prior to the 45-day expiration period by written or electronic
notification by the law enforcement officer placing the hold or other
authorized officer from that agency. Nothing in this section shall limit a law
enforcement officer’s ability to seize property when there is reasonable cause
to believe it is stolen by means of a warrant, court order, or other method
authorized by law.
(1992 Code, § 28-19) (Ord. 46-96, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-
2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-2019)
§ 116.025 ARTICLES AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION.
   All pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers, or dealers in precious metals or
precious gems receiving an item in a regulated transaction shall make the item
available for inspection for purposes of determining compliance with this
chapter. The inspections shall be by a member of the property crimes section of
the city police department or his or her supervisor during normal business
hours during the holding period or until the item is disposed of in accordance
with this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 28-20) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-
2019)
§ 116.026 PURCHASE FROM MINOR.
   No pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, or dealer in precious metals or
precious gems shall purchase or receive from any person under the age of 18
years any item, unless the minor at the time he or she offers the item is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
(1992 Code, § 28-21) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-
2019)
§ 116.027 FIXED PREMISES AND LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)    No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker, secondhand goods
dealer, or dealer in precious metals or precious gems unless the person has a
fixed premises where all regulated transactions are conducted in person, either
on a continuing basis or from time to time, and unless the person has first
obtained a license to engage in that business at that premises.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, FIXED PREMISES includes any nonmobile
premises where all regulated transactions are conducted in person and the items
received are held according to the provisions of §
116.022, whether or not that premises remains in  the same location during the
period the license is in effect.
   (c)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the occasional receipt
of articles by a pawnbroker, dealer in precious metals or precious gems, or
secondhand goods dealer off the licensed premises. However, any article
received shall be recorded and reported according to the provisions of §
116.020 and held on the licensed premises according to the provisions of §
116.022 .
(1992 Code, § 28-22) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-
2019)
§ 116.028 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF LICENSE; RENEWAL AND SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF
LICENSE.
   A license issued under this chapter shall be valid and effective until
January 1 of the year following the year of issuance, and may be renewed
annually upon payment of the required fee. The license may be suspended or
revoked according to the provisions of
chapter 110 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 28-23) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 116.029 CHANGE IN LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   If, during the effective period of a license issued under this chapter, a
licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, or dealer in precious metals or
precious gems changes the location of the licensed premises within the city,
the person shall inform the city’s licensing specialist of the change of
location and shall have the new premises to be licensed noted on the license.
There shall be no additional fee charged for changing the location of the
licensed premises.
(1992 Code, § 28-24) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 67-19, passed 6-18-
2019)
§ 116.030 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   A license issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed at the
licensed premises during hours when the premises is open for business.
(1992 Code, § 28-25) (Ord. 54-11, passed 7-18-2011)
CHAPTER 117: PEDDLERS AND VENDORS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.001   Definitions
   
117.002   Exceptions to chapter
   
117.003   Refusing to leave
   
117.004   Entrance to premises restricted
   
117.005   Misrepresentation
   
117.006   Hours of operation
   
117.007   Prohibited conduct
Permit
   
117.020   Required
   
117.021   Application
   
117.022   Investigation, examination of applicant
   
117.023   Bond required
   
117.024   Chapter 110 applicable
   
117.025   False information
   
117.026   Photographs
   
117.027   Fee
   
117.028   Issuance restricted
   
117.029   Display
   
117.030   Suspension and revocation
Sidewalk Vendors
   
117.040   Definitions
   
117.041   Permit required in central business district
   
117.042   Vending outside central business district
   
117.043   Prohibited conduct
   
117.044   Size requirements for vending stands
   
117.045   Health and sanitation requirements for food and beverage vending
   
117.046   Advertising
Right-of-Way Allowances in the Central Business District; Generally
   
117.060   Purpose
   
117.061   Definitions
   
117.062   Furniture zone use allowed
   
117.063   Permit fees and permit duration
   
117.064   Furniture zone limited leases for sidewalk cafés and sidewalk pubs
   
117.065   Lease fees and lease duration
   
117.066   Objects allowed in the right-of-way
   
117.067   Application for permit or lease
   
117.068   Review and evaluation criteria
   
117.069   Approval conditional
   
117.070   Liability and insurance
   
117.071   Designated pedestrian walkway
   
117.072   Maintenance of permitted or leased area
   
117.073   Food preparation not authorized
   
117.074   Noise allowed; excessive noise prohibited
   
117.075   Occurrence in downtown parks
   
117.076   Exceptions for city-approved objects
   
117.077   Priority of assignment for furniture zone use sites
   
117.078   Natural gas fire pits within furniture zones
   
117.079   Revocation and suspension
Right-of-Way Allowances in the Central Business District; Additional Rules
Specific to Type of Use
   
117.090   Sidewalk cafés, sidewalk pubs, and parklets as extension of adjacent
businesses
   
117.091   Sidewalk café, sidewalk pub, and parklet delineation
   
117.092   Sidewalk café and sidewalk pub furniture requirements
   
117.093   Trash and trash receptacles for vendors, sidewalk cafés, sidewalk
pubs, and parklets
   
117.094   Alcohol in sidewalk cafés, sidewalk pubs, and parklets
   
117.095   Additional rules governing alcoholic beverages in sidewalk cafés and
sidewalk pubs
   
117.096   Locational rules for performance artists
   
117.097   Sale of goods by artists and performance artists
   
117.098   Additional rules related to vending
   
117.099   Additional rules related to parklet permits
Events in the Central Business District
   
117.110   Special events
   
117.111   Reserved
   
117.112   Special event preemption of furniture zone use
Mobile Food Vendors
   
117.120   Definitions
   
117.121   Required
   
117.122   False information
   
117.123   Mobile food vending permit issuance and fees
   
117.124   Issuance restricted
   
117.125   Nontransferability
   
117.126   Background check
   
117.127   Chapter 110 applicable
   
117.128   Mobile food vendor application
   
117.129   Display of permit
   
117.130   Revocation
   
117.131   Allowed mobile vending locations
   
117.132   Hours of operation
   
117.133   Health and sanitation requirements
   
117.134   Noise
   
117.135   Parking
   
117.136   ADA access
   
117.137   Fire safety
   
117.138   Litter control
   
117.139   Prohibited conduct
   
117.140   Liability and insurance
 
   
117.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   License fee for vendors, see §
110.028
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
   Noise control, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
   Police, see §§
131.020,
131.021
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Traffic code, see title VII
Statutory reference:
   Authority to license, tax and regulate transient
    merchants and transient stores, see SDCL 9-34-7
   Authority to license, tax, regulate or prohibit peddlers, see SDCL 9-34-8
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. As used in this chapter means any person, whether a resident of
this city or not, traveling from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street for the purpose of selling or soliciting for sale of goods,
wares, merchandise or services, including food and beverages not intended to be
immediately consumed, and shall also mean and include any person transacting a
temporary business within the city. This definition does not include mobile
food vending in compliance with
Chapter 117 of this Code.
   TEMPORARY BUSINESS. As used in this chapter means the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or services, including food and beverages, sold by a  person,
business or other entity for fewer than 90 days within any period of 12
consecutive months, or from a car, truck, other motor vehicle, trailer or any
structure other than a permanent building. This definition does not include a
mobile food truck in compliance with
Chapter 117 of this Code.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 8.401, 8.1601; 1992 Code, § 29-1) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-
17-2006; Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 117.002 EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Solicitations, sales, or distributions made by charitable,
educational, or religious organizations which have registered with the city;
   (b)   Traveling salespersons doing business exclusively with retail
merchants, manufacturers, jobbers, or public officials;
   (c)   Persons selling jams, jellies, vegetables, fruits, or flowers grown or
produced by them and not purchased by them for resale; and
   (d)   Bona fide garage, rummage, yard, or moving sales which do not occur at
the same location more than four times per year for more than four days each
time.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.402; 1992 Code, § 29-2) (Ord. 78-78, passed 8-7-1978;
Ord. 85-94, passed 9-19-1994; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed
12-15-2015)
§ 117.003 REFUSING TO LEAVE.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler who enters upon premises owned or
leased by another to fail to promptly leave the premises after having been
notified by the owner or possessor of the premises, or his or her agent, to
leave the premises.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.402; 1992 Code, § 29-3) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006)
Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.004 ENTRANCE TO PREMISES RESTRICTED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private
premises when the premises is posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed,"
"No Soliciting," or words to that effect.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter any residence unless
expressly invited by a competent adult in charge of the residence.
(1992 Code, § 29-4) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.005 MISREPRESENTATION.
   No peddler shall make false or fraudulent statements concerning the quality
or nature of their goods, wares, merchandise or services for the purpose of
inducing another to purchase the goods, wares, merchandise or services.
(1992 Code, § 29-5) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.006 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No peddler shall peddle door-to-door between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. the following morning, except by specific appointment with or invitation
from the prospective customer.
(1992 Code, § 29-6) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 117.007 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   Any peddler selling or soliciting for sale goods, wares, merchandise or
services by traveling from place to place, house to house or street to street
shall not remain in any one place for a period longer than necessary to make a
sale after having been approached or stopped for that purpose.
(1992 Code, § 29-7) (Ord. 13-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006)
PERMIT
§ 117.020 REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler
within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city.
(1992 Code, § 29-17) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.021 APPLICATION.
   Applicants will have 15 days to complete the permitting process. An
incomplete application 15 days or older will require a new application fee and
background recheck. The application for a permit required by the provisions of
this subchapter shall include at least the following information:
   (a)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any state or federal law or municipal
ordinance or code other than traffic offenses; the nature of the offense; the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor, if previously convicted; and the place
of conviction;
   (b)   Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept,
or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
   (c)   The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in business within
the city;
   (d)   The local and permanent addresses of the applicant;
   (e)   The local and permanent addresses and the name of the entity, if any,
that the applicant represents;
   (f)   The kind of goods, wares, merchandise, or services the applicant
wishes to peddle within the city;
   (g)   The cities or towns wherein the applicant has worked as a peddler for
the last five years prior to application; and
   (h)   The applicant's date of birth, state of issuance and government
picture identification number, and social security number or other identifying
number.
   (i)   The state of South Dakota sales tax number for the applicant and/or
the entity that the applicant represents.
(1992 Code, § 29-18) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.022 INVESTIGATION, EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.
   (a)   The application for a peddler permit shall be investigated by the
police chief or his or her designee. No permit shall be granted to any person:
      (1)   Who has an active warrant relating to any offense;
      (2)   Who has been convicted for a sex crime as defined by SDCL 22-24B-
1 or any indecent exposure for which he or she is still subject to sex offender
registration requirements;
      (3)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years of application for all other
indecent exposures;
      (4)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last ten years of application for a crime of
violence as defined by SDCL 22-1-2(9);
      (5)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last ten years of application for any burglary;
      (6)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years of application for a felony
possession or distribution of controlled substances;
      (7)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years of application for any offense
involving theft or fraud;
      (8)   Who has knowingly omitted or provided false information on the
application; or
      (9)   For any good cause.
   (b)   Convictions in other states considered. Any known conviction for an
offense in another state which, if committed in this state, would be a
violation of one of the offenses listed in subsection (a) shall be used to
determine if an applicant is eligible for a permit.
   (c)   Any denial of an application for permit may be appealed through the
procedures established by the administrative code provisions of this code
according to the procedure set forth in §
30.040.
(Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.023 BOND REQUIRED.
   Every peddler before receiving a license shall file with their application a
bond in the penal sum of $1,000 conditioned for the faithful performance and
payment of obligations of the peddler arising in connection with the business,
and for payment of all claims or damages for which the peddler may become
liable through fraud, deceit, or otherwise in the course of business as a
peddler.
(1992 Code, § 29-18.1) (Ord. 69-93, passed 9-7-1993; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 117.024 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable
and not in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license
under the provisions of this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.1603; 1992 Code, § 29-19) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006;
Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 117.025 FALSE INFORMATION.
   No person shall give any false or misleading information in connection with
his or her application for a permit required by §§
117.001 through
117.007 and
117.020 through
117.030.
(1992 Code, § 29-20) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015)
§ 117.026 PHOTOGRAPHS.
   The applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall submit to
photographing by the police chief or his or her designee.
(1992 Code, § 29-21) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-
2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 117.027 FEE.
   Before any application is considered or any permit issued under the
provisions of this subchapter, the applicant shall pay an application fee of
$35.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 8.204—8.206, 8.208—8.210, 8.1602; 1992 Code, § 29-22)
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed
12-15-2015)
§ 117.028 ISSUANCE RESTRICTED.
   No peddler’s permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership or other
impersonal legal entity, unless that entity is operating a temporary business
at a fixed location, but each individual person engaging in the business of
peddling from door-to-door or street-to-street within the city shall be
required to have a separate permit, whether acting for himself or herself or as
an agent or representative of another.
(1992 Code, § 29-23) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015)
§ 117.029 DISPLAY.
   Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter
and doing business within the city shall prominently and always display the
permit on his or her person while acting as a peddler.
(1992 Code, § 29-24) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.030 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be suspended
or revoked by the police chief or his or her designee for the violation by the
permittee of any provision of city ordinance, state or federal law, rule, or
regulation, or for other good cause. The permittee may appeal through the
procedures established by the administrative code provisions of this code
according to the procedure set forth in §
30.040.
   If the police chief or his or her designee finds good cause to suspend or
revoke a permit, the police chief or his or her designee may take immediate
action to suspend or revoke the permit. A suspension shall be temporary in
nature and the terms of any suspension shall be specified at the time of
issuance; however, if no other time period is specified for a suspension, the
suspension shall be deemed in effect for the initial maximum time period of 90
days. The suspension period may be reviewed and increased by up to 90-day
increments if there is a valid reason for the extension. However, a total
period of suspension shall not exceed one year under any circumstances. The
peddler shall be informed of any temporary suspension or extension(s) of the
suspension period. A peddler shall have the right to appeal any suspension,
extension of a suspension, or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this
code. Any circumstances or events that lead to a permit suspension herein can
similarly amount to good cause for a revocation. A revocation may be ordered
immediately without a suspension or at any time during or after a suspension.
(1992 Code, § 29-25) (Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 131-15, passed 12-15-
2015; Ord. 38-16, passed 4-19-2016) Penalty, see §
117.999
SIDEWALK VENDORS
§ 117.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. The Main Street Business Improvement District as
defined by §
37.106 of this Code.
   STAND. Any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon or any other
movable vehicle or device, which may be moved without the assistance of a motor
and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the state department
of commerce and regulation, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of
articles offered for sale by a vendor.
   VEND. To sell or solicit for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or
services, including food and beverages.
   VENDOR. Any person engaged in the selling or soliciting for sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, services, including food and beverages, on the public
streets or sidewalks, from a stand or motor vehicle or from his or her person.
This definition does not  include a mobile food truck in compliance with
Chapter 117 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 29-26) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 117.041 PERMIT REQUIRED IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   It shall be unlawful for a vendor to sell or offer for sale any food,
beverage, merchandise or service on any street or sidewalk in the central
business district within the city without first obtaining a peddler’s license
and sidewalk use permit.
(1992 Code, § 29-27) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.042 VENDING OUTSIDE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   Vending goods, wares, merchandise, and/or services outside the central
business district is permitted upon receipt of a peddler’s license. Vending
food and beverages outside the central business district requires a mobile food
vending permit or a health permit if not classified as a mobile food vendor.
(1992 Code, § 29-28) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3- 2024)
§ 117.043 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   No vendor shall:
   (a)   Store, park or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk or
park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking place, in conformance
with city and state parking regulations;
   (b)   Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless the vendor has
available for public use a litter receptacle or a public litter receptacle
which is available for his or her patrons’ use;
   (c)   Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of
all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by the vendor;
   (d)   Use any device that is designed to amplify sound for the purpose of
making verbal solicitations;
   (e)   Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to
be placed anywhere other than in, on or under the stand or motor vehicle;
   (f)   Set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack
or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of the stand or
motor vehicle where the items have not been described in the application;
   (g)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles;
   (h)   Sell anything other than that which the vendor is licensed to vend;
and
   (i)   Allow the stand or any other item relating to the operation of the
vending business to lean against or hang from any building or other structure
lawfully placed on public property without the owner’s permission.
(1992 Code, § 29-29) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 89-87, passed 11-2-
1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 117.044 SIZE REQUIREMENTS FOR VENDING STANDS.
   No vending stand shall exceed 30 inches in width and six feet in length and
38 inches in height to the countertop and seven feet vertical clear space,
ground to lowest point of protective covering, which measurements shall include
the entire vehicle and any attachments unless otherwise approved in peddler’s
license or sidewalk use permit.
(1992 Code, § 29-30) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 117.045 HEALTH AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING.
   (a)   Vendors of food and beverages shall comply with the inspection
provisions and standards for food service establishments as set forth in the
following provisions of the code: this
chapter 117 of this Code and the fire code as adopted by the city in §
91.015 of this Code.
   (b)   Additionally, vendors of food and beverages shall allow:
      (1)   The equipment used in vending food and beverages be inspected upon
application for a license and shall be required to obtain a valid food service
license and operating permit; and
      (2)   Each food or beverage vending business be inspected at least twice
a year.
(1992 Code, § 29-31) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 117.046 ADVERTISING.
   No advertising, except the posting of prices, shall be permitted on any
stand or motor vehicle, except to identify the name of the product or the name
of the sidewalk vendor.
(1992 Code, § 29-32) (Ord. 12-87, passed 3-2-1987; Ord. 49-06, passed 4-17-
2006; Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
RIGHT-OF-WAY ALLOWANCES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT; GENERALLY
§ 117.060 PURPOSE.
   Sidewalk cafés, sidewalk pubs, artistic displays, artistic performances,
natural gas fire pits, and other approved or permitted uses of the sidewalk
encourage a pedestrian friendly environment and help to create a visually
attractive and dynamic atmosphere for downtown Sioux Falls. These uses are a
privilege granted by the city and are encouraged so long as they are compatible
with the pedestrian use of sidewalk, create positive conditions downtown, and
comply with other relevant provisions found in the Code of Ordinances of the
city.
(1992 Code, § 29-50) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJACENT/ADJOINING BUSINESS. The business or property immediately adjacent
to a portion of the sidewalk and furniture zone. A business shall be determined
to be ADJACENT to a portion of the furniture zone by extending the property
lines perpendicular into the furniture zone.
   ARTIST or PERFORMANCE ARTIST. Any person or group who is permitted to use
the furniture zone area for the purpose of conducting an artistic display or
performance. The term ARTIST or PERFORMANCE ARTIST includes, but is not limited
to, musicians, painters and dancers. Any ARTIST or PERFORMANCE ARTIST actively
selling works of art or other items shall be defined as a vendor.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT and DOWNTOWN. The area contained within the
Downtown business improvement district as defined in §
37.106  of this Code.
   DESIGNATED PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY. The portion of the sidewalk designated by the
city which is at least 84 inches in width unless otherwise designated by a
furniture zone use permit or furniture zone limited lease. The DESIGNATED
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY shall be kept clear of intrusions and obstructions in order
to provide for pedestrian travel and access.
   FIRE PIT INSTALLATION PERMIT. A permit for the installation of a natural gas
fire pit in the public right-of-way in the central business district as set
forth in this chapter.
   FIRE PIT USE PERMIT. An annual permit for the use of a natural gas fire pit
in the public right-of-way in the central business district as set forth in
this chapter.
   FURNITURE ZONE. The portion of the right-of-way which is designated for the
express purpose of allowing commercial uses thereon. It may be designated by
stamped and/or colored concrete and may extend into areas that are permitted as
a parklet. In some areas, the FURNITURE ZONE may include areas of the sidewalk
where the sidewalk is greater than 84 inches wide.
   FURNITURE ZONE LIMITED LEASE. An annual limited lease granted by the city to
a sidewalk café or pub licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, which shall
convey the exclusive right to the use of a portion of the city’s right-of-way
to the adjoining business only for those business purposes designated in the
lease, which shall include the sale and service of alcoholic beverages. A
partial-year limited lease may also be granted by the city to a parklet.
   FURNITURE ZONE USE PERMIT. A permit for the use of a specific portion of the
city’s furniture zone for any of the uses set forth in this chapter except for
those uses which include the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. Terms
in this chapter referring to specific types of FURNITURE ZONE USE PERMITS shall
be synonymous to a FURNITURE ZONE USE PERMIT and sidewalk use permit.
   MINOR USE BY ADJACENT BUSINESSES. The placement of objects on the furniture
zone area adjacent to a business which enhance or support the business, but
where the primary purpose is not a permanent or semi-permanent operation of
retail activities, and where financial transactions are limited to the confines
of the adjacent business. These  activities include placement of a cart,
planter, sandwich board sign or other similar item which is allowed unless
placement obstructs the designated pedestrian walkway.
   NATURAL GAS FIRE PIT. A device specifically designed to burn natural gas for
the purpose of providing warmth.
   PARKLET. A designated area located within a public right-of-way that would
otherwise be used for vehicle parking in the central business district that can
host temporary approved activities by limited lease.
   RETAILING. The use of the furniture zone by an adjacent business for the
primary purpose of operation of retail activities above and beyond minor uses
described in this section.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the designated public right-of-way which is hard-
surfaced and not used for motor vehicle travel or motor vehicle parking.
Generally, it will be that portion of the right-of-way which is located between
the street curb and the parallel property line except for any area that is a
furniture zone.
   SIDEWALK CAFÉ. Licensed food service establishment which is permitted to use
the furniture zone adjacent to its place of business for the purpose of serving
food from its menu in an outdoor setting.
   SIDEWALK PUB. An establishment licensed to serve alcoholic drinks for
consumption on its premises which is permitted to use the furniture zone area
adjacent to its place of business for the purpose of serving alcoholic
beverages in an outdoor setting. A SIDEWALK PUB may provide light dining
options.
   VENDOR or PEDDLER. Any person who, from a cart or some other form of
conveyance located upon the furniture zone use area, offers for sale goods or
distribution, wares, merchandise, or services, including food or beverages.
(1992 Code, § 29-51) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023; Ord. 101-24, passed 12- 3-2024)
§ 117.062 FURNITURE ZONE USE ALLOWED.
   (a)   Commercial or other nonpublic use of the furniture zone shall be
allowed in the central business district only upon permission or by a limited
lease granted by the city.
   (b)   The following uses are allowed under the provisions of this chapter by
permit:
      (1)   Retailing;
      (2)   Artists and performance acts;
      (3)   Vending; and
      (4)   Natural gas fire pit.
   (c)   The following uses are allowed under the provisions of this chapter by
limited lease of the furniture zone:
      (1)   Sidewalk cafés:
         A.   Without alcohol sales and consumption; or
         B.   With alcohol sales and consumption.
      (2)   Sidewalk pubs.
      (3)   Parklets.
   (d)   The following uses are allowed under the provisions of this chapter by
notification:
      (1)   Minor uses by adjacent business; and
      (2)   Placement of objects consistent with this chapter.
   (e)   The city shall consider the impact of each proposed use of the
furniture zone upon public property, public investments, public rights of
access and way, and to businesses owners, property owners and residents in
granting permission for allowing the requested use and reserves its right as
steward of public right-of-way to limit, prohibit, or place conditions on
nonpublic uses of the public right-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 29-52) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.063 PERMIT FEES AND PERMIT DURATION.
   (a)   The annual fee for a furniture zone use permit shall be determined by
type of use. Unless otherwise provided in this subchapter, the permit shall be
valid for up to one calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the year
of issuance.
   (b)   Permit fees shall be as follows:
 
Permit                       Fee and Duration
Artist or performance artist $35 for the calendar year
Fire pit installation        $35 one-time installation fee
Retailing                    $35 for the calendar year
Vending                      $35 for the calendar year
 
(1992 Code, § 29-53) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.064 FURNITURE ZONE LIMITED LEASES FOR SIDEWALK CAFÉS AND SIDEWALK PUBS.
   Any furniture zone limited lease granted by the city pursuant to this
chapter shall convey to the adjoining business the right to use a designated
portion of the sidewalk or furniture zone only for those purposes set forth in
the lease. The limited lease may contain those restrictions and conditions as
deemed necessary by the city and may not be assigned or sublet at any time
during its term. The city shall have the right to terminate the limited lease
for violation of any material term or condition thereof. Required compliance
with all city ordinances and state statutes regarding the sale and service of
alcoholic beverages shall be deemed to be a material condition of the limited
lease. Compliance with city noise ordinances shall be deemed a material
condition of the limited lease. The limited lease term shall not include those
dates and times specified for special events approved by the city council or
city special event committee which includes the area of the furniture zone
limited lease at the election of the event sponsor.
(1992 Code, § 29-54) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.065 LEASE FEES AND LEASE DURATION.
   The furniture zone limited lease shall take effect when issued and terminate
on December 31, in the year for which it was issued. Limited lease for a
parklet is seasonal and terminates on October 15 to clear the right-of-way for
snow removal. The annual fee for a furniture zone limited lease shall be $35.
(1992 Code, § 29-55) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.066 OBJECTS ALLOWED IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Objects such as carts, planters, sandwich board signs, freestanding signs,
and benches may be placed upon the furniture zone by adjacent businesses only
so long as the items do not encroach upon the designated pedestrian pathway or
another person’s or business’s furniture zone use permit or limited lease area.
Any placement of sandwich and freestanding signs shall be made so as to
maintain 20 feet of distance from each other.
(1992 Code, § 29-56) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.067 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT OR LEASE.
   (a)   All applicants for furniture zone use permits or furniture zone
limited leases shall complete an online application. Any permit or limited
lease shall be granted on forms prepared by the city.
   (b)   Applicants requesting to extend the furniture zone into the public
right-of-way, which would otherwise be used for vehicle parking, shall be
subject to the additional rules in §
117.099.
(1992 Code, § 29-57) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.068 REVIEW AND EVALUATION CRITERIA.
   Each application for a furniture zone use permit or furniture zone limited
lease shall be evaluated for the following criteria prior to issuance of a
permit:
   (a)   Provisions of this subchapter are adequately followed;
   (b)   All additional licenses or permits required by the city or state for
the proposed use activity have been obtained;
   (c)   Placement of objects upon the furniture zone is consistent with the
policies and standards developed by the planning department;
   (d)   Adequate clearances for pedestrian circulation exist within the site.
This includes proper clearances from items such as parking meters, light poles,
trash cans, and other street furniture and whether proper pedestrian
circulation occurs on the site;
   (e)   Safety concerns related to the requested furniture zone use have been
addressed; and
   (f)   Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(1992 Code, § 29-58) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.069 APPROVAL CONDITIONAL.
   The planning and development services department may attach conditions to
the furniture zone use permit or furniture zone limited lease to provide for
the safety and welfare of the public and neighboring property interests, or may
deny the requested permit if it determines in writing that no conditions can
adequately provide safety and welfare. Conditions may be added to a permit or
limited lease during its term to address bona fide concerns that may arise
after the issuance of the permit.
(1992 Code, § 29-59) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.070 LIABILITY AND INSURANCE.
   (a)   Before any furniture zone use permit or furniture zone limited lease
is granted, the applicant shall sign a statement holding harmless the city and
shall indemnify the city, its officers and employees, for any claims for
damages to property or injury to persons which may occur in connection with any
activity carried on pursuant to the terms of the furniture zone use permit or
furniture zone limited lease.
   (b)   With the exception of minor uses by adjacent businesses and artists or
performing artists, all applicants for use of the furniture zone shall furnish
and maintain a policy of insurance protecting the applicant and the city from
all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may
arise from operations under the furniture zone use permit or limited lease, or
in connection therewith. The insurance policy shall list or endorse the city as
additional insured and carry minimum liability limits of at least $1,000,000
per occurrence. The endorsement shall provide that the policy shall not be
terminated or canceled prior to the termination of the furniture use without 30
days’ written notice to the city.
   (c)   Any permit for furniture zone use or limited lease for furniture zone
use shall be deemed void in the absence of a current insurance policy meeting
the above criteria.
(1992 Code, § 29-60) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.071 DESIGNATED PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY.
   The city shall, on each permit or limited lease issued for furniture zone
usage, identify the designated pedestrian walkway. No aspect of the furniture
zone use shall be allowed to be conducted upon the designated pedestrian
walkway, and no equipment or fixtures shall intrude upon or extend into the
designated pedestrian walkway. The designated pedestrian walkway shall not be
considered part of the furniture zone use or lease area, nor shall the uses
allowed by this subchapter apply to the designated pedestrian walkway which
shall at all times remain free of any intrusion and obstruction.
(1992 Code, § 29-61) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.072 MAINTENANCE OF PERMITTED OR LEASED AREA.
   Permit and lease holders shall maintain the permitted or leased area in a
clean manner at all times, and shall mitigate any impact activities associated
with the permitted or leased use which contribute to the uncleanliness of the
sidewalk and surrounding area that includes snow removal.
(1992 Code, § 29-62) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.073 FOOD PREPARATION NOT AUTHORIZED.
   Food preparation on the sidewalk or furniture zone is not authorized under
this subchapter unless approved by the city health department.
(1992 Code, § 29-63) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.074 NOISE ALLOWED; EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Noise generated by a furniture zone use must conform to standards set
forth in §§
93.001 through
93.011 of this Code.
   (b)   The city may order the cessation of all noise generating activities,
up to and including closure of the site, when it is deemed an approved
furniture zone use, or furniture zone limited lease is in violation of §§
93.001 through
93.011 of this Code, and in which the permit or lease holder has been notified
of the excessive noise.
(1992 Code, § 29-64) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.075 OCCURRENCE IN DOWNTOWN PARKS.
   In instances in which uses related to this subchapter are proposed to occur
in a downtown park, the rules, regulations and procedures of the parks and
recreation department may take precedence.
(1992 Code, § 29-65) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.076 EXCEPTIONS FOR CITY-APPROVED OBJECTS.
   Any object(s) placed by the city in the regular conduction of its business,
or any other object(s) approved by the city through other means, is exempted
from this subchapter unless otherwise provided.
(1992 Code, § 29-66) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.077 PRIORITY OF ASSIGNMENT FOR FURNITURE ZONE USE SITES.
   Adjacent businesses and property owners shall be given priority
consideration for furniture zone use for furniture zone areas abutting the
adjacent property. The city may grant permission for multiple permit holders to
use an individual site upon a written agreement between the parties, or in
cases where multiple permits will not be in conflict. Priority of assignment is
determined annually.
(1992 Code, § 29-67) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 117.078 NATURAL GAS FIRE PITS WITHIN FURNITURE ZONES.
   (a)    Prior to installation of a natural gas fire pit in the furniture
zone, a fire pit installation permit is required. The permit application shall
require a site plan that identifies the placement of the natural gas fire pit
in the furniture zone, the fire pit's dimensions, the fire pits distance from
the nearest object(s) and the designated pedestrian walkway, and any other
information requested by the city. The city shall not issue a fire pit
installation permit unless the applicant is found by the city to be in
compliance with the following:
      (1)    The installation of the natural gas fire pit shall conform to all
city fire, mechanical, and engineering requirements and manufacturer's
specifications.
      (2)    The natural gas fire pit shall be installed with an "on and off"
switch in a secure location within the applicant's business.
      (3)    A natural gas fire pit emergency remote shutoff switch shall be
located in the immediate area of the natural gas fire pit and be accessible to
the public.
      (4)    The natural gas fire pit shall be protected from all motor
vehicles using affixed concrete bollards, concrete planters, or other similar
devices.
      (5)    The natural gas fire pit shall be constructed to avoid being
tipped over, but cannot be permanently affixed to the public right-of-way.
      (6)    A natural gas line shall be installed under the public right-of-
way to the natural gas fire pit in compliance with SDCL 49-7A.
   (b)    A fire pit use permit shall not be issued by the city unless the
applicant has secured a fire pit installation permit, and is found by the city
to be in compliance with the following:
      (1)    The natural gas fire pit shall be at least ten feet from the
adjacent business and must be two feet from any furniture or other objects set
forth in §
117.066.
      (2)    The open flame and heat outlets must maintain clearance to all
combustible materials and fire sprinkler heads.
(Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.079 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The city may deny, revoke or suspend a fire pit use permit, furniture
zone use permit, parklet permit, or limited lease upon finding that any
provision herein or any condition set forth in the permit or lease has been
violated, but only after investigation and consultation with the permit or
lease holder.
   (b)   Upon denial, revocation, or suspension, the city shall give notice of
the action to the permit or limited lease holder in writing stating the action
which has been taken and the reason therefor. The action shall be effective
immediately upon receipt of the notice of the action by the permit or limited
lease holder, but the permit or limited lease holder may appeal the action
pursuant to §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code. An appeal does not stay the immediate effect of the
action.
(1992 Code, § 29-68) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 107-18, passed 11-13-
2018; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
RIGHT-OF-WAY ALLOWANCES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT; ADDITIONAL RULES
SPECIFIC TO TYPE OF USE
§ 117.090 SIDEWALK CAFÉS, SIDEWALK PUBS, AND PARKLETS AS EXTENSION OF ADJACENT
BUSINESSES.
   Approved sidewalk cafés, sidewalk pubs, and parklets shall be considered an
allowed extension of an adjacent business onto the furniture zone and only an
existing business adjacent to a furniture zone may be allowed to operate a café
or pub in the adjacent furniture zone area. Generally, the same rules and
regulations which apply to the applicant’s typical business operation shall be
applicable to the operation of sidewalk cafés and sidewalk pubs. The city
retains the authority to modify these rules and regulations as they apply to
the leased furniture zone use area.
(1992 Code, § 29-76) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.091 SIDEWALK CAFÉ, SIDEWALK PUB, AND PARKLET DELINEATION.
   All sidewalk cafés, sidewalk pubs, and parklets shall provide a clear visual
delineation of the café or pub area. Delineation may include existing pavement
markings, existing objects, temporary barriers or new pavement markings,
fencing or other methods if approved by the city planning and development
services director or designee. Any proposed permanently affixed fencing or
barrier shall undergo design review in accordance with §§
160.449 of this Code, and receive the approval of the city public works and
planning and development services departments, if applicable.
(1992 Code, § 29-77) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.092 SIDEWALK CAFÉ AND SIDEWALK PUB FURNITURE REQUIREMENTS.
   The following criteria must be followed for placement of tables and chairs
in a sidewalk café or sidewalk pub:
   (a)   A maximum ratio of up to one chair per ten square feet shall be
allowed in the café, pub, or parklet area;
   (b)   A minimum of one table per café area must be ADA accessible;
   (c)   All tables and chairs must be commercial grade and designed for
outdoor use;
   (d)   At the discretion of the city planning and development services
director, or designee, furniture may be subject to design review under §§
160.449.
   (e)   No table or chair shall be allowed within 12 inches of any traffic
lane curb as measured from the back of the curb unless an appropriate buffer or
barrier approved by the city is in place;
   (f)   Stacking of furniture shall be for temporary storage when the
furniture zone area is not operating; stacking of furniture for extended
periods of time is prohibited. Stacking of furniture shall be in such a way as
to reduce aesthetic impacts and safety hazards; and
   (g)   Furniture is not allowed to be stored on the furniture zone before or
after the effective date of lease.
(1992 Code, § 29-78) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.093 TRASH AND TRASH RECEPTACLES FOR VENDORS, SIDEWALK CAFÉS, SIDEWALK
PUBS, AND PARKLETS.
   Permit and limited lease holders shall be responsible for ensuring that the
operation of a café or pub does not impact the capacity of public trash
receptacles by providing private receptacles on site and by mitigating
excessive use of the public receptacles.
(1992 Code, § 29-79) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.094 ALCOHOL IN SIDEWALK CAFÉS, SIDEWALK PUBS, AND PARKLETS.
   Alcohol service and consumption in a sidewalk café, sidewalk pub or parklet
area is prohibited unless the adjacent business holding the sidewalk café,
sidewalk pub or parklet lease also holds a valid on-sale license issued by the
state for the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for that adjacent
business. Sale and consumption of alcohol on the furniture zone is limited to
the area identified in the furniture zone limited lease which shall be adjacent
to the licensed premises.
(1992 Code, § 29-84) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.095 ADDITIONAL RULES GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN SIDEWALK CAFÉS AND
SIDEWALK PUBS.
   Any café or pub operation which includes the sale or consumption of alcohol
shall adhere to these additional provisions which shall be deemed to be
material conditions of any limited lease:
   (a)   Compliance with the rules, regulations and conditions of the alcohol
license;
   (b)   Containers for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages must be
maintained inside the licensed facility and not in the furniture zone use area.
No taps, kegs, cooler or other alcoholic beverage storage devices are allowed
on the furniture zone use area;
   (c)   All alcoholic beverages served by the permitted establishment must be
consumed in the furniture zone or inside the licensed facility and disposed of
on site. Patrons and staff loitering with alcohol on the designated pedestrian
pathway is a prohibited activity. Exception: the transport of alcoholic
beverages by patrons or staff directly from the indoor premises to the
furniture zone use area or to the licensed facility is not prohibited;
   (d)   The limited lease holder shall have in place a security and crowd
management plan for the designated use area approved by the city police
department; and
   (e)   Any time more than 15 people occupy a sidewalk café, sidewalk pub, or
parklet serving alcohol, the café, pub, or parklet area shall be staffed so
that the furniture zone use area is supervised.
(1992 Code, § 29-85) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.096 LOCATIONAL RULES FOR PERFORMANCE ARTISTS.
   The following rules apply to the locations of permitted artists and
performance artists.
   (a)   Permits obtained by an adjacent business shall have priority rights to
adjacent furniture zone. Artist and performance artist permits shall be valid
in these areas when the adjacent business does not have or is not exercising
its permit.
   (b)   The city may limit the areas of performance granted by a permit to a
single location or a series of locations.
   (c)   Artists and performance artists utilizing any enhanced noise or sound
shall locate their act at least 150 feet from any other act utilizing noise or
sound or have a coordination plan in place facilitated by Downtown Sioux Falls,
Inc.
(1992 Code, § 29-86) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 117.097 SALE OF GOODS BY ARTISTS AND PERFORMANCE ARTISTS.
   An artist or performance artist is not explicitly prohibited from selling
works of art or other items from the furniture zone use area by this section.
Any artist or performance artist actively soliciting sales of art or other
items in the right-of-way must first obtain a peddler license.
(1992 Code, § 29-87) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
§ 117.098 ADDITIONAL RULES RELATED TO VENDING.
   In addition to §§
117.040 through
117.046, the following rules apply when conducting vending activities in a
furniture zone in the central business district:
   (a)   All vending activities shall be stationary, unless permission is
granted by the planning and development services director, or designee; and
   (b)   Sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited.
(1992 Code, § 29-91) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
§ 117.099 ADDITIONAL RULES RELATED TO PARKLET PERMITS.
   (a)   All applications for a parklet permit shall be filed with the planning
and development services department in a form approved by the planning and
development services department. The initial application must be accompanied by
the following:
      (1)   Written consent of all property owners and/or tenants whose
property abuts the business requesting a parklet permit.
      (2)   Site layout, drawn to scale, which accurately depicts the
dimensions of the existing area to be utilized as a parklet and adjacent
private property(s), the proposed location of the parklet, size and number of
tables, chairs, steps, planters, and umbrellas, location of doorways, trees,
existing parking meters, sidewalk benches, trash receptacles, light poles, and
any other sidewalk obstructions, either existing or proposed, within the
pedestrian area. This layout shall be submitted on eight and one-half-inch by
eleven-inch paper, suitable for reproduction.
   (b)   Upon filing, the director of planning and development services, or
designee, shall review the application for compliance with this subchapter in
consultation with the city attorney's, public works, health, and police
departments, and public parking division.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be met prior to issuance:
      (1)   A parklet permit may only be issued in the central business
district in which the adjacent street or roadway has a posted speed limit not
more than 20 miles per hour;
      (2)   A parklet may not be located within parking spaces designated for
the physically disabled or handicapped persons;
      (3)   The installation must be removable;
      (4)   Parklet furniture must be of commercial grade, designed durably,
and comply with applicable design standards;
      (5)   Parklets need to be constructed out of durable and stable
materials;
      (6)   Parklet materials and furniture must be stored inside after the
October 15 expiration date;
      (7)   Parklets must include vertical elements that alert vehicles to
their presence and include materials that create enclosure around the
perimeter;
      (8)   Must be located at least 20 feet away from the nearest intersection
and shall have five foot setback from any driveway;
      (9)   Cannot occupy more than two parking spaces;
      (10)   Cannot be located in diagonal parking spaces;
      (11)   Cannot be located within 40 feet of a bus stop;
      (12)   Have reflective vertical elements that make them visible to
traffic, such as flexible posts or bollards;
      (13)   Have a minimum of a two-foot buffer space from adjacent parallel
parking spaces;
      (14)   Have a minimum of a two-foot buffer space from the drive lane;
      (15)   Have a flush transition at the curb to permit easy access for
wheelchairs or others with mobility issues and to avoid any tripping hazards;
      (16)   Utilize barriers such as planters or railings to protect the
patrons;
      (17)   Remain clear, unobstructed sightlines to and from the street;
      (18)   Provide sidewalk-facing edges that are open to pedestrians;
      (19)   The parklet must not significantly impede curbside storm drainage;
      (20)   Meets all applicable requirements contained within the city's code
of ordinances; and
      (21)   Any other criteria deemed necessary by the city.
(Ord. 22-23, passed 4-11-2023)
EVENTS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 117.110 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Any downtown special event which has been approved by the city’s special
event committee may be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 29-92) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-
2024)
§ 117.111 RESERVED.
§ 117.112 SPECIAL EVENT PREEMPTION OF FURNITURE ZONE USE.
   Certain special events conducted by Downtown Sioux Falls, Inc. for the
betterment and promotion of downtown may be designated as promotional. Any
designated promotional event may preempt any approved sidewalk use within the
event venue area during the event time upon 30 days’ written notice to the
affected permit/leaseholder(s).
(1992 Code, § 29-94) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-
2024)
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
§ 117.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. As used in this chapter means the primary person conducting sale
or service of food or beverages, or the primary operator of a mobile food
truck.
   MOBILE FOOD TRUCK. A licensed and operable vehicle or concession trailer,
which is enclosed and self-contained, independent with respect to water, sewer,
and power utilities, that contains equipment for the preparation and sale or
service of food or beverages with or without charge which are designed for
immediate consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING. The act of preparation and sale or service of food or
beverages with or without charge that are designed for immediate consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. As used in this chapter means any person or entity
conducting the sale or service of food and beverages with or without charge
that are designed for immediate consumption in the public right-of-way or on
private property.
   OPERATE. Shall mean all activities associated with the conduct of mobile
food vending, including setup and takedown and/or actual hours where the mobile
food vending unit is open.
   PRIMARY OPERATOR. The registered owner of a mobile food truck or the owner’s
designated agent.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.121 REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mobile food vending as a
mobile food vendor on public or on private property within this city without
first obtaining all applicable state and city permit and licenses.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.122 FALSE INFORMATION.
   No person shall give any false or misleading information in connection with
his or her application for a permit required by §
117.127.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.123 MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT ISSUANCE AND FEES.
   (a)   Prior to any mobile food vending permit being issued under the
provisions of this subchapter, the applicant shall have all applicable state
and city permits and licenses, shall pay an application fee of $75, and submit
to and pass a background check pursuant to §
117.125.
   (b)   The primary person or operator is required to obtain a mobile vending
permit for each operating mobile food truck and shall not transfer the permit
between persons or vehicles.
   (c)   Permit shall remain in effect until December 31 of the year of
issuance.
   (d)   Permit fees shall be as follows:
 
Permit              Fee and Duration
Mobile Food Vending $75 for the calendar year
 
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.124 ISSUANCE RESTRICTED.
   No mobile food vending permit shall be issued to a corporation, partnership,
or other impersonal legal entity.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 117.125 NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   Any permit issued under this chapter is nontransferable.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.126 BACKGROUND CHECK.
   (a)   A background check will be conducted annually by the Sioux Falls
Police Department with all applicable information being provided.
   (b)   The applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall submit to
photographing by the police department.
   (c)    No permit shall be granted to any person:
      (1)   Who has an active warrant relating to any offense.
      (2)   Who does not possess a valid driver’s license.
      (3)   Who has been convicted for a sex crime as defined by SDCL 22-24b-
1 or any indecent exposure for which they are still subject to registration
requirements.
      (4)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years for all other indecent exposure
(Class 1 misdemeanor).
      (5)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last ten years of application for a crime of
violence as defined by SDCL 22-1-2(9).
      (6)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole
within the last five years of application for a felony possession/distribution
of controlled substances.
      (7)   For any good cause.
   (d)   Convictions in other states considered. Any known conviction for an
offense in another state which, if committed in this state, would be a
violation of one of the offenses listed in subsection (c) shall be used to
determine if applicant is eligible for a license.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.127 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
Chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any permit under the provision of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 117.128 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR APPLICATION.
   Applicants will have 15 days to complete the permitting process. Any
incomplete application 15 days or older will require a new application fee and
background recheck. The application for a mobile food vending permit required
by the provisions of this subchapter shall contain:
   (a)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any state or federal law or municipal
ordinance or code other than traffic offenses; the nature of the offense; the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor, if previously convicted; and the place
of conviction;
   (b)   The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in business within
the city;
   (c)   The local and permanent addresses of the applicant;
   (d)   The local and permanent addresses and the name of the entity, if any,
that the applicant represents;
   (e)   Verification of all applicable state and city permits;
   (f)   The last five cities or towns wherein the applicant has worked before
coming to this city if any; and
   (g)   The applicant’s date of birth and valid driver’s license.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.129 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Primary operators having a permit issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall display their permit at all times in a conspicuous place where
it can be read by the general public.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.130 REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked for
violation of any provision of this Code, state law, or city ordinance by the
Sioux Falls Police Department or other licensing authority within the city.
Upon the revocation, the permit shall immediately be surrendered, and failure
to do shall be an offense.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024)
§ 117.131 ALLOWED MOBILE VENDING LOCATIONS.
   (a)   Mobile food vending is permitted on the public right-of-way inside the
central business district as defined by §
37.106 and is also permitted in the public right-of-way abutting C-2, C-3, C-4,
I-1, and S-2 zoning districts as per the official zoning map of the city of
Sioux Falls. Mobile food vendors must be actively engaged in mobile food
vending operations at all times while parked in any allowed mobile vending
location;
   (b)   Mobile food vending is permitted on private property inside the
central business district as defined by §
37.106 and is also permitted on private property within the DT-PUD, C-2, C-3,
C-4, I-1, and S-2 zoning districts as per the official zoning map of the city
of Sioux Falls. Mobile food vendors must be actively engaged in mobile food
vending operations at all times while parked in any allowed mobile vending
location.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.132 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   Mobile food vendors are not allowed to operate in the public right-of-
way between the hours of 12 a.m. and 6 a.m. from Monday to Thursday and between
the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. from Friday to Sunday;
   (b)   Hours of operation are not limited on private property.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.133 HEALTH AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Mobile food vendors shall comply with the minimum public health and
safety requirements as made and enforced by the South Dakota Department of
Health, pursuant to SDCL 34-18 and as set forth in the following provisions of
the Code: This
Chapter 117 of this Code,
Chapter 110: Licenses, and
Chapter 112: Food and Food Handlers, and the fire code as adopted by the city
in §
91.015 of this Code.
   (b)   Mobile food vendors shall allow:
      (1)   The equipment used in vending be inspected upon application for a
permit and shall be required to obtain a valid food service license and
operating permit; and
      (2)   Each mobile vending truck to be inspected at a minimum of twice per
year by the Sioux Falls Health Department or similar agency so tasked with
jurisdiction over this duty.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.134 NOISE.
   Mobile food trucks must adhere to all noise ordinances found in this Code.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.135 PARKING.
   (a)   If operating from the public right-of-way, mobile food vendor shall
only vend from legal parallel parking space in the public right-of-way;
   (b)   No mobile food vendor shall operate with the serving window facing
street traffic; and
   (c)   Mobile food vendors must adhere to established parking rules as found
in this Code.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.136 ADA ACCESS.
   All vendors must ensure that individuals with disabilities have comparable
access to services offered. If existing designs cannot be modified to be
accessible, the method of providing service must be modified.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.137 FIRE SAFETY.
   (a)   No mobile food vendor shall operate without a completed and approved
fire inspection by Sioux Falls Fire Rescue in the current year, which shall
include proof of an annual third-party inspection or receipt of propane fill or
gas-related capabilities as applicable;
   (b)   No mobile food vendor shall vend from within parking garages,
overhangs, or within 10' of any entrance to any property.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.138 LITTER CONTROL.
   Mobile food vendors shall be responsible for providing one private trash bin
and one private recycling bin for public use with capacity of no less than 30
gallons each, and shall remove all litter within 25' of the mobile food truck.
Litter shall be removed at mobile food vendor's expense and shall not be placed
in an unauthorized private or city receptacle.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.139 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   No mobile food vendor shall:
   (a)   Vend on the public right-of-way within 50 feet of a licensed
restaurant property line or 50' from a sidewalk patio, whichever is greater,
unless the restaurant is closed for business.
   (b)   Operate a mobile food truck or vending stand within 300 feet of any
sanctioned event held in the central business district without obtaining
permission from the event sponsor;
   (c)   Operate in or abutting a city park without proper permissions and
permits from the parks and recreation department;
   (d)   Place any object that blocks the pedestrian pathway;
   (e)   Utilize signage in addition to what is already permanently displayed
on the mobile food truck;
   (f)   Conduct mobile food vending from an unhooked concession trailer in the
public right-of-way;
   (g)   Operate without commercial license plates. This applies to vehicles
pulling a food trailer or self-contained mobile food trucks without a trailer.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 101-24, passed 12-3-2024) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.140 LIABILITY AND INSURANCE.
   (a)   Before any mobile food vendor permit is granted, the applicant shall
sign a statement holding harmless the city and shall indemnify the city, its
officers, and employees, for any claims for damages to property or injury to
persons, which may occur in connection with any activity carried on pursuant to
any activities associated with mobile food vending.
   (b)   All applicants shall furnish and maintain a policy of insurance
protecting the applicant and the city from all claims for damage to property or
bodily injury, including death, which may arise from activities associated with
mobile food vending. The insurance policy shall list or endorse the city as
additional insured and carry minimum liability limits of at least $1,000,000
per occurrence. The endorsement shall provide that the policy shall not be
terminated or canceled prior to the termination of the mobile vending permit
without 30 days' written notice to the city.
   (c)   Any permit for mobile food vending shall be deemed void in the absence
of a current insurance policy meeting the above criteria.
(Ord. 118-15, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 117.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.999.
   (b)   Failure to comply with the provisions of §§
117.060 through
117.078 shall be a violation of this Code. Violations shall be issued and
penalties assessed in accordance with §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 29-69) (Ord. 2-10, passed 2-8-2010)
CHAPTER 118: ESCORT SERVICES
Section
   
118.001   Statement of purpose
   
118.002   Definitions
   
118.003   License required
   
118.004   License fee
   
118.005   Denial, revocation or suspension of license
   
118.006   Contract with patrons
   
118.007   Referral of employees; notice of terminations
   
118.008   Employment records
   
118.009   Age of employees
   
118.010   Permits and identification required
   
118.011   Permit application
   
118.012   Permit approval, denial, revocation, suspension
   
118.013   Permit fee
   
118.014   Contents of permit
   
118.015   Renewal of permit
   
118.016   Limitations to named service in permit
   
118.017   Transfer of permit
   
118.018   Permit and identification card surrender
   
118.019   Reporting loss of permit
   
118.020   Identification card
   
118.021   Exhibition of permit or identification card on request
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Amount of license fees, §
110.026
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
§ 118.001 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The city council finds that the business of providing escorts seriously
affects the social and moral well-being of the city and its residents, that the
business must be strictly regulated for the welfare of the public and that the
business must therefore comply with this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-26) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ESCORT. Any persons who, for salary, fee, commission, hire or profit, make
themselves available to the public for the purpose of accompanying other
persons for social engagements.
   ESCORT PATRON. Any person who seeks the services of an escort service or
escort.
   ESCORT RUNNER. Any person who for a salary, fee, hire or profit, and who is
not a licensed owner of an escort service or is not an escort, acts for an
escort or escort service by contacting or meeting with escort patrons to make
social engagements for escorts.
   ESCORT SERVICE. Any business, agency or person who for a fee, commission,
hire or profit furnishes or arranges for escorts to accompany other persons for
social engagements.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-27) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 118.003 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of providing escorts or conducting an
escort service without first obtaining and thereafter maintaining a valid,
unexpired license pursuant to this chapter and this Code.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-28) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.004 LICENSE FEE.
   Each escort service must pay an annual license fee as established in
chapter 110.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-29) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.005 DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   In addition to the grounds provided in §
118.012, an escort service license may be denied, revoked or suspended if:
   (a)   The applicant, licensee or any principal thereof has committed a crime
of prostitution or any other crime of sexual misconduct;
   (b)   An escort or escort runner employed by the escort service has
committed a criminal act while providing services to an escort patron under
circumstances where the service has knowledge or should have had knowledge by
reasonable diligence that the criminal act might occur; and
   (c)   An escort or escort runner employed by the escort service has
permitted his or her identification card to be used by another who is not
employed by the escort service.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-30) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.006 CONTRACT WITH PATRONS.
   (a)   The escort service shall provide to each patron a written contract for
services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be
performed; the length of time the services shall be performed; the total amount
of money the service shall cost the patron; and any special terms or conditions
relating to the services to be performed. The contract shall additionally
include a statement in clear and concise language that prostitution is illegal
in this city and is punishable by both fine and imprisonment and that no act of
prostitution shall be performed in relation to the services contracted for.
Further, the contracts provided for in this division (a) shall be numbered and
utilized in numerical sequence by the escort service.
   (b)   The contract shall be signed by the patron and a copy furnished to him
or her. The escort service shall also retain a copy of each contract and shall
furnish the copies to the city’s licensing specialist or police department for
their inspection upon the departments’ furnishing a written request therefor.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-31) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.007 REFERRAL OF EMPLOYEES; NOTICE OF TERMINATIONS.
   Every escort service shall refer all prospective escorts and escort runners
to the city’s licensing specialist for application for a permit. Upon
termination of employment of any escort or escort runner with the escort
service, the escort service shall notify the city’s licensing specialist, in
writing, of the termination within five days thereof.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-32) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-
16-2006)
§ 118.008 EMPLOYMENT RECORDS.
   (a)   Every escort service licensed under this chapter shall maintain the
following records of employment of their employed escorts and runners:
      (1)   Date employment commenced; and
      (2)   Date employment terminated.
   (b)   These records shall be available to the city upon written request
therefor.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-33) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.009 AGE OF EMPLOYEES.
   No escort service shall employ a person as an escort or escort runner who is
under the age of 18.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-34) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 118.010 PERMITS AND IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall act as an escort or an escort runner without first obtaining
and carrying in his or her possession a valid, unexpired permit and a valid,
unexpired identification card as provided for in this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-35) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 118.011 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Escorts and escort runners must apply for the permit from the city’s
licensing specialist and pay a license fee as provided for in
chapter 110 and an investigation fee of $50.
   (b)   The application must be made upon forms provided by the city’s
licensing specialist and shall set forth the information required, which
includes the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s personal description, history, education,
experience and background;
      (2)   The applicant’s criminal history and civil and administrative
litigation history;
      (3)   The applicant’s relationship to the licensee;
      (4)   In the case of an escort, a written statement from a licensed
physician that the physician has examined the applicant and that the applicant
is free from any sexually transmitted diseases;
      (5)   A recent three inch by five inch photograph showing the applicant’s
face and shoulders; and
      (6)   Other information as the city’s licensing specialist may require
and that reasonably relates to the applicant’s fitness for a permit or the
nature of the service to be provided.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-36) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-
16-2006)
§ 118.012 PERMIT APPROVAL, DENIAL, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The city’s licensing specialist shall refer the application for a
permit to the police department for an investigation. Upon completion of the
investigation, the city’s licensing specialist shall approve, deny or take
other action with respect to the application as it considers appropriate.
   (b)   The city’s licensing specialist may deny, revoke or suspend a permit
for good cause, which may include, but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or contains false, misleading or
fraudulent statements with respect to any information required;
      (2)   The applicant or permittee fails to satisfy any qualification or
requirement imposed by this Code, or other local, state or federal law or
regulations pertaining to the activities;
      (3)   The applicant or permittee fails to comply with any conditions of
the license or permit;
      (4)   The applicant or permittee is or has engaged in a business, trade
or profession without a valid license, permit or approval for suitability, when
he or she knew that one was required or under other circumstances that he or
she reasonably should have known one was required;
      (5)   The applicant or permittee has been subjected in any jurisdiction
to disciplinary action of any kind against a license, permit or approval for
suitability, to the extent that the disciplinary action reflects on the
qualifications, acceptability or fitness to hold a permit;
      (6)   The applicant or permittee has committed acts which would
constitute a crime involving drugs, prostitution or other sex crimes, or
involving any federal, state or local law or regulation relating to the same or
a similar business;
      (7)   Substantial information exists which tends to show that the
applicant or permittee is dishonest or corrupt; and
      (8)   The applicant or permittee has engaged in deceptive practices upon
the public.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-37) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-
16-2006)
§ 118.013 PERMIT FEE.
   Each escort and each escort runner must pay an annual permit fee as
established in
chapter 110 of this Code. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform
to the requirements for licenses as set forth in
chapter 110.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-38) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.014 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   The permit required in this chapter shall contain a photograph identifying
the permittee and naming the licensee and shall set forth a date of issuance
and expiration.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-39) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.015 RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   Each escort, prior to renewal of the permit under this chapter by the
payment of the annual permit fee, shall furnish a written statement from a
licensed physician that the physician has examined the permittee within 30 days
prior to renewal and that the permittee is free from any sexually transmitted
diseases.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-40) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.016 LIMITATIONS TO NAMED SERVICE IN PERMIT.
   Every escort’s and escort runner’s permit shall be issued to the applicant
for one escort service only. It is unlawful for an escort or escort runner to
undertake employment within an escort service other than the escort service
identified on his or her permit.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-41) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 118.017 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   Upon application and payment of a transfer fee in the amount of $30, an
escort’s or escort runner’s permit may be transferred to a different escort
service employer.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-42) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.018 PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARD SURRENDER.
   Upon termination of employment as an escort or escort runner for a licensed
escort service employer, the permittees shall surrender their permits and
identification cards to the city’s licensing specialist within five days of the
termination of employment. It is unlawful for any escort or escort runner to
fail to surrender the permit and identification card within the time
prescribed.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-43) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-
16-2006) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 118.019 REPORTING LOSS OF PERMIT.
   If an escort or escort runner shall lose the permit, it shall be the duty of
the escort or escort runner to report the loss to the city’s licensing
specialist within five days after knowledge of the loss occurs. A fee of $30
shall be charged by the clerk to issue a new permit.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-44) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-
16-2006)
§ 118.020 IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   Any individual who is required to have an identification card under this
chapter shall make application for the card with the police department and
provide the information required, including fingerprints and photographs. The
card when issued shall be valid through December 31 of the year issued.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-45) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
§ 118.021 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT OR IDENTIFICATION CARD ON REQUEST.
   Each person required to have a permit or an identification card under this
chapter must exhibit the permit and identification card upon the request of any
law enforcement officer.
(1992 Code, § 23.5-46) (Ord. 31-89, passed 4-10-1989)
CHAPTER 119: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
119.001   Purpose
   
119.002   Administration
   
119.003   Definitions
   
119.004   Duties of the alarm user
   
119.005   Duties of alarm installation company and monitoring company
   
119.006   License or licensing
   
119.007   Duties and authority of the alarm administrator
   
119.008   Notification
   
119.009   Suspension of response
   
119.010   Appeals
   
119.011   Exceptions
   
119.012   Government immunity
   
119.013   Severability
 
   
119.999   Penalty
§ 119.001 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm
companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm
systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or
eliminate false alarms.
   (b)   This chapter governs alarm systems intended to summon law enforcement
response, and establishes fees, provides for civil penalties for violations,
establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension of
police response.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the
chief of police.
   (b)   The chief of police shall designate an alarm administrator to carry
out the duties and functions described in this chapter.
   (c)   The alarm administrator may conduct an annual evaluation and analysis
of the effectiveness of this chapter, and may identify and implement system
improvements, as warranted.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons designated by the chief of police
to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer
the provisions of this chapter.
   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST. A notification to a law enforcement agency that an
alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm
site.
   ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY. A person in the business of selling, providing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an
alarm system in an alarm site. This definition shall also include individuals
or firms that install and service the alarm systems that will be used in their
private or proprietary facilities. This does not include persons doing
installation or repair work where the work is performed without compensation of
any kind (i.e., “do-it-yourselfers”).
   ALARM RESPONSE MANAGER (ARM). A person designated by an alarm installation
company to handle alarm issues for the company, and act as the primary point of
contact for the jurisdiction’s alarm administrator.
   ALARM SITE. A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit
building or complex, shall be considered a SEPARATE ALARM SITE.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or series of devices, including, but not limited to,
hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such
as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local
audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended
to summon law enforcement response, including local alarm systems. ALARM SYSTEM
does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone’s person unless
the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site.
   ALARM USER. Any person, who (which) has contracted for monitoring, repair,
installation or maintenance service from an alarm installation company or
monitoring company for an alarm system, or who (which) owns or operates an
alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under contract.
   ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS. A class conducted for the purpose of educating
alarm users about the responsible use, operation and maintenance of alarm
systems, and the problems created by false alarms.
   ARMING STATION. A device from which the alarm system is turned “on” (armed)
and “off” (disarmed).
   AUDIO VERIFICATION. The transfer of sounds from the protected premises to
the monitoring company, as a result of activation of one or more devices, to
confirm or deny the validity of the alarm signal.
   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER. Any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other
device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when
activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system to a law
enforcement, public safety or emergency services agency requesting dispatch.
   CANCELLATION. The process where response is terminated when a monitoring
company (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies the
responding law enforcement agency that there is not an existing situation at
the alarm site requiring law enforcement agency response after an alarm
dispatch request.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The chief of police of the city or his or her designee.
   CONVERSION. The transaction or process by which one alarm installation
company or monitoring company begins the servicing and/or monitoring of a
previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously serviced and/
or monitored by another alarm company.
   DURESS ALARM. A silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a
designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user
is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response.
   ENHANCED CALL VERIFICATION (ECV). A monitoring procedure requiring that a
minimum of two calls be made prior to making an alarm dispatch request. The two
calls must be made to different phone numbers where a responsible party can
typically be reached.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency, when the
responding law enforcement officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or
attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the
alarm site.
   GOVERNMENT FACILITY. Any alarmed location where the primary owner, operator,
renter or lessee is the city of Sioux Falls, county of Minnehaha, state of
South Dakota, agency of the United States or public school district.
   HOLDUP ALARM. A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress, or immediately after it has
occurred.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The chief of police, director or other authorized
representative of a law enforcement agency.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the city to an alarm installation company and
monitoring company to sell, install, monitor, repair or replace alarm systems.
   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm system, which is not monitored, that
annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site.
   MONITORING. The process by which a monitoring company receives signals from
an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for
the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the alarm site.
   MONITORING COMPANY. A person in the business of providing monitoring
services.
   ONE PLUS DURESS ALARM. The manual activation of a silent alarm signal by
entering a code at an arming station that adds one number higher to the last
digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress
code = 1235).
   OTHER ELECTRONIC MEANS. The real-time audio/video surveillance of an alarm
site by the monitoring company by means of devices that permit either the
direct, live listening in or viewing of an alarm site or portions thereof.
   PANIC ALARM. An audible alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency
situation requiring law enforcement response.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or similar entity.
   RESPONDER. An individual capable of reaching and having access to the alarm
site, the code to the alarm system, and the authority to approve repairs to the
alarm system.
   ROBBERY ALARM. See HOLDUP ALARM.
   SIA/ANSI CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01. The SIA-Security Industry
Association, American National Standard Institute approved-SIA CP-01 control
panel standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended
design features for security system control panels and their associated arming
and disarming devices, to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels
built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other
nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: “Design
evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 control panel standard features for
false alarm reduction.”
   SUSPENSION OF RESPONSE. The termination of police response to alarms at a
specified alarm site as a result of false alarms or other violation of this
alarm chapter.
   TAKE OVER. The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over
control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another
alarm user.
   TELEPHONE VERIFICATION. See VERIFY.
   VERIFY. An attempt by the monitoring company to determine the validity of an
alarm signal prior to initiating an alarm dispatch request.
   VIDEO VERIFICATION. The transfer of video images to the monitoring company
reflecting conditions existing at the protected premises at the time an alarm
was activated through the use of video technology.
   ZONE. The capability of an alarm system to separate and report incidents or
alarms by area. (Example: zone 1—front door contact; zone 2—front entry motion
detector.)
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.004 DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER.
   (a)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Provide to the alarm user’s monitoring company the names and
telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to:
         A.   Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
         B.   Respond to the alarm site immediately; and
         C.   Upon request, can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate
the alarm system if necessary.
      (2)   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
      (3)   Make every reasonable effort to have a responder to the alarm
system’s location immediately when requested by the law enforcement agency in
order to:
         A.   Deactivate an alarm system;
         B.   Provide access to the alarm site; and
         C.   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
      (4)   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (b)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated.
   (c)   An alarm user shall have a licensed alarm installation company inspect
the alarm system after two false alarms in a one-year period. The alarm
administrator may waive a required inspection if it determines that a false
alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm
system. After four false alarms within a one-year period, the alarm user must
have a licensed alarm installation company modify the alarm system to be more
false alarm resistant and provide additional user training as appropriate.
   (d)   An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers.
   (e)   An alarm user shall maintain, at each alarm site, a set of written
operating instructions for each alarm system.
   (f)   This section applies to all individuals and firms who have installed
and/or monitor their own alarm system.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.005 DUTIES OF ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY AND MONITORING COMPANY.
   (a)   The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral
instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of
their alarm systems. These instructions will specifically include all
instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off, and to avoid false
alarms.
   (b)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation companies
shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus
duress alarms. The alarm installation company shall remove the one plus duress
alarm feature from alarm systems whenever an alarm technician is at the alarm
site or otherwise accessing the panel for reprogramming purposes.
   (c)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation companies
shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm, which is a single
action, nonrecessed button.
   (d)   Upon enactment of this chapter, the alarm installation companies shall
use only SIA/ANSI control panel standard CP-01 listed alarm control panels on
all new installations and panel replacements or upgrades.
   (e)   An alarm installation or monitoring company shall not use automatic
voice dialers.
   (f)   After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm
installation company employee shall review with the alarm user a customer false
alarm prevention checklist, or an equivalent checklist, approved by the alarm
administrator.
   (g)   A monitoring company shall:
      (1)   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the
alarm administrator;
      (2)   Verify, by means of enhanced call verification, every alarm signal,
except a duress or holdup alarm activation before initiating an alarm dispatch
request;
      (3)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests in a manner and form determined
by the alarm administrator;
      (4)   Communicate cancellations in a manner and form determined by the
alarm administrator;
      (5)   Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a
duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use
of the duress, holdup or panic alarm;
      (6)   Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back,
floor and the like) about the location on all alarm signals related to the
alarm dispatch request;
      (7)   Communicate nature of alarm (i.e., burglary, robbery, panic,
duress, silent, audible, interior or perimeter);
      (8)   Maintain the names and telephone numbers of at least two
individuals who are able and have agreed to:
         A.   Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
         B.   Respond to the alarm site immediately; and
         C.   Upon request, can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate
the alarm system if necessary.
      (9)   After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the law
enforcement agency if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or the
responder is on the way to the alarm site;
      (10)   Attempt to contact the alarm user or responder within 24 hours via
mail, fax, telephone or other electronic means when an alarm dispatch request
is made; and
      (11)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, monitoring companies must
maintain for a period of at least one year from the date of the alarm dispatch
request, records relating to alarm dispatch requests. Records must include the
name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s)
activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of an attempt to
verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of these records for
individually named alarm users. If the request is made within 60 days of an
alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records
within three business days of receiving the request. If the records are
requested between 60 days to one year after an alarm dispatch request, the
monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within 30 days of
receiving the request.
   (h)   An alarm installation company and/or monitoring company that purchases
alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the alarm administrator
of the purchase and provide details as may be reasonably requested by the alarm
administrator.
   (i)   Each alarm installation company and alarm monitoring company must
designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company
who will manage alarm related issues and act as the point of contact for the
alarm administrator. The appointed individual must be knowledgeable of the
general provisions of this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority
to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the alarm
administrator. The name, phone number and email address of the designated ARM
must be provided to the alarm administrator.
   (j)   An alarm installation company and/or monitoring company shall provide
the alarm administrator with customer information and any other information
required to be kept pursuant to this chapter in a format acceptable to the
alarm administrator, upon request, to assist the alarm administrator in his or
her duties under this chapter after an alarm dispatch request has occurred.
   (k)   Alarm installation companies shall provide timely training and
continuing education requirements, if applicable, for alarm company employees
which would include training on false alarm prevention.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.006 LICENSE OR LICENSING.
   (a)   All alarm installation companies and monitoring companies shall
obtain, and thereafter maintain, a valid and unexpired license as established
in Chapter 110 of this Code.
   (b)   All alarm installation companies and monitoring companies shall obtain
from the alarm administrator a license which authorizes the company to install
and monitor alarm systems.
   (c)   The initial application fee for a license and annual renewal fee for
the license shall be in the amount as set forth in §§
110.025 through
110.037 of this Code. The annual renewal date, and the date upon which the
annual renewal fee is due, shall be December 31 of each year, regardless of
when the company originally registered. By November 1 of each year, the alarm
administrator shall send a letter to all companies notifying them that the
renewal fee is due. The original license fee and renewal license fee being
charged shall be used in part to help defray expenses for mailings, notices,
registrations, forms and other costs associated with the administration of the
licensing. Payment of all license fees and renewals shall be submitted to the
alarm administrator and be made payable to the city and be deposited into the
general fund of the city.
   (d)   Application for license. All applications for a license required by
this chapter shall be made on forms designated by the alarm administrator and
shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   The full name and address of the alarm installation company or
monitoring company;
      (2)   The full name, business address and home address of the manager or
person to be contacted at the company;
      (3)   A telephone number at which the city police department and other
law enforcement agencies can notify personnel of the company of a need for
assistance at any time; and
      (4)   The names and addresses of all alarm agents employed by the
company.
   (e)   A minimum of $10,000 surety bond, in a form approved by the city,
guaranteeing the faithful and honest conduct of business under the license
running in favor of the city and customers of the applicant.
   (f)   A company shall promptly notify the alarm administrator, in writing,
of any change in the information contained in the registration form.
   (g)   It is a violation of this chapter for any company, who is otherwise
required to obtain a license, to knowingly install or monitor an alarm system
without obtaining a license.
   (h)   Penalty for violation of this section. A company, or other person or
entity violating this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided
in §
119.999.
   (i)   A company’s license shall be personal to the company holding the
license and is not transferable.
   (j)   Issuance; denial of license.
      (1)   The alarm administrator will issue a license provided for by this
chapter to an applicant, or renew a license, if applicable, when the following
conditions of the applicable licensing provisions have been fully satisfied:
         A.   All application requirements have been met, including any
criminal history background checks;
         B.   All fees have been paid in full; and
         C.   No grounds for denial listed in this section exist.
      (2)   The alarm administrator may deny a license or deny the renewal of a
license if, at the time of the filing of an original application or a request
for renewal, the licensing authority has reasonable grounds to believe that an
applicant, licensee or person employed by an alarm dealer to install, service,
sell or otherwise deal with alarms:
         A.   Has had a preliminary criminal history check reveal that an
applicant, licensee or person employed by an alarm dealer to install, service,
sell or otherwise deal with alarms, has been convicted of any felony, or any
offense not constituting a felony but which, because of its nature, would
render the installer a security risk, or any offense involving moral turpitude
within the last five- year period as determined by the chief of police or his
or her designee;
         B.   Has prepared or filed an application or request for renewal which
contains any false or misleading information, submitted false or misleading
information in support of the application or request, or failed or refused to
make full disclosure of all information required by this chapter;
         C.   Has had a license relating to alarm businesses or agents, as
applicable, or a license of similar character issued by the authority of
another city, suspended, canceled or revoked within the five- year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; and
         D.   Has violated an applicable provision of this chapter, code, city
ordinance, rule or regulation, or state law or has committed any act which, if
committed by a licensee, would be grounds for the denial or revocation of a
license pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   Notice shall be given of any denial of a license application, or a
request for renewal, in writing, and either by hand delivery or by mail, to the
address of record. The notice shall include the reasons for denial of the
license or license renewal. If a license is denied, the applicant may appeal
through the procedures established by the administrative code provisions of
this code.
   (k)   The provisions of Chapter 110 of this Code, insofar as the provisions
may be applicable and not in conflict, shall apply to and govern the issuance
of any license under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.007 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   The alarm administrator shall:
      (1)   Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests; and
      (2)   Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch
requests.
   (b)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record
information obtained by the city on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit
the alarm administrator to maintain records, which may include, but is not
limited to, the information listed below:
      (1)   Identification of the alarm site;
      (2)   Date and time alarm dispatch request was received, including the
name of the monitoring company and the monitoring operator name or number;
      (3)   Date and time of law enforcement officer arrival at the alarm site;
      (4)   Zone and zone description, if available;
      (5)   Weather conditions;
      (6)   Name of alarm user’s representative at alarm site, if any;
      (7)   Identification of the responsible alarm installation company or
monitoring company;
      (8)   Whether law enforcement officer was unable to locate the address of
the alarm site; and
      (9)   Cause of alarm signal, if known.
   (c)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the
notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the
following information:
      (1)   The date and time of law enforcement response to the false alarm;
      (2)   The identification number of the responding law enforcement
officer; and
      (3)   A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system
is properly operated, inspected and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and
resulting civil penalties.
   (d)   The alarm administrator may require a conference, with an alarm user
and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company responsible for
the repair or monitoring of the alarm system, to review the circumstances of
each false alarm. For these purposes, the alarm company must have a designated
contact on record with the alarm administrator. (See alarm response manager.)
   (e)   The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user
awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of
associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and
implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems
created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false
alarms.
   (f)   The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a holdup
alarm device that is a single action, nonrecessed button, or have it replaced
with an acceptable dual action or recessed device after the occurrence of a
false holdup alarm.
   (g)   The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove the duress
or panic alarm capability from their alarm system after the occurrence of a
false alarm.
   (h)   The alarm administrator will make a copy of this chapter and/or a
chapter summary sheet available to the alarm user.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.008 NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user, in writing, after
the second or subsequent false alarm. The notification shall include the amount
of the civil penalty for the false alarm, notice that the alarm user can
attend, if applicable, an alarm user awareness class to waive a civil penalty,
the fact that response may be suspended after six false alarms, excluding
duress, holdup and panic alarms, and a description of the appeals procedure
available to the alarm user.
   (b)   The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user and the alarm
installation company or monitoring company in writing 30 days before the alarm
response is to be suspended. This notice of suspension will also include the
amount of the civil penalty for each false alarm, and a description of the
appeals procedure available to the alarm user and the alarm installation
company or monitoring company.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.009 SUSPENSION OF RESPONSE.
   (a)   The alarm administrator may suspend law enforcement response to an
alarm site if it is determined that:
      (1)   The alarm user has six or more false alarms in a consecutive 12-
month period;
      (2)   The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of a civil penalty
assessed under §
119.999;
      (3)   The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an
alarm installation company that complies with the requirements of this chapter
stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary),
and/or additional training has been conducted by the alarm installation
company;
      (4)   The alarm user has failed to comply with any other duties as set
forth in §
119.004; and
      (5)   The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company
may appeal the decision to suspend response according to the procedure set
forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
   (b)   Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress,
the law enforcement authority may refuse law enforcement response to an alarm
dispatch request at an alarm site for which law enforcement response has been
suspended by the alarm administrator.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.010 APPEALS.
   (a)   If the alarm administrator assesses a civil penalty, the alarm
administrator shall send written notice of the action, and a statement of the
right to an appeal, to either the affected applicant or alarm user and the
alarm installation company and/or monitoring company.
   (b)   The alarm user, alarm installation company, or monitoring company may
appeal assessment of a civil penalty through the procedures established by the
administrative code provisions of this code according to the procedure set
forth in §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code.
   (c)   Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm
administrator requiring payment of a civil penalty while the appeal is pending.
   (d)   The alarm administrator, board or hearing examiner may adjust the
count of false alarms based on:
      (1)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by circumstances beyond the
control of the alarm user;
      (2)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone
company;
      (3)   Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage lasting
longer than four hours;
      (4)   Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm;
      (5)   Evidence that the law enforcement officer response was not
completed in a timely fashion; and/or
      (6)   In determining the number of false alarms, multiple alarms
occurring in any 24-hour period shall be counted as one false alarm to allow
the alarm user time to take corrective action unless the false alarms are
directly caused by the alarm user.
   (e)   With respect to civil penalties of an alarm installation company or
monitoring company, the alarm administrator, board or hearing examiner may take
into consideration whether the alarm company had engaged in a consistent
pattern of violations.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.011 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to temporary alarm
systems used by the department or other public law enforcement agencies for
investigative or protective purposes.
   (b)   Government facilities.
      (1)   Government facilities, as defined in §
119.003, are subject to the following special rules:
         A.   No civil penalty shall be charged for police response(s) to false
alarms at government facilities; and
         B.   Government facilities are exempt from having police response
suspended.
      (2)   To qualify for the special rules and exemptions under this section,
an alarm site must meet the following criteria:
         A.   The site is located within the municipal boundaries of the city;
and
         B.   The site meets the criteria as defined in § §
119.003, government facility.
      (3)   Upon four responses to a false alarm in any consecutive 12-month
period, a responsible party for the government alarm site shall meet with the
alarm administrator and present a false alarm abatement plan.
      (4)   The alarm administrator may make any other special rules and
exceptions as are deemed necessary to ensure that appropriate protection and
accountability is maintained at government sites.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.012 GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY.
   This chapter is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and
consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is
hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.013 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable. If a court determines that a
word, phrase, clause, sentence, division, section or other provision is
invalid, or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or
circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those
provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
§ 119.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   An alarm user shall be subject to civil penalties, depending on the
number of false alarms within a consecutive 12-month period, based on the
following schedule:
 
False Alarm Civil Penalties
Description                      Civil Penalty
First false alarm                $0
Second false alarm               $50
Third false alarm                $100
Fourth false alarm or subsequent $200
 
   (b)   Any alarm event occurring within three days of the installation of an
alarm system shall not constitute a false alarm for purposes of determining
whether a civil penalty shall be assessed.
   (c)   An alarm user may have the option of attending an alarm user awareness
class, if applicable, in lieu of paying one prescribed civil penalty.
   (d)   The alarm user shall be issued a civil penalty of $100 for each
failure to comply with §§
119.004(a)(1) or (a)(3).
   (e)   If cancellation of an alarm dispatch request occurs prior to law
enforcement arriving at the scene, no false alarm will be assessed. However, if
the alarm dispatch request results from a panic, duress or holdup signal,
policy response will not be terminated regardless of cancellation, and a false
alarm will be assessed.
   (f)   The alarm installation company shall be assessed a civil penalty of
$100 if the officer responding to the false alarm determines that an on- site
employee of the alarm installation company directly caused the false alarm. In
this situation, the false alarm will not be counted against the alarm user.
   (g)   The monitoring company shall be issued a civil penalty of $100 for
each failure to verify alarm system signals as specified in §
119.005(g)(2).
   (h)   The alarm installation company shall be issued a civil penalty of $200
if the alarm administrator determines that an alarm installation company
employee knowingly made a false statement concerning the inspection of an alarm
site or the performance of an alarm system.
   (i)   The alarm installation company and/or monitoring company shall be
assessed a civil penalty of $100 for the first offense, and $200 for each
subsequent offense, for operating without a license as required by §
119.006.
   (j)   Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with
any civil penalty.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 9-4-2012)
CHAPTER 120: PEST CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
120.001   Definitions
   
120.002   Notice to city departments
   
120.003   Vacating premises
   
120.004   Sealing of openings
   
120.005   Warning card
   
120.006   Reentrance to premises
   
120.007   Fumigation by owner
   
120.008   Storage of fumigants
   
120.009   Sale of fumigants
License
   
120.020   Required
   
120.021   Chapter 110 applicable
   
120.022   Approval of board of health; appeal
   
120.023   Insurance required
   
120.024   Issuance
   
120.025   Term
   
120.026   Renewal restricted
   
120.027   Revocation
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
Statutory reference:
   Pest control activities, see SDCL ch. 38-20
   Pesticides, see SDCL ch. 38-20A
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 120.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXTERMINATION. The use of any insecticide, rodenticide or any other
substances or mechanical devices, other than fumigants, under whatever name
known, for the destruction or control of insects, vermin, rodents or other
pests.
   FUMIGATION. The use of any substance which by itself or in combination with
any other substances emits or liberates gas, fumes or vapors, and which gas,
fumes or vapors, when liberated and used for the destruction or control of
insects, vermin, rodents or other pests, are lethal, poisonous, noxious or
dangerous to human life.
   PEST CONTROL. The identification of infestations or infections, the making
of inspections of the use of insecticides, rodenticides, fumigants, substances
or mechanical devices, under whatever name known, for the purpose of destroying
or controlling insects, vermin, rodents and other pests in household structures
and other properties.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.501; 1992 Code, § 31-1)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 120.002 NOTICE TO CITY DEPARTMENTS.
   The holder of a pest control license shall, prior to the commencement of
fumigation, notify the police and fire departments and the health department of
the date and hour when fumigation is to commence, and no fumigation shall be
performed unless the notice has been given. Upon completion of fumigation the
departments shall be so notified.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.506; 1992 Code, § 31-2)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Police, see §§
131.020,
131.021
§ 120.003 VACATING PREMISES.
   No building or enclosed space shall be occupied by human beings during the
period of fumigation. It shall be the duty of the fumigator to make a careful
examination of all parts of the buildings or enclosed space in order to verify
that no human beings have remained therein and that all necessary precautions
have been taken to safeguard the life and health of all persons occupying
buildings adjoining that in which the fumigation is to be performed.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.506; 1992 Code, § 31-3)
§ 120.004 SEALING OF OPENINGS.
   All crevices, cracks or openings of any building or enclosed space to be
fumigated shall be sealed in a manner as to confine the fumigant to the space
intended to be fumigated.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.506; 1992 Code, § 31-4)
§ 120.005 WARNING CARD.
   (a)   Prior to releasing the gas, suitable warning signs shall be posted on
all entrances or doors to the premises to be fumigated as follows:
 
DANGER
Skull      Fumigating with Cyanide Gas                               Skull
and        Deadly Poison                                             and
Crossbones All persons are warned to keep away by order of the Board Crossbones
           of Health (Name and Address of Licensee)
 
   (b)   The signs shall be printed in red ink on white cardboard. The letters
in the word “danger” shall be at least two inches high and all others except
the signature at least three-fourths inch high. At night the signs shall be
illuminated to make the reading matter thereon plainly legible.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.506; 1992 Code, § 31-5)
§ 120.006 REENTRANCE TO PREMISES.
   No person shall be permitted to reenter the fumigated premises until the
fumigator shall have ascertained by personal inspection, without a gas mask,
that the building is safe for occupancy.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.506; 1992 Code, § 31-6)
§ 120.007 FUMIGATION BY OWNER.
   In cases where the owner desires to fumigate his or her own residence or
other property of which he or she is the owner, he or she must appear before
the health officer and show that he or she is competent to do the specific
fumigation which he or she desires to perform. After a showing of
qualifications, the health officer may issue a permit to the owner for one
fumigation, provided that the owner fulfill the requirements of this chapter
with exception of paying a license fee.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.507; 1992 Code, § 31-7)
§ 120.008 STORAGE OF FUMIGANTS.
   Fumigants shall be stored within the city limits only if locked in vaults or
warehouses approved by the fire prevention division as to construction,
location and ventilation and in maximum quantities as shall be approved by the
fire prevention division.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.508; 1992 Code, § 31-8) (Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002)
§ 120.009 SALE OF FUMIGANTS.
   The sale of cyanide (sodium cyanide and potassium cyanide) in small
quantities as fumigants shall be registered and the purchaser required to state
the use for which the cyanide is required and sign for the cyanide under
similar conditions and statutes as those governing the sale of other poisons or
narcotics.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.509; 1992 Code, § 31-9)
LICENSE
§ 120.020 REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of pest control, extermination or
fumigation, or shall use in any building or other enclosed space a fumigant or
a liquid, solid or powdered insecticide or rodenticide for the destruction or
control of insects, vermin, rodents or other pests within the city without
first obtaining an annual license therefor from the city health director,
provided, however, that the employees of any person duly licensed as provided
by this subchapter shall not be required to be licensed.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.502; 1992 Code, § 31-20)
Cross-reference:
   License fee for pest control, extermination and fumigation, see §
110.029
§ 120.021 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 31-21)
§ 120.022 APPROVAL OF BOARD OF HEALTH; APPEAL.
   (a)   Any applicant desiring to engage in the business of pest control,
extermination or fumigation must present satisfactory evidence to the health
director of his or her fitness and ability to carry on and execute the work
authorized by the license applied for in a manner as to safeguard and preserve
the public health, safety and general welfare and in compliance with the
provisions of this Code and city ordinances governing the work.
   (b)   Should any applicant for the license be aggrieved by the action of the
health director, he or she may apply to the city council for a review of the
action. Upon the review, the city council may affirm, modify or reverse the
action of the health director and may for good cause order the issuance of the
license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.503; 1992 Code, § 31-22)
§ 120.023 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of a license under this subchapter, the
applicant therefor shall furnish an insurance policy in an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, providing comprehensive general
insurance (including products and completed operations insurance) and
contractual liability insurance specifically insuring obligations assumed by
licensee under this subchapter. The licensee shall save the city harmless from
any liability from the use of any fumigating gases or any other chemicals or
any work performed by the licensee or any agent or employee of the licensee.
   (b)   The insurance shall be approved by the health director and shall be at
least in the following amounts:
      (1)   One hundred thousand dollars bodily injury liability each person;
      (2)   Three hundred thousand dollars bodily injury liability each
occurrence and aggregate;
      (3)   Twenty-five thousand dollars property damage liability each
occurrence; and
      (4)   Fifty thousand dollars property damage liability aggregate.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.504; 1992 Code, § 31-23) (Ord. 2740, passed 3-2-1971)
§ 120.024 ISSUANCE.
   Upon compliance with all the provisions of this subchapter, the health
director shall issue a license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.504; 1992 Code, § 31-24) (Ord. 2740, passed 3-2-1971)
§ 120.025 TERM.
   Every pest control license issued under the terms of this chapter shall
expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.505; 1992 Code, § 31-25)
§ 120.026 RENEWAL RESTRICTED.
   If any licensee under this subchapter shall fail to renew his or her license
within three months after the expiration date thereof, he or she shall proceed
for renewal in the same manner as for an original license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.505; 1992 Code, § 31-26)
§ 120.027 REVOCATION.
   Any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked by
the city council for the violation by the licensee of any applicable provision
of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.510; 1992 Code, § 31-27)
CHAPTER 121: MEDICAL CANNABIS REGULATIONS
Section
   
121.001   Definitions
   
121.002   Operation of cannabis establishments in the city
   
121.003   Licensing of medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility
   
121.004   Restrictions
   
121.005   Additional provisions
§ 121.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The terms and definitions found in SDCL 34-20G-1 are specifically
adopted for the purpose of this chapter. Specifically:
      ALLOWABLE AMOUNT OF CANNABIS.
         A.   Three ounces of cannabis or less.
         B.   The quantity of cannabis products as established by rules
promulgated by the Department under SDCL 34-20G-72.
         C.   If the cardholder has a registry identification card allowing
cultivation, two flowering cannabis plants and two cannabis plants that are not
flowering.
         D.   If the cardholder has a registry identification card allowing
cultivation and meets the requirements set forth by the Department and in SDCL
ch. 34-20G, the amount of cannabis and cannabis products that were produced
from the cardholder's allowable plants, if the cannabis and cannabis products
are possessed at the same property where the plants were cultivated.
      BONA FIDE PRACTITIONER- PATIENT RELATIONSHIP. A treatment or consulting
relationship between a practitioner and patient, during which:
         A.   The practitioner completes, at the initial visit, an assessment
of the patient's medical history and current medical condition, including an
appropriate in-person physical examination;
         B.   The patient is under the practitioner's care for the debilitating
medical condition that qualifies the patient for the medical use of cannabis or
has been referred by the practitioner caring for the patient's debilitating
medical condition that qualifies the patient for the medical use of cannabis to
another practitioner;
         C.   The patient has a reasonable expectation that the practitioner
providing the written certification will continue to provide follow-up care to
the patient to monitor the medical use of cannabis; and
         D.   The relationship is not for the sole purpose of providing a
written certification for the medical use of cannabis unless the patient has
been referred by a practitioner providing care for the debilitating medical
condition that qualifies the patient for the medical use of cannabis.
      CANNABIS or MARIJUANA. All parts of any plant of the genus cannabis,
whether growing or not, in its natural and unaltered state, except for drying
or curing and crushing or crumbling. The term includes the seeds thereof; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant or its seeds. The term includes cannabis products and an altered state of
marijuana absorbed  into the human body. The term does not include fiber
produced from the mature stalks of such plant or oil or cake made from the
seeds of such plant. The term does not include the plant Cannabis sativa L. and
any part of that plant, including the seeds thereof and all derivatives,
extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts, and salts of isomers, whether
growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more
than three-tenths of 1% on a dry weight basis.
      CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Any concentrated cannabis, cannabis extracts, and
products that are infused with cannabis or an extract thereof and are intended
for use or consumption by humans. The term includes edible cannabis products,
beverages, topical products, ointments, oils, and tinctures.
      CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. An entity registered with the
Department pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G that acquires, possesses, manufactures,
delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, or sells cannabis products to a
medical cannabis dispensary.
      CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY or TESTING FACILITY. An independent entity
registered with the Department pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G and licensed by the
city to analyze the safety and potency of cannabis.
      CARDHOLDER. A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has been
issued and possesses a valid registry identification card.
      CULTIVATION FACILITY. An entity registered with the Department pursuant
to SDCL ch. 34-20G that acquires, possesses, cultivates, delivers, transfers,
transports, supplies, or sells cannabis and related supplies to a medical
cannabis establishment.
      DEBILITATING MEDICAL CONDITION.
         A.   A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition or its
treatment that produces one or more of the following: cachexia or wasting
syndrome; severe, debilitating pain; severe nausea; seizures; or severe and
persistent muscle spasms, including those characteristics of multiple
sclerosis; or
         B.   Any other medical condition or its treatment added by the
Department, as provided for in SDCL 34-20G-26.
      DEPARTMENT. The South Dakota Department of Health.
      DESIGNATED CAREGIVER. An individual who:
         A.   Is at least 21 years of age;
         B.   Has agreed to assist with a qualifying patient's medical use of
cannabis;
         C.   Has not been convicted of a disqualifying felony offense;
         D.   Assists no more than five qualifying patients with the medical
use of cannabis unless the designated caregiver's qualifying patients each
reside in or are admitted to a health care facility, as defined in SDCL 34-12-
1.1, an accredited prevention or treatment facility, as defined in SDCL 34-20A-
2, a mental health center, as defined in SDCL 27A-1-1, a child welfare agency,
as defined in SDCL 26-6-1, or a community support provider or community
services provider, as defined in SDCL 27B-1-17, where the designated caregiver
is employed.
      DISQUALIFYING FELONY OFFENSE. A violent crime that was classified as a
felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted.
      EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Any product that:
         A.   Contains or is infused with cannabis or an extract thereof;
         B.   Is intended for human consumption by oral ingestion;
         C.   Is presented in the form of foodstuffs, beverages, oils,
tinctures, or other similar products.
      ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY. Any closet, room, greenhouse, building, or
other enclosed area that is equipped with locks or other security devices that
permit access only by a cardholder or a person allowed to cultivate the plants.
Two or more cardholders who reside in the same dwelling may share one ENCLOSED,
LOCKED FACILITY for cultivation.
      FLOWERING CANNABIS PLANT. The reproductive state of the cannabis plant in
which the plant shows physical signs of flower budding out of the nodes of the
stem.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS OR CANNABIS. Marijuana as defined in SDCL 22-42-1.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY or DISPENSARY. An entity registered with the
South Dakota Department of Health pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G and licensed by
the city that acquires, possesses, stores, delivers, transfers, transports,
sells, supplies, or dispenses cannabis, cannabis products, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to cardholders.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation facility, a cannabis
testing facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility, or a dispensary.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT AGENT. An owner, officer, board member,
employee, or volunteer at a medical cannabis establishment.
      MEDICAL USE. The acquisition, administration, cultivation, manufacture,
delivery,  harvest, possession, preparation, transfer, transportation, or use
of cannabis or paraphernalia relating to the administration of cannabis to
treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical
condition or symptom associated with the patient's debilitating medical
condition. The term does not include:
         A.   The cultivation of cannabis by a nonresident cardholder;
         B.   The cultivation of cannabis by a cardholder who is not designated
as being allowed to cultivate on the cardholder's registry identification card;
         C.   The extraction of resin from cannabis by solvent extraction
unless the extraction is done by a cannabis product manufacturing facility.
      NONRESIDENT CARDHOLDER. A person who:
         A.   Has been diagnosed with a debilitating medical condition, or is
the parent, guardian, conservator, or other person with authority to consent to
the medical treatment of a person who has been diagnosed with a debilitating
medical condition;
         B.   Is not a resident of this state or who has been a resident of
South Dakota for fewer than 45 days;
         C.   Was issued a currently valid registry identification card or its
equivalent by another state, district, territory, commonwealth, insular
possession of the United States, or country recognized by the United States
that allows the person to use cannabis for medical purposes in the jurisdiction
of issuance;
         D.   Has submitted any documentation required by the Department and
has received confirmation of registration.
      PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. A place to which the public is invited or
welcome, including in, on, or around any place of business, parking lot, or
place of amusement or entertainment, whether or not a charge of admission or
entry thereto is required and includes the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors,
and areas open to the public of any store, office, or multi-family residential
building even if such place charges an admission or limits the number of
admittees.
      PRACTITIONER. A physician, physician assistant, or advance practice
registered nurse who is licensed with authority to prescribe drugs to humans.
In relation to a nonresident cardholder, the term means a person who is
licensed with authority to prescribe drugs to humans in the state of the
patient's residence.
      QUALIFYING PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed by a practitioner as
having a debilitating medical condition.
      REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD. A document issued by the Department that
identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or registered designated
caregiver, or documentation that is deemed a registry identification card
pursuant to SDCL 34-20G-29 to 34-20G-42 inclusive.
      WRITTEN CERTIFICATION. A document dated and signed by a practitioner.
         A.   Stating that the patient has a qualifying debilitating medical
condition or symptom associated with the debilitating medical condition;
         B.   Affirming that the document is made in the course of a bona fide
practitioner-patient relationship;
         C.   Specifying the qualifying patient's debilitating medical
condition; and
         D.   Specifying the expiration date of the qualifying patient's
written certification pursuant to SDCL 34-20G-43.
   (b)   Furthermore, additional terms not defined under SDCL 34-20G-1 are
hereby defined as follows:
      CERTIFICATION. A signed and notarized affidavit affirming a truthful
disclosure of information.
      CITY. The city of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
      RULES. Official rules or regulations promulgated and enforced by the
Department and city.
(Ord. 105-21, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 68-22, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 56-24, passed
7-2-2024)
§ 121.002 OPERATION OF CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS IN THE CITY OF SIOUX FALLS.
   (a)   Compliance.
      (1)   All cannabis establishments, including, but not necessarily limited
to, medical cannabis establishments in the city must comply with zoning and
land use requirements and obtain all necessary zoning and land use approvals.
      (2)   All cannabis establishments, including, but not necessarily limited
to, medical cannabis establishments in the city must comply with building and
fire codes applicable to the type of facility and license, including, but not
limited to, compliance with the requirements for fire suppression, signage, and
parking.
   (b)   Operation. Cannabis establishments authorized:
      (1)   No medical or other cannabis establishment, other than a medical
cannabis dispensary or testing facilities, shall be permitted to operate within
the jurisdictional limits of the city.
      (2)   Under the authority granted by SDCL 34-20G-56, there shall be no
more than five active medical cannabis dispensaries that may be registered by
the state of South Dakota to operate within the jurisdictional limits of the
city at any given time.
      (3)   Every medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility may only
conduct business and activities within the respective facilities, outside the
view of the public and as otherwise authorized and licensed by the Department
and city.
      (4)   Any medical cannabis dispensary operating in the city may only be
open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      (5)   Every medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility must have
written policies, procedures, or plans detailing appropriate security measures
designed to deter theft of cannabis.
      (6)   Every medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility must have
written policies, procedures, or plans detailing how the establishment will
prevent unauthorized entrance to the facility and any area containing cannabis.
      (7)   Every medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility must have
written policies, procedures, or plans detailing an odor control plan.
      (8)   Every medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility may only be
accessed by authorized agents of the medical cannabis dispensary or testing
facility, emergency personnel, and authorized visitors, such as contractors or
vendors, who are at least 21 years of age and are accompanied by an authorized
medical cannabis establishment agent. All authorized visitors must comply with
the requirements set forth by Department and city rules, and all visitor names,
times of visit, and purpose of visit must be documented in a visitor log, of
which records must be maintained for at least five years by the medical
cannabis establishment, and must be made available upon request to state or
local regulatory authorities or law enforcement, as part of any official audit,
inspection, or investigation.
      (9)   If the facility is a licensed medical cannabis dispensary, then it
may also permit access to cardholders but only upon verification of identity by
requiring the person to present a valid photographic identification document
issued by this state, another state, tribe, or the federal government and
verification of the validity of the registry identification card, and only
during authorized hours of operation and in accordance with Department and city
rules.
      (10)   No medical cannabis dispensary may issue cannabis to anyone who is
not a qualifying patient or a designated caregiver with a current and valid
registry identification card issued by the Department.
      (11)   A medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility may not share
space with a practitioner, nor can a medical cannabis establishment refer any
person to a practitioner.
      (12)   A medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility may not share
space with any other cannabis establishment.
      (13)   No person may consume cannabis on the property of a medical
cannabis dispensary or testing facility.
      (14)   The city may inspect a medical cannabis dispensary or testing
facility during normal business hours to ensure compliance with this Code of
Ordinances.
   (c)   Security. Every medical cannabis dispensary and testing facility shall
have the following security system at a minimum:
      (1)   Electronic video security recording system, internal and external,
which retains recordings for 180 days;
      (2)   Well-lit perimeter;
      (3)   Locked, fully enclosed facility;
      (4)   Internal security to track access to building and all cannabis;
      (5)   Any additional security to comply with the requirements of SDCL ch.
34-20G and Department and city rules.
   (d)   Personnel.
      (1)   Anyone who is a board member, principal officer, agent, volunteer,
or employee of a medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility in the city
must have had a current and valid background check before working in or with
the medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility.
      (2)   A medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility may not employ
any person who has been convicted of a disqualifying felony offense.
      (3)   All employees of a medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility
in the city must be over 21 years old.
(Ord. 105-21, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 68-22, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 121.003 LICENSING OF MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY AND TESTING FACILITY.
   (a)   Applications.
      (1)   To operate as a medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility in
the city, the prospective licensee must obtain a license from the city, a
current state registration certificate issued by the South Dakota Department of
Health, and a certificate of occupancy from the city. A city license to operate
a medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility can only be issued by the
city and is transferable only under the following criteria:
         A.   The transferee shall, with the exception of the application and
license fees set forth in this chapter, comply with the application, license
and zoning requirements that have been previously met by the current license
holder as set forth in this chapter.
         B.   The license specialist shall review the transferee's application,
verify that the provisions of this chapter have been met and, in the event the
transfer is approved, report such transfer to the city council.
      (2)   License application procedures.
         A.   A prospective medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility
seeking to operate in the city must first obtain a license to operate from the
city prior to seeking registration as a medical cannabis dispensary from the
South Dakota Department of Health under the provisions of SDCL 34-20G-55.
         B.   All license requests must be submitted to the city on forms
prescribed by the city and contain all the information required by the city to
determine the eligibility of the applicant, along with the application fee and
initial annual fee.
         C.   The city shall make a determination to reject or approve a
license application within 60 days of application or end of lottery deadline,
whichever is later. Said 60 days is tolled pending any applicant's appeal or
application for conditional use permit.
         D.   The licensee shall not begin operation or open its doors to the
public until it receives from the city a certificate of occupancy. The city
shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the city has fully inspected
the licensed premises and determined that the establishment satisfies all
requirements of licensure as set forth in this chapter, all applicable zoning
requirements, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws and
building codes, and that the licensed establishment is ready for occupancy with
such equipment and security measures in place as may be necessary to comply
with the applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances and state law. The
city shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the licensee provides
written evidence that the licensee has paid the fees set forth herein, and all
registration application fees due to the state in connection with the
Department's review of the application.
         E.   A license application to operate as a medical cannabis dispensary
or testing facility requires:
            1.   The legal name of the prospective medical cannabis dispensary
or testing facility;
            2.   The location (legal description) of the prospective medical
cannabis dispensary or testing facility and certification from property owner
authorizing tenant to engage in business as a medical cannabis establishment.
Only one application per location is allowed;
            3.   A certification that the location of the prospective medical
cannabis dispensary or testing facility is not within 1,000 feet of a public or
private school meets any other location requirements pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-
20G and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder, in compliance with all
city zoning and land use requirements and, if applicable, applicant will apply
for any city conditional use permitting within ten days of notification of
license eligibility and that the conditional use process will be completed
within 60 days of the filing of the application for the conditional use permit
unless extended by the city planning commission or city council;
            4.   The name, date of birth, and a photocopy of a valid form of
identification issued in South Dakota, or its equivalent issued in another U.S.
jurisdiction, for each principal officer and board member of the prospective
medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility;
            5.   A certification that at least one officer or board member of
the prospective medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility is a resident
of the State of South Dakota;
            6.   A certification that none of the employees of the prospective
medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility has been convicted of a
disqualifying felony offense;
            7.   A certification that the employees of the prospective medical
cannabis dispensary or testing facility are over the age of 21 years;
            8.   A confirmation of a completed current background check for
each officer, board member, agent, volunteer, and employee associated with or
working in the prospective medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility,
which has been completed within 30 days prior to submission of the application;
            9.   A copy of the operating documents for the prospective medical
cannabis dispensary or testing facility that detail oversight of the
establishment and procedures to ensure accurate recordkeeping;
            10.   A description of appropriate security measures designed to
deter and prevent theft of cannabis and unauthorized entry into any area
containing cannabis;
            11.   The application fee and applicable license fee;
            12.   Any other information required by the city.
         F.   The city shall reject an application for a medical cannabis
dispensary or testing facility if:
            1.   The application is incomplete or insufficient regarding the
information required pursuant to this chapter;
            2.   The city determines the applicant has failed to comply with
SDCL ch. 34-20G or has a history of violating state or city rules governing
medical cannabis establishments or county ordinances;
            3.   The applicant or any officer, board member, agent, volunteer,
or employee fails to pass a background check;
            4.   Any applicable conditional use permit is not obtained as
certified in the application.
         G.   Any medical cannabis dispensary licensee under this chapter shall
be the owner or actual lessee of the premises where the business is conducted,
and the sole owner of the business operated under the license.
         H.   Any application for the reissuance of a medical cannabis
dispensary or testing facility license shall be processed by the city in the
same manner as required by this chapter for initial applications.
      (3)   Special procedure for initial issuance of dispensary license by the
city. In addition to the requirements of division (a)(2), these special
procedures will apply any time new licenses to operate a medical cannabis
dispensary become available from the city:
         A.   When licenses to operate a medical cannabis dispensary become
available from the city, the city shall publish an invitation for applications
on the city's website stating the deadline to apply and the location(s)
applications may be submitted. No applications will be accepted prior to
publication of the invitation nor after the deadline established in the
published invitation.
         B.   Applications must otherwise adhere to the requirements of
division (a)(2) of this section but must also be sealed. No supplementing of an
application may be done after the deadline has passed.
         C.   Once the deadline has passed, all applications shall be placed
into order by the licensing specialist or designee utilizing a lottery system
to establish the order in which applications will be considered. Prior to
conducting the lottery, the licensing specialist or designee shall publish
notice of the lottery on the city's website a minimum of 24 hours in advance of
the lottery being conducted and such lottery shall be open to the public.
         D.   After placed in order, the licensing specialist or designee shall
open all sealed applications received during the invitation submittal window
and review each application for completeness and requirements of division (a)
(2) and this division. Any application that is incomplete shall be rejected and
ineligible for further consideration.
         E.   After all eligible applications have been approved or denied, the
time period for these special procedures will have deemed to have passed. All
applications not drawn and approved for a new dispensary license are denied and
a new application will be required when a new dispensary license next becomes
available.
   (b)   Fees, expiration, and duration.
      (1)   Application fee. At the time an applicant files an initial
application according to this section, applicant shall pay a fee for each
application to the city in an amount of $25,000 for medical cannabis
dispensaries and $1,500 for testing facilities. In the event the applicant is
denied a registration certificate from the Department or the city, the
application fee shall be refunded.
      (2)   Initial license fee. At the time an applicant files an application
according to this section, the licensee shall tender to the city an initial
license fee in the amount of $50,000 for medical cannabis dispensaries and
$5,000 for testing facilities. The initial license fee shall cover the
remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued and the full subsequent
calendar year. The initial license fee is in addition to the application fee
required pursuant to division (b)(1). In the event the applicant is denied a
registration certificate from the Department or the city, the license fee shall
be refunded.
      (3)   Renewal license fee. The license period shall be for a period of
one year from the effective date on the renewal and in the amount of $25,000
for medical cannabis dispensaries and $1,500 for testing facilities. In the
event the applicant is denied a registration certificate from the Department or
the city, the renewal license fee shall be refunded.
   (c)   Violations as grounds for revocation or suspension of license. The
city licensing specialist may recommend the revocation or suspension of any
license issued under this chapter upon a violation(s) by the licensee, by the
licensee's agents or employees, or by the manager or contractual operators of
the medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility and their agents or
employees operating under a city license, of any of the following:
      (1)   Any provision of SDCL ch. 34-20G or other state law relevant to
medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility control;
      (2)   Any rule promulgated by the Department;
      (3)   Any rule promulgated by any applicable county ordinance;
      (4)   False material statements made by a licensee to the city or State
of South Dakota during the application process;
      (5)   Failure to pay taxes owed to the State of South Dakota or any
political subdivision of the State of South Dakota, including the city;
      (6)   Failure to prevent diversion or theft of medical cannabis;
      (7)   Failure to allow entry to the licensed premises to any law
enforcement officers in the course and scope of their employment;
      (8)   Failure to maintain operational alarm systems and video
surveillance systems;
      (9)   Failure to maintain or keep any record required by these rules or
South Dakota law;
      (10)   Failure to comply with advertising and marketing restrictions;
      (11)   Failure to properly package or secure medical cannabis on the
licensed premises or during transport;
      (12)   Failure to properly dispose of medical cannabis;
      (13)   Operating a testing facility or dispensary when a license has been
suspended or revoked;
      (14)   Failure to comply with any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Department or the city regarding medical cannabis;
      (15)   Failure to comply with any law of the State of South Dakota or the
city concerning medical cannabis;
      (16)   Failure to comply with any local regulation regarding medical
cannabis;
      (17)   Any violation of any municipal ordinance or regulation relevant to
medical cannabis dispensary or testing facility control adopted by the city;
      (18)   Any violation of any county ordinance relevant to medical cannabis
dispensary or testing facility control. For any licensee with multiple
licenses, upon suspension or revocation of any license pursuant to this
chapter, the licensee shall cease operation under all medical cannabis
dispensary or testing facility licenses held by the licensee for the same
period as the suspension or revocation.
   (d)   Suspension and revocation process.
      (1)   The license holder will receive a notice of the recommendation to
suspend or notice of the recommendation to revoke informing the license holder
of the violation and the licensing specialist's intent to suspend or revoke the
license. The notice will be hand delivered to the license holder or an employee
or agent of the license holder or sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested to the physical address of the cannabis establishment.
      (2)   The license specialist shall report his or her findings to the city
council. The city council shall conduct a public hearing to make a final
determination on the recommendation for suspension or revocation.
      (3)   A suspension will be for 30 days.
      (4)   A revocation will be for one year.
      (5)   The license holder who has had the license revoked may not be
issued any cannabis establishment license for one year from the date the
revocation became effective and must reapply for a license at the end of that
year.
   (e)   License to remain active. Any license issued under this chapter must
remain in continuous, active use. A licensee shall have 60 days after issuance
of the certificate of occupancy to begin active use of the license. Any license
not actively used within those 60 days shall be deemed inactive. Once an
initial annual license is in active use or any annual renewal license is
issued, any license not actively used for a period of more than 60 cumulative
days per calendar year may be deemed inactive by the city. Active use means
times where the licensee is open and available to conduct business authorized
by the license. However, days where the license is suspended by the city shall
not be used for purposes of calculating inactivity. The city may not reissue or
renew any medical cannabis establishment license issued pursuant to this
chapter to the same licensee if the license has not been actively used by the
licensee.
(Ord. 105-21, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 121.004 RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter permits any person to:
      (1)   Undertake any task under the influence of cannabis, when doing so
would constitute negligence or unprofessional malpractice;
      (2)   Possess cannabis or engage in the medical use of cannabis in any
correctional facility;
      (3)   Smoke or vape cannabis on any form of public transportation in any
place open to the public or if under the age of 21.
   (b)   No person shall consume or smoke cannabis in any public place,
including, but not limited to, parks, sidewalks, streets, highways, alleys,
rights-of-way, sports complexes, publicly owned property whether in or out of a
building, commonly and customarily open to or used by the general public, or in
any place that is open to the public. A violation of this division shall be
punished under the general penalty provisions of this Code.
   (c)   No cannabis odor shall exist at or beyond the property line of the
medical cannabis dispensary or at or near places where people live or work.
   (d)   No cannabis dispensary or testing facility shall display a marijuana
leaf, the word marijuana, or depictions of a person holding or smoking cannabis
in any location visible outside the dispensary or testing facility.
   (e)   Nothing in this chapter requires an employer to allow ingestion
possession, transfer, display, or transportation of cannabis in the workplace
or to allow an employee to work while the employee is under the influence of
cannabis.
   (f)   Nothing in this chapter requires a person or establishment to allow a
guest, client, customer, or other visitor to smoke or use cannabis on or in
that property.
   (g)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits an employer from disciplining an
employee for ingesting cannabis in the workplace or disciplining an employee
for working while under the influence of cannabis.
(Ord. 105-21, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 68-22, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 121.005 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   The city hereby directs the state to give registration preference only
to those applicants that have received a medical cannabis dispensary license
issued by the city.
   (b)   Any person or entity found to be violating any provision of this
chapter and/or requirement imposed pursuant to this chapter relating to time,
place, or manner restrictions shall be guilty of a violation of city ordinances
and subject to a civil penalty as prescribed by Chapter 40. Each day in which
any violation shall continue is a separate offense.
(Ord. 105-21, passed 9-7-2021)
CHAPTER 122: TATTOOING
Section
Licensing
   
122.001   Definitions
   
122.002   License required for tattoo establishment
   
122.003   Application for tattoo establishment license
   
122.004   Investigation of premises proposed to be used as tattoo establishment
   
122.005   Denial of tattoo establishment license; notice; right to hearing
   
122.006   Temporary tattoo establishment license
   
122.007   Inspection of establishments by officials
   
122.008   Name of establishment
   
122.009   Change of location of establishment
   
122.010   Licensed tattoo artists
   
122.011   Tattoos at tattoo establishment only
   
122.012   Tattoo artist license required
   
122.013   Application for tattoo artist license
   
122.014   Investigation upon receipt of application for tattoo artist license
   
122.015   Denial of tattoo artist license; notice; right to hearing
   
122.016   Temporary tattoo artist license
   
122.017   Transfer of tattoo artist license
   
122.018   Transfer of tattoo establishment license
   
122.019   Posting of tattoo artist and tattoo establishment licenses
   
122.020   Denial, suspension or revocation of licenses; generally
   
122.021   Injunctive relief
   
122.022   Chapter 110 applicable
   
122.023   Applicability
Tattoo Establishments
   
122.035   General provisions
   
122.036   Hand-washing facility required
   
122.037   Toilet facilities
   
122.038   General-use equipment
   
122.039   Animals prohibited; restricted activities
   
122.040   Maintenance
   
122.041   Inspection
   
122.042   Required equipment for tattoo establishments
   
122.043   Required equipment for tattoo artists and tattoo establishments
Tattoo Artist
   
122.055   Restricted activities
   
122.056   Patrons restricted; notice posted
Regulations
   
122.070   Communicable disease reporting
   
122.071   Record of patrons
   
122.072   Sterilization methods
   
122.073   Packaging and storage
   
122.074   Needle construction; sterilization required
   
122.075   Tube construction; sterilization required
   
122.076   Tattoo machine sanitization
   
122.077   Razor requirement
   
122.078   General-use equipment; sanitization required
   
122.079   Linen cleaning and storage
   
122.080   Hygienic practices; gloves required
   
122.081   Skin preparation
   
122.082   Pigment requirements
   
122.083   Design layout
   
122.084   Tattoo application
   
122.085   Changing pigments
   
122.086   Washing of excess pigment
   
122.087   Use of styptics
   
122.088   Use of antibacterial ointment required; care instructions
   
122.089   Storage of soiled equipment
   
122.090   Disposal of contaminated products
   
122.091   Approved immersion methods
   
122.092   Approved cleaning methods
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Licensing, see
ch. 110
LICENSING
§ 122.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNICABLE DISEASE. A disease which is capable of being transmitted from
person to person.
   DEPARTMENT. The city department of health.
   INFECTIOUS DISEASE. An infection which is capable of being transmitted from
person to person.
   MICROBLADING. To create small cuts or punctures in the skin that are then
filled in with ink to partially or fully simulate natural hair.
   MINOR. A person who is under the age of 18 years.
   PATRON. A person who receives a tattoo.
   PERMANENT TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. A building where tattooing is practiced on a
year- round basis.
   TATTOO ARTIST. A person engaged in the practice of tattooing.
   TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. The building or structure where tattooing is
practiced.
   TATTOOING. To puncture the skin of a person with a needle and insert
indelible permanent colors through the puncture to leave permanent marks or
designs. TATTOOING includes MICROBLADING.
   TATTOOING AREA. A tattoo establishment, the immediate vicinity where
tattooing is performed.
   TEMPORARY TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. A building or structure where tattooing is
practiced for not more than 30 days.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-1) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. 128-19, passed 12-17-
2019)
§ 122.002 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT.
   No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city a tattoo
establishment, unless a tattoo establishment license has been issued by the
city and unless the license remains in effect in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter and with
chapter 110. Physicians and surgeons licensed under the provisions of SDCL 36-
4 are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-2) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.003 APPLICATION FOR TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   Each application for a tattoo establishment license shall be upon a form
provided by the health department and shall be submitted to the health
department and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   A definition of service to be provided;
   (b)   The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment;
   (c)   The name and residence address of each applicant;
   (d)   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses
of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each
stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, and the
address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the tattoo
establishment;
   (e)   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses
of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the
partnership itself, if different from the address of the tattoo establishment;
   (f)   The last two previous addresses (if any) during the past three years
immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
   (g)   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;
   (h)   Individual or partnership applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes
and hair and sex;
   (i)   Copy of identification such as driver’s license and social security
card;
   (j)   The history of the applicant in the operation of a tattoo
establishment or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to,
whether or not the person, in previously operating in this or another city
within this state with or without license, has had the license revoked or
suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation;
   (k)   The name and address of each tattoo artist who is or will be employed
in the establishment;
   (l)   Other identification and information necessary to discover the truth
of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the
application; and
   (m)   If a corporation, the name and address of a resident agent, residing
within the city, which must be kept current at all times.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-3) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.004 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES PROPOSED TO BE USED AS TATTOO
ESTABLISHMENT.
   The health department shall refer any application to the fire department and
the planning and building services department, each of which, within a period
of 30 days from the date of application, shall review records and make an
inspection of the premises proposed to be used as a tattoo establishment and
shall make a written recommendation to the public health director concerning
compliance with the law.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-4) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.005 DENIAL OF TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE; NOTICE; RIGHT TO HEARING.
   (a)   The public health director shall not issue the tattoo establishment
license if, based upon the investigation and reports, it is found that:
      (1)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if licensed, would not
comply with all applicable laws; or
      (2)   The applicant has, knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or
any other document required by the city in conjunction therewith.
   (b)   For denial, notifications and reasons for the denial shall be set
forth in writing by the health department and sent to the applicant by
certified mail. The denied applicant shall at his or her election have the
right to receive a hearing before the independent hearing examiner pursuant to
the terms of §
122.020. If a hearing is not requested within ten days of the notice of denial
by the health department, the denial shall be final.
   (c)   This section shall not limit causes for denial but shall be in
addition to other causes for denial found by the public health director or
provided by this Code.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-5) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.006 TEMPORARY TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   Upon application, the public health director may issue a temporary tattoo
establishment license to any applicant who has completed and filed an
application for a tattoo establishment license and the proposed premises has
been investigated by the department. A temporary tattoo establishment does not
need to meet the space requirements of a permanent tattoo establishment. The
temporary license shall remain in effect for 30 days.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-6) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.007 INSPECTION OF ESTABLISHMENTS BY OFFICIALS.
   City officials may enter the tattoo establishment premises from time to time
during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections
to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health
regulations. This shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in any
law enforcement agency.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-7) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.008 NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT.
   No person licensed to do business as provided in this subchapter shall
operate under any name or conduct the business under any designation not
specified in the license.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-8) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.009 CHANGE OF LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENT.
   A change of location of a licensed tattoo establishment may be approved by
the public health director provided all applicable provisions of the Code are
complied with and upon payment of a change of location fee of $25.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-9) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.010 LICENSED TATTOO ARTISTS.
   No tattoo establishment licensee shall employ or otherwise allow any person
to practice as a tattoo artist who is not licensed as a tattoo artist under the
terms of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-10) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.011 TATTOOS AT TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT ONLY.
   No person shall tattoo or permit a tattoo to be administered at or upon any
public place other than a tattoo establishment.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-11) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.012 TATTOO ARTIST LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall practice as a tattoo artist within the city unless the
person has a valid tattoo artist license issued by the city.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-12) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.013 APPLICATION FOR TATTOO ARTIST LICENSE.
   (a)   Each application for a tattoo artist license shall be upon a form
provided by the health department and shall be submitted to the health
department.
   (b)   Each form shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s full name, residence address, and telephone number;
      (2)   The name and address of the tattoo establishment where the
applicant is to be employed as a tattoo artist;
      (3)   Whether any license to practice as a tattoo artist has previously
been denied or revoked and, if so, the reasons, dates, and places of the denial
or revocation;
      (4)   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years; and
      (5)   Written proof that the applicant has completed bloodborne pathogen
training.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-13) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. 128-19, passed 12-17-
2019)
§ 122.014 INVESTIGATION UPON RECEIPT OF APPLICATION FOR TATTOO ARTIST LICENSE.
   Upon receipt of the application for a tattoo artist license, the health
department, within a period of 30 days from the date of the application, shall
make investigation and submit a written recommendation thereon to the public
health director for action.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-14) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.015 DENIAL OF TATTOO ARTIST LICENSE; NOTICE; RIGHT TO HEARING.
   (a)   The public health director shall not issue a tattoo artist license if,
based upon the investigation and report, it is found that the applicant has,
knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the license application or in any other document required
by the city in conjunction therewith.
   (b)   For denial, notifications and reasons for denial shall be set forth in
writing by the health department and shall be sent to the applicant by means of
certified mail. The denied applicant shall, at his or her election, have the
right to a hearing before the independent hearing examiner pursuant to the
terms of §
122.020. If the hearing is not requested within ten days of the notice of
denial by the health department, the denial shall be final.
   (c)   This section shall not limit causes for denial but shall be in
addition to other causes for denial found by the public health director or
provided by this Code.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-15) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.016 TEMPORARY TATTOO ARTIST LICENSE.
   Upon application, the public health director shall issue a temporary tattoo
artist license to any applicant who has completed and filed an application for
a tattoo artist license and the applicant has been investigated by the
department. A temporary tattoo artist license shall be for 30 days.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-16) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.017 TRANSFER OF TATTOO ARTIST LICENSE.
   No tattoo artist license shall be transferable.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-17) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.018 TRANSFER OF TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   No tattoo establishment license shall be transferable.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-18) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.019 POSTING OF TATTOO ARTIST AND TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES.
   Each tattoo establishment licensee shall post in a conspicuous place within
the tattoo establishment the license of each tattoo artist practicing as a
tattoo artist in the establishment and the license of the tattoo establishment.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-19) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.020 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES; GENERALLY.
   (a)   Denial. Within ten days of the denial by the public health director of
an application for a tattoo establishment license or tattoo artist license, the
applicant may file with the health department a written request for hearing
before the independent hearing examiner. At the hearing, evidence shall be
received for the purpose of determining whether or not the denial shall be
upheld. Following the hearing, if the denial is upheld, the notification of and
reasons for the decision shall be set forth in writing and sent to the
applicant by means of certified mail.
   (b)   Suspension or revocation. Any tattoo establishment or tattoo artist
license shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the independent hearing
examiner for violation of any provision of this subchapter, or applicable
provision of the Code, city ordinance, rule or regulation or state law, or for
grounds that should warrant the denial of the issuance of the license in the
first instance, or for the violation of any law relating to or regulating
tattoo establishments or tattoo artists. The suspension or revocation of a
license shall be accomplished pursuant to a hearing held before the independent
hearing examiner at which time evidence shall be received for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license shall be suspended or revoked or
retained. Following the hearing, if the license is suspended or revoked, the
notification of and reasons for the decision shall be set forth in writing and
sent to the licensee by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery.
Notice of the hearing shall be in writing, directed to and delivered to
applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery at least
ten days before the hearing.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-20) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.021 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this Code, the operation
of any tattoo establishment in violation of the terms of this subchapter shall
be deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the city.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-21) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.022 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-22) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.023 APPLICABILITY.
   The standards in this chapter apply to both temporary and permanent tattoo
establishments.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-23) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 122.035 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   A tattoo establishment must be a minimum of 60 square feet for one tattoo
artist and 40 square feet for each additional artist. A tattoo establishment
must be physically separated from facilities used for purposes other than
tattooing. Floors, walls and ceilings of the tattooing area must be smooth,
easily cleanable, nonabsorbent and in good repair. A minimum of 30-footcandles
of light must be provided for applying the tattoo and a minimum of ten-
footcandles for general lighting.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-24) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.036 HAND-WASHING FACILITY REQUIRED.
   An easily accessible hand-washing facility supplied with warm, potable,
running water must be provided in or directly adjacent to the tattooing area.
Each hand-washing facility must be provided with liquid soap and single-use
paper towels.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-25) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.037 TOILET FACILITIES.
   Toilet facilities must be available for employee or patron use.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-26) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.038 GENERAL-USE EQUIPMENT.
   Tables, chairs and other general-use equipment must be constructed of
plastic, metal with enamel or porcelain coating, or stainless steel. General-
use equipment must be maintained in an easily cleanable condition. Covered
waste containers with single-use plastic liners must be provided.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-27) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.039 ANIMALS PROHIBITED; RESTRICTED ACTIVITIES.
   Animals other than guide dogs are prohibited in tattoo establishments.
Smoking, eating and drinking are prohibited within ten feet of the tattooing
area. Tattoo establishments may not be used for activities which are not
directly associated with the practice of tattooing.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-28) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.040 MAINTENANCE.
   A tattoo establishment must be maintained in a clean, sanitary, vermin-free
condition and in good repair.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-29) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.041 INSPECTION.
   A tattoo establishment must be inspected at least annually by the city
health department to determine compliance with this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-30) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.042 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A tattoo establishment must be equipped with a steam pressure autoclave
capable of producing 15 pounds of pressure per square inch for at least 35
minutes at a temperature of 250°F. If the establishment uses only single use,
presterilized, disposable instruments and products, an autoclave is not
required.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-31) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. 128-19, passed 12-17-
2019)
§ 122.043 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR TATTOO ARTISTS AND TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   A tattoo artist must have the following minimum equipment:
      (1)   Twenty-five liner tubes of whatever style and design preferred in
sealed sterile envelopes;
      (2)   Twenty-five shader tubes of whatever style and design preferred in
sealed sterile envelopes; and
      (3)   Fifty needle bar setups with needles attached in sealed sterile
envelopes.
   (b)   Each tattoo establishment must have the following minimum equipment:
      (1)   Five hundred disposable pigment containers;
      (2)   Three hundred disposable latex or vinyl examination gloves;
      (3)   One gallon each of germicidal soap, isopropyl alcohol and distilled
water for prepping skin;
      (4)   Access to the applicable sterilization and sanitization measures in
this chapter;
      (5)   Closed dust-proof containers for the exclusive storage of
instruments, dyes, pigments, stencils and other equipment; and
      (6)   Gauze and bandages.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-32) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
TATTOO ARTIST
§ 122.055 RESTRICTED ACTIVITIES.
   A tattoo artist may not engage in the practice of tattooing while under the
influence of alcohol or other mind-altering substance. Minors are prohibited
from the practice of tattooing. A tattoo artist shall take precautions to
prevent disease transmission to the patron. The skin of the tattoo artist shall
be free of rash or infection. No person or artist affected with a boil,
infected wound, open sore, abrasion, weeping skin lesion, or acute respiratory
infection shall work in an area of a tattoo establishment in which there is a
likelihood of contaminating equipment, supplies, or working surfaces. A tattoo
artist shall wear clean, laundered clothing. The tattoo artist's hair shall be
secured, tied, or covered in such a fashion to prevent the hair from falling in
front of the artist's shoulders when in a normal working position.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-33) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. 128-19, passed 12-17-
2019)
§ 122.056 PATRONS RESTRICTED; NOTICE POSTED.
   (a)   A tattoo artist may not tattoo a patron without first obtaining a
signed consent. The consent must include a statement by the patron that he or
she is free from infectious or contagious diseases in a communicable stage. A
tattoo artist may not tattoo a patron with evident skin lesions or skin
infections or who is known or suspected to have an infectious or contagious
disease in a communicable stage. No tattoo artist may tattoo a patron who is
under the influence of alcohol or other mind-altering substance.
   (b)   Minors may not be tattooed unless the minor’s parents have signed a
consent form authorizing the tattoo.
   (c)   A tattoo artist shall conspicuously post a notice stating that it is
illegal to tattoo any person under the age of 18 without the parents’ signed
consent.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-34) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. 128-19, passed 12-17-
2019)
REGULATIONS
§ 122.070 COMMUNICABLE DISEASE REPORTING.
   A tattoo artist shall immediately report to the department any known or
suspected communicable disease associated with the practice of tattooing.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-35) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.071 RECORD OF PATRONS.
   A tattoo artist shall keep a record of each patron which includes name,
address, age, consent form with medical inquiry, and the locations and
description of tattoos. This record must be available for inspection by the
public health director or his or her designated representative, and kept for a
period of at least two years. A sample record form will be prepared and
furnished each tattoo artist by the health department.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-36) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.072 STERILIZATION METHODS.
   Equipment requiring sterilization must be sterilized by using the method of
steam pressure sterilization with at least 15 pounds of pressure per square
inch for at least 30 minutes at a temperature of 250°F in an autoclave. This
must be certified by a chemical indicator which is attached to the autoclave
bag and turns color when the required temperature has been reached. A tattoo
establishment owner or operator shall provide lab result slips which state that
each autoclave has been bacteriologically tested monthly and has passed the
test. These tests may be performed in the establishment by the owner with test
procedures and criteria approved by the department. Dry heat is not an
acceptable method of sterilization for the purpose of this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-37) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.073 PACKAGING AND STORAGE.
   All sterile equipment and supplies must be stored in a closed dust-proof
container in a manner as to prevent being contaminated. All needles and tubes
must be packaged prior to autoclaving either individually or in quantities for
individual tattoos. Autoclave packages must be constructed so that the contents
are visible without opening the package. Autoclave packages containing
equipment which has been autoclaved must be dated with an expiration date. The
expiration date may not exceed 30 days from the date autoclaved. Sterile
equipment may not be used after the expiration date without being re-
sterilized. A tattoo machine must be stored in a manner that will prevent
contamination. Commercially available individually packaged sterilized
equipment may be used within the manufacturer's expiration date.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-38) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993; Ord. 128-19, passed 12-17-
2019)
§ 122.074 NEEDLE CONSTRUCTION; STERILIZATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   All needles must be either stainless steel or nickel-plated carbon
steel. Needles may be soldered to stainless steel bars using a silver-bearing
solder.
   (b)   Lead-bearing solder may not be used in this process. Needles are a
single-service item and must be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized between
patrons. Rusty or faulty needles may not be used for tattooing.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-39) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.075 TUBE CONSTRUCTION; STERILIZATION REQUIRED.
   All tubes, including the grips on the tube, must be either stainless steel,
nickel-plated carbon steel or Lexan. The grips may also be constructed of
anodized aluminum. Lead-bearing solder may not be used in the construction of
the tubes. Tubes must be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized between patrons.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-40) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.076 TATTOO MACHINE SANITIZATION.
   The open end of the tattoo machine must be cleaned and sanitized with an
approved sanitizer before each use. See §
122.092 for a listing of approved sanitizing solutions.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-41) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.077 RAZOR REQUIREMENT.
   Razors must be disposable single-use only. Single-use razors may be used for
one patron only and must then be discarded.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-42) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.078 GENERAL-USE EQUIPMENT; SANITIZATION REQUIRED.
   All surfaces, counters and general-use equipment in the tattooing area must
be cleaned and sanitized before a patron is seated. A listing of approved
sanitizing solutions is available for public inspection in the office of the
health department.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-43) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.079 LINEN CLEANING AND STORAGE.
   Cloth towels, robes and similar items used in conjunction with tattooing
must be laundered in a washing machine with hot water, laundry detergent and
chlorine bleach between uses. A closed dust-proof container must be provided
for the storage of clean towels and linen. A hamper or similar receptacle must
be provided for the storage of soiled towels and linen.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-44) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.080 HYGIENIC PRACTICES; GLOVES REQUIRED.
   A tattoo artist shall use antiseptic techniques at all times in the practice
of tattooing. A tattoo artist shall scrub his or her hands with liquid soap and
water thoroughly before beginning preparation to tattoo. Hands must be dried
with individual single-use towels. At all times when preparing the skin and
while applying the actual tattoo, the tattoo artist must wear latex or vinyl
examination gloves, which must be discarded upon completion of the tattoo. A
tattoo artist must discard the gloves he or she is wearing, rewash his or her
hands, and put on new gloves after an interruption in the tattoo process which
requires him or her to use his or her hands.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-45) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.081 SKIN PREPARATION.
   The skin area to be tattooed must be shaved if needed and must be washed
with germicidal soap and water, rinsed, dried and washed again with 70%
isopropyl alcohol. A single-use gauze pad or tissue may be used for washing the
skin. All single-use products used must be discarded after they are used.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-46) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.082 PIGMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All pigments must be nontoxic and antiseptic. All pigments which are in a
dry form must be suspended in a solution of isopropyl alcohol, distilled water
or witch hazel with only nontoxic and antiseptic additives. Pigments must be
dispensed from a main plastic container with a sealable top which allows a
single service portion of the pigment to be dispensed into a single use
container. All pigment dispensed and the material into which it has been
dispensed must be immediately discarded upon completion of the tattoo.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-47) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.083 DESIGN LAYOUT.
   The methods in this section are approved for the design layout of the tattoo
on the skin. In the first method, the tattoo artist sketches the design
directly onto the skin with nontoxic ink to serve as a guideline for the actual
tattoo. In the second method, the tattoo artist makes a stencil using nontoxic
ink on tracing paper and transfers the design to the skin by spraying
germicidal soap and distilled water directly onto the area to be tattooed and
laying the stencil over the sprayed area.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-48) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.084 TATTOO APPLICATION.
   Before placing the tattoo design on the patron’s skin, the tattooist must
apply a thin coating of a petroleum jelly or antibacterial ointment over the
area to be tattooed. This must be applied with cotton swabs, gauze or wooden
tongue depressors which must immediately be discarded. This application may not
be directly spread with an ungloved hand.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-49) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.085 CHANGING PIGMENTS.
   When changing pigments, a tattoo artist may use a solution of germicidal
soap and water or an ultrasonic cleaner to rinse the needle and tube, if the
needle and tube are used on the same patron. Ultrasonic cleaner solutions and
solution containers and covers must be discarded between patrons.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-50) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.086 WASHING OF EXCESS PIGMENT.
   Washing of excess pigment from the skin during the tattoo process must be
done with single-use gauze pads or tissue with a solution of germicidal soap
and distilled water.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-51) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.087 USE OF STYPTICS.
   Styptics, if used to arrest bleeding, may be used only in liquid or powder
form and must be applied with cotton swabs or gauze which is immediately
discarded.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-52) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.088 USE OF ANTIBACTERIAL OINTMENT REQUIRED; CARE INSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   Upon completion of the tattoo, a tattoo artist must apply an
antibacterial ointment to the tattoo with a single-use cotton swab, gauze pad
or wooden tongue depressor which is immediately discarded. After application of
the antibacterial ointment, the tattoo artist must apply a sterile bandage. The
tattoo artist must provide written instructions regarding the proper care and
precautions for a new tattoo to each patron.
   (b)   Care instructions must include the following minimum recommendations:
      (1)   Remove the bandage after 24 hours;
      (2)   Wash tattoo gently with mild soap and water and pat dry;
      (3)   Apply an antibacterial ointment at least twice daily;
      (4)   Avoid exposing the tattoo to direct sunlight for two weeks;
      (5)   Avoid swimming or soaking of the tattoo until healed;
      (6)   Avoid scratching or picking of the tattoo; and
      (7)   If redness or swelling develops, contact your doctor.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-53) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.089 STORAGE OF SOILED EQUIPMENT.
   Upon completion of a tattoo, a tattoo artist must immerse needles and tubes
used for the tattoo in an effective sanitizing solution (see section §
122.091) until they can be cleaned and sterilized.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-54) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.090 DISPOSAL OF CONTAMINATED PRODUCTS.
   Gauze, cotton swabs or other single-use products which are contaminated with
body fluids must be disposed of in impervious double plastic bags which are
securely sealed. When needles, tubes or other multiple-use products used in
conjunction with the practice of tattooing are disposed of, they must be
sterilized and placed in an impervious rigid container which is securely
sealed.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-55) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.091 APPROVED IMMERSION METHODS.
   (a)   The following methods are approved for immersion of soiled equipment,
such as instruments, needles and tubes prior to cleaning and sterilization:
      (1)   Immersion in glutaraldehyde 2% solution mixed according to
manufacturer’s instruction. Minimum contact time is ten minutes. Thorough
rinsing of equipment is required after use. Solution may cause chemical burns
on the skin. Wear gloves;
      (2)   Immersion in a 500 ppm solution of chlorine. (This requires a 1:100
dilution of 5.25% sodium hypochlorite bleach which is equivalent to two
teaspoons bleach per quart of water.) A minimum contact time of ten minutes is
required to be effective. This solution must be mixed fresh daily and may
corrode metal instruments;
      (3)   Immersion in a solution of 70% isopropyl alcohol for a minimum of
ten minutes. Flammable. Use and store in a cool, well-ventilated area;
      (4)   Immersion in a phenolic germicidal detergent solution for a minimum
of ten minutes. Mix according to the manufacturer’s instruction; and
      (5)   Immersion in an iodophor germicidal detergent solution formulated
as a disinfectant. Minimum contact time is ten minutes. May stain instruments.
   (b)   Note: After immersion in any of these solutions, instruments, needles,
tubes or similar equipment must be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed with warm water,
dried thoroughly and individually packaged for sterilization as described in §
122.073.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-56) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 122.092 APPROVED CLEANING METHODS.
   (a)   The following methods are approved for cleaning of environmental
surfaces such as counter tops, floors, walls, chairs and the open end of tattoo
machines:
      (1)   Application of a quaternary ammonium germicidal detergent solution.
Benzalkonium chloride is not acceptable. Dilutions must be according to the
manufacturer’s instructions;
      (2)   Application of phenolic germicidal detergent solution mixed
according to the manufacturer’s instruction. May cause skin irritation; and
      (3)   Application of 100 ppm solution of chlorine. This requires a 1:500
dilution of 5.25% sodium hypochlorite (bleach) which is equivalent to one-half
teaspoon bleach per quart of water. A minimum contact time of ten minutes is
required to be effective. This solution must be mixed fresh daily.
   (b)   Note: If using spray bottles for application of these solutions, the
following procedure must be followed: Each time the bottle needs refilling, any
remaining old solution must be discarded, the bottle rinsed and fresh solution
poured into the spray bottle. Always label spray bottles with the name of the
contents. Never add fresh solution to remaining old solution.
(1992 Code, § 38.5-57) (Ord. 54-93, passed 7-6-1993)
CHAPTER 123: CABLE SERVICE
Section
Declaration of Findings
   
123.001   Declaration
Statement of Intent and Purpose
   
123.015   Intent and purpose
General Provisions
   
123.030   Title
   
123.031   Incorporation of ordinance into any franchise agreement
   
123.032   Rights and duties
   
123.033   Open records law
   
123.034   Enforcement rights of the city
   
123.035   No relationship created
   
123.036   Indemnify and hold harmless
   
123.037   Unlawful to offer cable services without franchise
   
123.038   Authorization for use of rights-of- way required
Definitions
   
123.050   Definitions
Franchise General Provisions
   
123.065   Franchise required
   
123.066   Nonexclusive
   
123.067   Written notice to existing grantees of new applications
   
123.068   Franchise for cable service
   
123.069   Equal protection
Application for Grant of Franchise
   
123.080   Form
   
123.081   Application approval by city
Application for Franchise Renewal
   
123.095   Parties to follow Cable Act as amended for renewals
Permits for Non-Cable Services
   
123.110   Permits
Franchise Provisions
   
123.125   Chapter applicable
   
123.126   Federal and state law applicable
   
123.127   Grantee acknowledgment
Conditions for Use of Rights-of-Way and Construction in City
   
123.140   Compliance with rights-of-way laws required by grantee
   
123.141   Adverse impact
   
123.142   Poles
   
123.143   Location of cable system above-ground
   
123.144   City rights
   
123.145   Underground systems
   
123.146   Build-out—new subdivisions
   
123.147   Signage
   
123.148   Preservation of trees
   
123.149   Movement of wires, cables and poles and the like
   
123.150   Joint cooperation between other providers, licensees, permittees and
grantees
   
123.151   Compliance with trench requirements
   
123.152   Property damage or repair
   
123.153   City’s control over use of rights-of- way
   
123.154   Persons’ names, other than grantee, who perform work to be provided
to city
   
123.155   Record keeping
Permit Requirements
   
123.170   Scope of authority
   
123.171   Utility permit required
Service Areas and Technical Standards
   
123.185   Area served and build-out
   
123.186   Cable system compliance with FCC rules and regulations
Emergency Use
   
123.200   Emergency alert system
   
123.201   Qualified persons to operate EAS equipment
Public, Educational and Governmental Access Channels
   
123.215   Equal protection regarding PEG access channels
   
123.216   Minimum PEG requirements
   
123.217   Same channel designation
   
123.218   City approval required to change PEG channel designation
   
123.219   Interconnection—access program sharing
   
123.220   Use of PEG access channels must conform with law and rules enacted
   
123.221   PEG access channels
   
123.222   Noncommercial use of PEG access channels
   
123.223   PEG access channels to meet FCC technical standards
   
123.224   City notification of changes to cable system
   
123.225   Digital format
   
123.226   Capital grants
Cable Service to Public Buildings
   
123.240   Cable service to public buildings
Institutional Network and Services to Public, Educational and Governmental
Locations
   
123.255   Institutional network and services to public, educational and
governmental locations
   
123.256   Interconnection of institutional network
   
123.257   Equal protection regarding institutional network(s)
Broad Categories of Programs and Services
   
123.270   Provision of broad programming
Periodic Evaluation
   
123.285   Periodic evaluations
Regulation by the City
   
123.300   City may delegate responsibilities
   
123.301   Inspection by city
   
123.302   Franchise fee
   
123.303   Good faith
   
123.304   Rate regulation
   
123.305   Franchise renewal
   
123.306   Franchise terminated
   
123.307   Assignment of rights in franchise
Customer Practices
   
123.320   Nondiscrimination in customer rates
   
123.321   Compliance with Cable Act
   
123.322   Written notice
   
123.323   Rules promulgated by grantee
Customer Service Standards
   
123.335   Compliance with FCC customer service standards
   
123.336   Records maintained by grantee
Annual Reports and Records of Grantee
   
123.350   Annual reports
   
123.351   Records which are to be made available to city
Insurance and Indemnification
   
123.365   Indemnify and hold harmless
   
123.366   Defend at own cost
   
123.367   Insurance requirement
   
123.368   Workers’ compensation insurance requirement
   
123.369   Auto liability requirement
   
123.370   Additional insureds
   
123.371   Cancellation of insurance
   
123.372   Certificate on file
   
123.373   Waiver of subrogation
   
123.374   Liability to third parties
   
123.375   Survival of obligation
Enforcement and Termination of Franchise
   
123.390   Bond requirement
   
123.391   Remedies available to city
   
123.392   Notice of revocation
   
123.393   Franchise enforcement
   
123.394   Grantee to retain ownership of cable system upon termination of
franchise
   
123.395   Noncompliance or default
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
123.410   Good faith of both parties
   
123.411   Compliance with law
   
123.412   Nonwaiver of obligation
   
123.413   Application of this chapter
   
123.414   Door-to-door sales
Open Video Systems
   
123.425   Purpose
   
123.426   Applicability
   
123.427   Application required
   
123.428   Review of the application
   
123.429   Agreement required
   
123.430   Extension of facilities
   
Appendix A: Application for Cable Franchise (By Name of Applicant)
   
Appendix B: List of Public Buildings to be Connected to Cable Service (City to
Provide Exact Addresses for Each Building Location)
   
Appendix C: Franchise Fee Worksheet
DECLARATION OF FINDINGS
§ 123.001 DECLARATION.
   The city council for the city of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, finds and
declares that:
   (a)   It is in the public interest to permit the use of rights-of-way and
easements for the construction, maintenance and operation of cable systems
under the terms of this chapter and a franchise adopted by the city council
acting in its legislative capacity;
   (b)   It is in the public interest to ensure that providers of cable
services do not unreasonably discriminate in whom they serve based on race,
ethnic status, income, area in which they live, or other inappropriate basis,
such as by not serving certain areas of the city, or failing on a timely basis
to build their system to serve certain areas;
   (c)   In order to meet community needs, cable systems need to be accessible
throughout the city and need to be constructed with lines in appropriate places
both to make available public, educational and governmental access channels and
to provide cable service to schools and government buildings;
   (d)   Requiring providers to obtain a franchise prior to constructing the
cable systems, while requiring the city to act expeditiously on any franchise
request, allows the city to ensure that the city can properly manage and
control rights-of-way use and that the preceding objectives and others which
are in the public interest are met, while allowing the prompt provision of
cable services; and
   (e)   It is the city’s intent to apply the ordinances of the city, including
this chapter, to all persons who intend to offer video programming in the city
and who intend to use rights-of-way to construct or operate systems comparable
to a cable system in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner. All
persons shall be required to apply for and receive a franchise before offering
video programming in the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-1) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE
§ 123.015 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   The city intends, by the adoption of this chapter, to facilitate the
development and operation of cable systems in the city. This type of
development can contribute significantly to meeting the needs and desires of
many individuals, associations and institutions.
   (b)   Therefore, the following are statements of the city’s intent when
granting or renewing a franchise:
      (1)   Provide for the installation and operation of cable systems
offering cable services with features meeting the current and future cable-
related needs and interests of the community considering the costs to
subscribers and to any grantee;
      (2)   To act expeditiously on any requests for a franchise so as to allow
the prompt provision of cable services while ensuring that the public interest
is met and that residents are not discriminated against based on race, ethnic
status, income, area in which they live, or other inappropriate basis;
      (3)   Encourage the widest feasible scope and diversity of programming
and other cable services to all city residents that are consistent with
community needs and interests and as measured against the cost of providing the
programming and cable services;
      (4)   Encourage prompt implementation of technical advances in
communications technology;
      (5)   Provide for ample and fairly allocated access to cable and video
systems for program producers of public, educational and governmental public
service programming consistent with the needs and interests of the community as
measured against the cost of providing the programming and services;
      (6)   Ensure that rates and charges for basic cable programming and
equipment are fair, reasonable and consistent with federal standards;
      (7)   Require that a grantee of a franchise provide customer service
consistent with the standards of the FCC;
      (8)   Ensure that the installation and maintenance of cable systems
offering cable services comply with all applicable city ordinances and
regulations and do not interfere with the city’s legitimate use of rights-of-
way and its own facilities and property;
      (9)   Ensure that the occupants of the city’s rights-of-way protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizenry, public property and other uses of
the rights-of-way;
      (10)   Encourage universal availability of cable services within the city
on a nondiscriminatory basis;
      (11)   Provide for timely compliance with FCC and state regulations
regarding emergency alert systems; and
      (12)   Obtain compensation for the use of rights-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 44-2) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 123.030 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Cable Services Regulatory
Ordinance” or herein “this chapter.”
(1992 Code, § 44-3) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.031 INCORPORATION OF ORDINANCE INTO ANY FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the full extent of the terms
herein and shall be limited in scope or application only to the extent as may
be required by valid applicable federal or state law, including those changes
in valid applicable law as may be hereinafter enacted. The provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed incorporated in each franchise granted. The failure of
the city to enforce any provision herein or in a franchise or the failure of
any person to comply with any provision herein or in a franchise shall not be a
waiver of the city’s right to enforce the provisions.
(1992 Code, § 44-4) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.032 RIGHTS AND DUTIES.
   Any rights granted pursuant to this chapter and pursuant to any franchise
authorized hereunder are subject to the authority of the city to adopt and
enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Grantees shall be subject to and comply with all valid generally applicable
ordinances enacted by the city. A grantee’s rights and duties pursuant to this
chapter and a franchise may not be materially altered or impaired without
grantee’s prior written consent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld
except for the city’s valid exercise of its police powers.
(1992 Code, § 44-5) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.033 OPEN RECORDS LAW.
   Certain information required to be filed with the city pursuant to this
chapter is subject to inspection and copying by the public pursuant to the
provisions of South Dakota Open Records Law, SDCL ch. 1-27.
(1992 Code, § 44-6) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.034 ENFORCEMENT RIGHTS OF THE CITY.
   The city shall be entitled to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any
franchise through all remedies lawfully available.
(1992 Code, § 44-7) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.035 NO RELATIONSHIP CREATED.
   Under no circumstances shall any franchise authorized by this chapter be
construed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture or
employment between the parties.
(1992 Code, § 44-8) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.036 INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS.
   As a condition of use of the right-of-way, every grantee at its sole cost
and expense shall indemnify and hold harmless city for all damages and
penalties as a result of the exercise of a franchise by a grantee and as
described in §
123.365.
(1992 Code, § 44-9) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.037 UNLAWFUL TO OFFER CABLE SERVICES WITHOUT FRANCHISE.
   Except as otherwise permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons
in the city any cable services by means of a cable system using rights-of-way
unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, and unless the franchise is in full force and effect.
(1992 Code, § 44-10) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 123.038 AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY REQUIRED.
   Unless permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
install or maintain within any rights-of-way in the city, or within any other
public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city
which has not yet become a right-of-way but is designated or delineated as a
proposed right-of-way on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, or
the city’s official map, or the city’s major thoroughfare plan, any cable
system offering cable service unless a franchise authorizing the use of rights-
of-way or property or areas has first been obtained.
(1992 Code, § 44-11) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009) Penalty, see §
10.999
DEFINITIONS
§ 123.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter and a franchise, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section
and any franchise granted by city, unless the context clearly indicates that
another meaning is intended or unless otherwise more specifically defined in
another chapter or code of the city. Words used in the present tense include
the future tense, words in the single number include the plural number, and
words in the plural number include the singular. The words SHALL and WILL are
mandatory, and MAY is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common
and ordinary meaning.
   AFFILIATE. When used in relation to any person, means another person who
owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with, the person.
   APPLICABLE LAW. The Cable Act, all applicable FCC rules, this chapter, all
generally applicable ordinances, and state statutes and rules and regulations,
any amendments thereto, and any of the applicable federal and/or state laws
that are now existing or hereafter adopted or amended.
   APPLICANT. Any person that applies for a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
   APPLICATION. The process by which an applicant submits a request and
indicates a desire to be granted a franchise to provide cable service. An
application shall be considered an open record unless otherwise exempted by
state law.
   BASIC CABLE. The lowest priced tier of cable service that includes the
retransmission of local broadcast television signals and public, educational
and governmental access channels.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549,
(codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987)) as amended by the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No.
102-385 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104 (1996) as
it may, from time to time, be amended.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or groups of persons, who provide(s) cable
service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns
a significant interest in the cable system or who otherwise control(s) or is
(are) responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of
a cable system.
   CABLE SERVICE or SERVICES.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
         A.   Video programming; or
         B.   Other programming service.
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of video programming or other programming service. CABLE SERVICE as
defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the definition set forth in 47
U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed or used to provide cable services which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the
city, but the term does not include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any rights-of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that the facility shall
be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to
the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of the use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;
      (4)   An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems.
   CHANNEL. A portion of the spectrum which is capable of carrying one video
signal.
   CITY or GRANTOR. The City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of city.
   COUNTY. Minnehaha and Lincoln Counties, South Dakota.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date that a grantee files its written acceptance of a
franchise with the city or as otherwise described in a franchise.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Wires, cables, fibers, equipment facilities,
wireless communications facilities and other component parts utilized to
provide cable service and/or video programming to be installed or located in,
along, over, upon, under or through the rights-of-way by a grantee.
   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC. The agency of the federal
government authorized to adopt and enforce rules pertaining to cable systems
and any cable service(s) contemplated by application of this chapter.
   FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
      (1)   A cable system and/or cable service authorization adopted by the
city council and granted by the city authorizing the grantee to construct a
cable system in the rights-of-way in the city and/or provide cable service in
the city.
      (2)   Any authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or
include:
         A.   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the
ordinances and laws of the city, including the provision of telecommunications
services; and
         B.   Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations in the rights-of-way including, without limitation, permits and
agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures,
whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing
other work in or along the rights-of-way.
   FRANCHISE FEE.
      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city or other
governmental entity on a grantee or its subscribers, or both, solely because of
their status and activities as such.
      (2)   The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
         A.   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including
any tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and grantee or their cable
services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment that is unduly
discriminatory against grantees or subscribers);
         B.   Capital costs that are required by a franchise to be incurred by
a grantee for public, educational or governmental (“PEG”) access;
         C.   Requirements or charges incidental to the award or enforcement of
a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages;
         D.   Any permit fee or other fee imposed under any valid rights-of-way
ordinance;
         E.   Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code; or
         F.   City utility pole fees.
   GRANTEE. Any person, including a cable operator, required to have a
franchise pursuant to this chapter. A GRANTEE is not a person that provides
direct broadcast satellite services for purposes of this chapter.
   GROSS REVENUE. Any and all revenue in whatever form from any source received
by a grantee or an affiliate of grantee that would otherwise be subject to the
payment of franchise fees pursuant to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 542 derived
from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service within the
city. GROSS REVENUES shall include, but are not limited to, all revenue
received from basic and expanded basic, pay cable, digital services, high
definition services, digital video recorder, video on-demand, revenue for lease
of system to others, converter rentals and fees for cable Internet service (if
the service is deemed to be a cable service). The term does not include any
taxes or fees on cable services furnished by a grantee and imposed directly
upon any subscriber, nonsubscriber or user by federal, state or local law and
collected by grantee on behalf of the governmental unit, or amounts collected
from subscribers for public, educational and/or governmental access.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES does not include any revenue which cannot be
collected by a grantee and are identified as bad debt, provided, that if
revenue previously representing bad debt is collected, this revenue shall be
included in gross revenues for the collection period.
      (2)   The term does not include revenue received from advertising, home
shopping service commissions, leased access and service charges, including, but
not limited to, installation, disconnection, repair or other similar service
charges.
      (3)   It is understood that over the term of a franchise, a grantee may
provide new services that are classified as cable services under a franchise
and federal law. The parties anticipate and agree that the services shall be
subject to franchise fees under this chapter and a franchise without any
further amendment or other action by the parties hereto.
   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK. A communication network for educational or
governmental use which is constructed or operated by a grantee and which is
generally available only to subscribers who are not residential subscribers.
   INTERACTIVE ON-DEMAND SERVICES. A service providing video programming to
subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but
does not include services providing video programming prescheduled by the
programming providers.
   MAYOR. The mayor of Sioux Falls, SD.
   NON-CABLE SERVICES. Any use of rights-of- way by any person to make
available its services outside the service area.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Those hours during which most similar businesses in
the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS
must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend
hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions which are within the
control of a grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of a
grantee, include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are within the control of a grantee
include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or rebuild
of the cable system.
   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a cable operator or a provider
of cable service makes available to all subscribers generally.
   PERSON. Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, governmental entity, including the city, or any natural person.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS. The availability of channels on
the cable system for noncommercial public, educational or governmental use by
agencies, institutions, organizations, groups and individuals in the community,
including the city for the distribution of noncommercial programming not under
a grantee’s editorial control and consistent with applicable law, including:
      (1)   PUBLIC ACCESS shall mean access where organizations, groups or
individual members of the general public are the designated programmers having
editorial control over their programming pursuant to rules which may be
promulgated by the city;
      (2)   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS shall mean access where local schools or
educational institutions, public or private, K-12, technical and community
colleges, as well as other accredited institutions of higher learning, are the
designated programmers having editorial control over their programming which
shall concern their educational functions;
      (3)   GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS shall mean access where the city, county or
other governmental entities, agencies or institutions, or their designees, are
the primary or designated programmer having editorial control over its
programming which shall concern governmental meetings, activities, services or
community affairs; and
      (4)   PEG ACCESS or PEG ACCESS CHANNELS. Public access, educational
access and governmental access or the channels designated for those purposes,
collectively.
   RENEWAL. A new franchise and franchise agreement granted pursuant to this
chapter to an existing cable operator.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below
any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane,
public path, public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public
boulevard, public parkway, public drive or any public easement or rights-of-way
now or hereafter held by the city which shall, within its proper use and
meaning, entitle a grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or
transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT. The Sioux Falls School District No. 49-5.
   SERVICE AREA. The present municipal boundaries of the city, and shall
include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels or channel equivalents.
   STANDARD INSTALLATION. Installations within 150 feet from the nearest tap to
the subscriber’s terminal.
   STATE. The State of South Dakota.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person who lawfully receives cable service from a cable system
with a grantee’s express permission.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission between or among points specified by
the user of information of the user’s choosing without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received regardless of the technology
used. This term does not include cable service.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 codified at Title
47 of the United States Code.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the public, or to the classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public. This term does not include cable service,
which is instead subject to separate cable franchising requirements under this
chapter.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming provided by or generally considered
comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station.
(1992 Code, § 44-12) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
FRANCHISE GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 123.065 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a
cable system without a franchise in compliance with this chapter authorizing
the same, unless valid applicable federal or state law prohibits the city’s
enforcement of a requirement. The franchise shall comply with all of the
specifications of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 44-13) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 123.066 NONEXCLUSIVE.
   Any franchise granted by the city shall be nonexclusive. The city
specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, additional franchises
for a cable system or any component thereof, to any other person, including
itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to this chapter and valid applicable
state and federal law. The term of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
may not exceed 15 years.
(1992 Code, § 44-14) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.067 WRITTEN NOTICE TO EXISTING GRANTEES OF NEW APPLICATIONS.
   Before granting an additional franchise, the city shall give written notice
to every existing grantee of any new application, identifying the applicant for
the additional franchise and providing at least 30 days’ prior notice of the
date, time and place at which the city shall consider and/or determine whether
the additional franchise should be granted.
(1992 Code, § 44-15) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.068 FRANCHISE FOR CABLE SERVICE.
   A franchise granted or renewed pursuant to this chapter shall authorize
constructing, operating and maintaining a cable system in the city for the
purpose of offering cable service. A grantee may utilize the rights-of-way
within the city for the operation of a cable system providing cable service,
subject to the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable city codes
and state and federal laws.
(1992 Code, § 44-16) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.069 EQUAL PROTECTION.
   The terms and conditions of all new or renewed franchises granted after the
date of this chapter shall be substantially similar in order that one grantee
not be granted a competitive advantage over another. Nothing in this provision
shall be construed in such a way as to limit the city’s authority to enter into
other franchises. Any grantee shall have the right to petition the city for
modifications to its franchise to ensure competitive equity and, in addition,
to provide for any rights it may have to modify its franchise under state or
federal law. The city shall work in good faith with a grantee to review and
adopt modifications which the grantee deems necessary, and the review and
approval of the city shall not be unreasonably delayed or denied.
(1992 Code, § 44-17) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF FRANCHISE
§ 123.080 FORM.
   An application for an initial franchise to provide cable service to both
residential and nonresidential locations shall be in writing on a form,
generally in conformance with
Appendix A, and which shall contain at least the following:
   (a)   Name and business address of applicant;
   (b)   A statement as to the proposed service area, and whether applicant
holds an existing authorization to access the rights-of-way in the city and a
map of the areas where the authorization exists if for an area other than the
entire city;
   (c)   Resumé of prior history of applicant, including the legal, technical
and financial expertise of applicant in the cable service field;
   (d)   List of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant and
resumés of each;
   (e)   A proposed construction and schedule to provide cable service to
subscribers;
   (f)   A certificate of insurance consistent with the requirements of this
chapter;
   (g)   A description of the cable system the applicant intends to build,
including its capacity, the types of equipment proposed for use, and the cable
services which will be offered;
   (h)   The initial service area as required in §
123.200, including schedule for construction completion and activation of the
cable system;
   (i)   A description of the financial qualifications of the applicant to
construct and operate the cable system including a balance sheet, income
statement sources and uses of funds statement, and pro forma projections for at
least three years of operation subsequent to cable system completion;
   (j)   A proposed plan for public, educational and governmental access
channels, including funding, facilities and equipment and capacity on the cable
system to be dedicated for educational and governmental use; and
   (k)   An application will not be final until complete information as may be
required by the city has been provided by an applicant.
(1992 Code, § 44-18) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.081 APPLICATION APPROVAL BY CITY.
   (a)   The application for an initial franchise may be evaluated according to
the following criteria, and approved within 180 days after city deems the
application is complete.
   (b)   In the event applicant is already authorized to occupy the rights-of-
way in the proposed service area, the time for review and approval will be 90
days after city deems the application is complete.
      (1)   The evidence of legal, technical and financial ability required in
the applicant’s proposal will be such as to assure the ability to complete the
entire cable system within a reasonable time from the date the franchise is
granted. The city will also consider the applicant’s ability to operate the
cable system and provide the necessary cable services in compliance with the
terms of this chapter.
      (2)   The mayor or designee shall prepare a report and make his or her
recommendations regarding the application to the city council.
      (3)   A public hearing shall be set prior to any grant of a franchise, at
a time and date approved by the city council. Within 30 days after the close of
the hearing, the city council shall make a decision based upon the evidence
received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should be
granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions.
      (4)   The city may consider any additional information that it deems
applicable.
(1992 Code, § 44-19) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE RENEWAL
§ 123.095 PARTIES TO FOLLOW CABLE ACT AS AMENDED FOR RENEWALS.
   Franchise renewals will be according to applicable law including the Cable
Act, as amended. The city and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into
renewal negotiations at any time during the term of a franchise. The city will
review and evaluate the requirements and conditions for renewal according to
the Cable Act requirements and this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 44-20) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
PERMITS FOR NON-CABLE SERVICES
§ 123.110 PERMITS.
   (a)   The city may issue a license, easement or other permit to a person
other than a grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of a
grantee’s service area within the city in order to provide service outside, but
not within the city. The license or easement, absent a grant of a franchise in
accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor permit the person to
provide cable service of any type to any home or place of business within the
city nor render any other service within the city.
   (b)   To the extent allowed by law, the city shall retain the authority to
regulate and receive compensation for non-cable cable services. If a grantee is
allowed by law and chooses to provide non-cable cable services, a grantee and
the city will negotiate the terms and fees in accordance with applicable law.
(1992 Code, § 44-21) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
FRANCHISE PROVISIONS
§ 123.125 CHAPTER APPLICABLE.
   All franchises granted pursuant to this chapter will be subject to this
chapter and applicable city ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 44-22) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.126 FEDERAL AND STATE LAW APPLICABLE.
   This chapter and any franchise will be construed in a manner consistent with
all valid applicable federal and state laws.
   (a)   In the event that the state or federal government will discontinue
preemption in any area of cable system and/or cable service or video
programming over which it currently exercises jurisdiction in a manner as to
expand rather than limit municipal regulatory authority or otherwise change
applicable law, the city may, if it so elects, make amendments or adopt rules
and regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law. Any rules and
regulations adopted by the city will apply equally to all grantees and will be
subject to §
123.069 herein.
   (b)   This chapter will apply to all franchises granted or renewed from and
after the effective date of this chapter.
   (c)   A grantee will not be relieved of its obligation(s) to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.
(1992 Code, § 44-23) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.127 GRANTEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   Franchises shall be subject to the following:
   (a)   By acceptance of a franchise, a grantee acknowledges and agrees that
this chapter in whole is incorporated and made part of a franchise and the
franchise shall be a binding contract; and
   (b)   In addition, the franchise must contain the following express
representations by a grantee that:
      (1)   It accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter, and
any supplementary specification, as to construction, operation or maintenance
of the cable system offering cable service, which the city may include in the
franchise subject to valid applicable state and federal law;
      (2)   It has examined all of the provisions of this chapter and agrees
that the provisions thereof are valid, binding at this time, and enforceable as
of the date of adoption of the franchise;
      (3)   A grantee’s rights and duties pursuant to this chapter and its
franchise may not be materially altered or impaired without grantee’s prior
written consent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. The grantee
recognizes the right of the city to adopt additional regulations of general
applicability as it will find necessary in the exercise of the city’s police
power to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens; and
      (4)   The franchise will contain those further conditions or provisions
as are included in the applicant’s proposal and negotiated between the city and
a grantee, except that no conditions or provisions will be such as to conflict
with any provisions of this chapter or other valid applicable law. In case of a
conflict or ambiguity between any terms or provisions of a franchise and this
chapter, the franchise will control.
(1992 Code, § 44-24) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
CONDITIONS FOR USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND CONSTRUCTION IN CITY
§ 123.140 COMPLIANCE WITH RIGHTS-OF- WAY LAWS REQUIRED BY GRANTEE.
   A grantee shall comply with §§
96.235 through
96.243 of this Code, with respect to construction within rights-of-way and
shall obtain all necessary permits and licenses required thereunder or by other
applicable law, ordinances and rules and as required of other like users of the
rights-of-way before commencing construction in the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-25) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.141 ADVERSE IMPACT.
   A grantee shall construct and maintain its cable system so as to minimize
any adverse impact on public improvements or facilities of others in a right-
of-way and which will not unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary
uses in the rights-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 44-26) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.142 POLES.
   Unless a grantee has existing authority as a telecommunications provider, a
grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any rights- of-
way without the prior approval of the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-27) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.143 LOCATION OF CABLE SYSTEM ABOVE-GROUND.
   Above-ground location of a cable system shall generally be located where
reasonable and safe and in a manner that will not adversely affect the city or
other public or private property and shall be screened from public view upon
request by the city if these requirements are made of like users of the rights-
of- way.
(1992 Code, § 44-28) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.144 CITY RIGHTS.
   Nothing herein or in a franchise shall be construed to prevent the city from
constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing or altering any rights-of-way,
or laying down, repairing or removing water mains or constructing or
establishing any other public work. All work shall be done, insofar as
practicable, in a manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and
operation of poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of a
grantee. If any facilities of a grantee interfere with the construction or
repair of any public sidewalk, roadway, public utility or public facility or
improvement, then the installation, facility or property of a grantee shall be
removed or replaced as directed by the city so that the same shall not
interfere with the public works of the city. The removal, relocation or
replacement shall be at the expense of a grantee. This section shall not apply
to any facility which may compete with a grantee’s system or cable services.
(1992 Code, § 44-29) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.145 UNDERGROUND SYSTEMS.
   In those areas within the city where a cable system offering cable service
is currently placed underground, all facilities shall remain or be placed
underground. In areas where telephone and electric utility facilities are
aboveground at the time of a grantee’s installation, a grantee may install its
facilities aboveground, provided that at a time as both electric and telephone
utility facilities are placed underground, a grantee shall likewise place its
facilities underground without cost to the city. In no event shall a grantee be
authorized to place aboveground any facility that has previously been
underground without prior approval from the city. Nothing contained in this
section shall require a grantee to construct, operate and maintain underground
any ground-mounted appurtenances. A grantee shall attempt to minimize the
number and size of pedestals and boxes located on residential properties, and
shall work with the city to mitigate the visual impact of the appurtenances.
(1992 Code, § 44-30) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.146 BUILD-OUT—NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   A grantee shall extend cable service to all areas of the city with a
density of 30 homes per mile at no cost for cable system extension other than
the standard installation fees charged to all subscribers, and in accordance
with its franchise and consistent with the rules and guidelines of the FCC,
except the Main Street Business Improvement District as defined in §§
37.105 through
37.120 of this Code.
   (b)   In cases of new construction or property development where utilities
are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give all
grantees at least 14 days’ notice to grantees of the construction or
development, and of the particular date on which open trenching will be
available for grantee’s installation of conduit and/or cable. A grantee shall
provide specifications as needed for trenching.
   (c)   Should the grantee determine that line extension is economically
unfeasible, the grantee and the developer agree to negotiate in good faith
toward an equitable agreement. If the grantee and the developer arrive at
impasse, disputes over the extension shall be decided by the city council 30
days after receipt of written request by either party.
(1992 Code, § 44-31) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.147 SIGNAGE.
   A grantee shall not place or cause to be placed any sort of signs,
advertisements or other extraneous markings, whether relating to a grantee or
any other person or entity on grantee’s facilities located in or on the rights-
of-way, except minimal markings necessary to identify the cable system for
service, repair, maintenance or emergency purposes, or as required by
applicable law or regulation.
(1992 Code, § 44-32) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.148 PRESERVATION OF TREES.
   A grantee shall comply with §
94.040 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 44-33) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.149 MOVEMENT OF WIRES, CABLES AND POLES AND THE LIKE.
   A grantee, on the request of the city, or any person holding a lawful permit
issued by the city, or any permit issued by an appropriate state agency, shall
temporarily move its wires, cables, poles or other facilities to permit the
moving of large objects, vehicles, buildings or other structures. The expense
of the temporary moves shall be paid to a grantee by the person requesting the
same and a grantee shall have the authority to require the payment in advance.
In no event shall the city pay the expense. A grantee shall be given not less
than ten business days’ advance notice to arrange for the temporary moves.
(1992 Code, § 44-34) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.150 JOINT COOPERATION BETWEEN OTHER PROVIDERS, LICENSEES, PERMITTEES AND
GRANTEES.
   Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share
bores or cuts or joint-share conduit, a grantee shall work with the city and
other providers, licensees, permittees and grantees so as to reduce, as far as
possible, the number of street cuts within the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-35) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.151 COMPLIANCE WITH TRENCH REQUIREMENTS.
   A grantee, by acceptance of a franchise, agrees to comply with the trench
requirements in §§
96.235 through
96.243 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 44-36) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.152 PROPERTY DAMAGE OR REPAIR.
   (a)   Whenever a grantee disturbs or damages any rights-of-way, other public
property or any private property, a grantee shall promptly restore the property
to at least its prior condition, normal wear and tear excepted, at its own
expense. In addition, if a grantee is restoring rights-of-way, it shall do so
as set forth in §
96.239 of this Code.
   (b)   When a grantee excavates the surface of any rights-of-way, the grantee
shall be responsible for restoration of the excavation in accordance with §
96.239 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 44-37) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.153 CITY’S CONTROL OVER USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   The city has the responsibility to manage and control use of the rights-of-
way or utility easements within the city’s jurisdictional boundaries, and has
the authority to administer and enforce right-of-way construction standards for
a grantee’s cable system on a nondiscriminatory basis, including the authority
to collect fees, review plans and enforce the provisions of a franchise, and
may utilize the assistance of qualified independent third parties.
   (a)   The city has the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and a franchise and
applicable ordinances of the city to make those tests as it shall find
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and a franchise at its own
expense. Provided, however, a representative of a grantee may be present for
all testing, which shall occur at a time of minimum inconvenience to
subscribers (generally between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.)
   (b)   The grantee agrees to comply with all provisions of §§
96.235 through
96.243 of this Code.
   (c)   Nothing in this chapter, or a franchise granted pursuant to it, gives
permission to use the poles, conduit or other facilities of the city or others.
A separate agreement for the use or connection shall be the responsibility of
grantee.
(1992 Code, § 44-38) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.154 PERSONS’ NAMES, OTHER THAN GRANTEE, WHO PERFORM WORK TO BE PROVIDED
TO CITY.
   A grantee shall make available to the city the names and addresses of any
person, other than a grantee, which performs work on behalf of a grantee
pursuant to a franchise. All provisions of this chapter and a franchise remain
the responsibility of a grantee. All provisions of a franchise shall apply to
any of a grantee’s subcontractors or others performing any work or services
pursuant to the provisions of a franchise. A grantee shall be responsible for
and hold the city harmless for any claims or liability arising out of work
performed by persons other than a grantee. A grantee shall provide the city
with emergency contact information (name, address, phone number, etc.) for the
entity.
(1992 Code, § 44-39) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.155 RECORD KEEPING.
   A grantee shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings of
its cable system constructed, reconstructed or relocated within the city’s
rights-of-way. A grantee shall cooperate promptly and fully with the city and
take all reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete
information regarding the nature and location of its cable system located
within the rights- of-way when requested by the city for public improvements,
subject to a grantee’s right to designate information as confidential
consistent with §
123.351 herein. The location and identification shall be at the sole expense of
a grantee without expense to the city, its employees, agents or authorized
contractors.
(1992 Code, § 44-40) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 123.170 SCOPE OF AUTHORITY.
   This chapter and a franchise establish the general rules and scope of
authority for a grantee to construct and maintain and operate a cable system to
provide cable service within the rights-of-way of the city. A grantee shall
designate a responsible contact person including a telephone number available
seven days a week, 24 hours a day, with whom representatives of the city can
communicate on all matters relating to cable system installation, construction,
operation and maintenance.
(1992 Code, § 44-41) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.171 UTILITY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Prior to any excavation within the rights-of-way, a grantee shall obtain a
construction permit in accordance with §§
96.235 through
96.243 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 44-42) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
SERVICE AREAS AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS
§ 123.185 AREA SERVED AND BUILD-OUT.
   (a)   Within one year from the date of issuance of a franchise, a grantee
shall complete construction and activation of the initial service area as
described in its franchise, which shall consist of at least 20% of a
geographically contiguous portion of the city as measured by street miles. A
grantee shall extend and activate cable to an additional 20% of a
geographically contiguous portion of the city each year thereafter as measured
by street miles until its system is complete. Further, a grantee shall extend
its services as requested by any person unless a grantee determines that
provision of cable services to areas not served by it is not economically
feasible due to insufficient subscribership as defined in division (c)(6) below
in areas then served by it. A person requesting service may appeal the decision
of a grantee to not provide service to the governing body of the city.
Notwithstanding anything herein or to the contrary, a grantee shall not be
obligated to extend service where there are fewer than 30 homes per street mile
as measured from the nearest node or terminating amplifier of the system.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a grantee may make a written request to
the city that a delay in the construction and activation of its services be
granted, if grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that one or
more circumstances as set forth in divisions (c)(1) through (c)(6) below exist.
The request shall include all documentation of grantee’s best efforts to
promptly pursue and obtain all necessary licenses and permits and other
authorizations, subscriber acquisition efforts, if applicable, and other
actions necessary to fulfill its commitment under its franchise and shall be
filed as soon as possible after grantee becomes aware of the potential delay.
   (c)   Further, a grantee shall indicate to the city’s satisfaction the steps
that it is taking to remedy or address the circumstances causing the delay. The
city shall grant a delay only if a grantee has demonstrated best efforts to
meet its construction schedule, but circumstances beyond grantee’s reasonable
control, based on the criteria in divisions (c)(1) through (c)(6) below, will
delay completion. Any delay granted shall be for the shortest possible time in
the reasonable discretion of the city:
      (1)   For periods of force majeure;
      (2)   For periods of delay resulting from the grantee’s inability to
obtain authority to access public rights-of-way in the service area;
      (3)   In developments or buildings that the grantee cannot access under
industry standard terms and conditions after good-faith negotiation;
      (4)   In developments or buildings that the grantee is unable to provide
cable service for technical reasons or that require facilities that are not
available or cannot be deployed on a commercially reasonable basis;
      (5)   In areas where the average residential household density is less
than 30 homes per street mile as measured in strand footage from the nearest
technically feasible point on the grantee’s system; and
      (6)   If grantee can demonstrate that it has completed construction and
activation of its system in its current service area, but the number of
households subscribing to the grantee’s cable service is less than 15% of the
households in the grantee’s current franchise area, any grantee seeking a delay
in system expansion under this provision will have to demonstrate that it
continues to have the financial qualifications to maintain a cable service
franchise in the city and that the requested delay would allow it to achieve a
market success of at least 15% subscribership in its current area and allow it
to extend its system throughout the city.
   (d)   A cable service grantee which is lawfully providing service in an area
that is subsequently annexed by the city may continue to operate within its
existing service area and shall not be required to, or allowed to, extend its
service. In all other respects, the grantee shall be required to comply with
this chapter and obtain from the city a franchise to the extent not
inconsistent with the specific terms of its existing authority from another
jurisdiction. If a grantee seeks to extend its service outside of its existing
service area, it will be required to file an application for a franchise, and
be granted a franchise prior to initiating an extension of service.
   (e)   A licensee operating an open video system, pursuant to its current
license, City Ordinance No. 56-04, as codified in §§
123.425 through
123.430, may continue to operate its open video system services within the
terms of the current license until its natural expiration and thereafter based
on a renewal of its current open video system license. A licensee may, at least
six months prior to the natural expiration of its current open video system
license, apply for a partial franchise, to provide cable service, consistent
with the terms of this chapter, which partial franchise, when granted, will
apply to those areas where the licensee is then currently providing service, or
is otherwise able to provide service using its existing system. Upon
application for the partial franchise, the licensee shall furnish the city with
a map corresponding to the above-described area of service. Alternatively, if
the licensee seeks to provide cable services throughout the service area, it
will be required to file an application for a franchise and be granted a
franchise prior to initiating an extension of service.
(1992 Code, § 44-43) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.186 CABLE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A grantee is responsible for ensuring that its system is designed, installed
and operated in a manner that fully complies with applicable FCC rules
including 47 C.F.R. chapter I, part 76, subpart K, as revised or amended from
time to time. As provided in these rules, the city shall have, upon request,
the right to obtain a copy of tests and records required in accordance with
appropriate rules, but the city has no authority, pursuant to federal law, to
enforce compliance with the standards.
(1992 Code, § 44-44) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
EMERGENCY USE
§ 123.200 EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.
   In accordance with and at the time required by the provisions of FCC
Regulations part 11, subpart D, § 11.51, and as other provisions which may from
time to time be amended, a grantee shall install, if it has not already done
so, and maintain an emergency alert system (EAS) for use in transmitting
emergency act notifications (EAN) and emergency act terminations (EAT) in local
and state-wide situations as may be designated to be an emergency by the local
primary (LP), the state primary (SP) and/or the state emergency operations
center (SEOC), as those authorities are identified and defined within FCC
Regulations, § 11.18.
(1992 Code, § 44-45) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.201 QUALIFIED PERSONS TO OPERATE EAS EQUIPMENT.
   The city shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized personnel to
operate the EAS equipment and take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of
a grantee’s cable system in any manner that results in inappropriate use, or
any loss or damage to the cable system. Except to the extent expressly
prohibited by law, the city agrees to hold a grantee, its employees, officers
and assigns harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its
system by the city, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees
and costs.
(1992 Code, § 44-46) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS CHANNELS
§ 123.215 EQUAL PROTECTION REGARDING PEG ACCESS CHANNELS.
   Every grantee shall provide channels, funds, facilities and equipment to
support PEG access as described in a franchise agreement, and consistent with
the minimum requirements of this chapter. Further, the requirements shall, at a
minimum, satisfy the community needs as determined by the city for the period
of the applicable franchise agreement. Additional franchises awarded by city
shall have comparable requirements.
(1992 Code, § 44-47) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.216 MINIMUM PEG REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The grantee acknowledges that the city is the current operator and
manager of the existing PEG access requirements, functions and responsibilities
related to PEG access channels and programming. The city shall have complete
control as to the content, scheduling, administration and all other programming
aspects of PEG access channels, and may delegate certain or all of the
functions to an appropriate designee, which shall be subject to the terms and
conditions established by the ordinance and a franchise. The grantee shall not
exercise any editorial control over PEG access channel programming, except as
otherwise required or permitted by law. In performing its functions under this
franchise, the city shall adopt and apply the same rules and procedures with
regard to all grantees with regard to PEG access channels and programming. The
grantee shall provide the following additional support for PEG access channels
and programming:
      (1)   Reservation, dedication and use of up to four PEG access channels,
two channels of which may be carried on a digital tier, and two of which shall
be carried as part of basic cable service. In the event a grantee fully
converts its system to digital, the city may direct that up to four PEG access
channels shall be carried on the least expensive tier of service;
      (2)   A community grant as required by §
123.302;
      (3)   No charges may be assessed by grantee for channel time or playback
of prerecorded programming on the specially designated PEG access channels.
Each user of the PEG access channels shall be responsible for the programming
content and pay their own costs of programming;
      (4)   Each grantee shall provide seven locations for program origination
(“origination points”). The grantee shall provide return capability to its
system to enable live program origination from origination points on the PEG
access channels. The cost of construction and equipment to each origination
point up to the demarcation point of approximately 12 inches outside of the
designated origination point (Demark point) shall be borne by a grantee. The
origination point locations shall be identified by the city and specified in
the franchise agreement. To the extent the city determines it does not need one
or more origination points from a particular grantee, it shall require that
grantee to make an investment in equipment or facilities for public use which
is comparable to the cost that grantee avoids by not constructing and equipping
the origination point(s). For purposes of this section, COMPARABLE COSTS for
each origination point shall mean an amount equal to the median amount expended
by the first grantee for the seven origination point(s) required by its
franchise;
      (5)   The grantee will include PEG access channels on its program guide
channels. Any content that may be required for the listing will be the
responsibility of city, based on the reasonable requirements for the furnishing
of the content to grantee; and
      (6)   The grantee will provide city with installation, equipment and only
that digital cable radio service generally available to subscribers without an
additional fee, subject to grantee’s ability to lawfully do so pursuant to its
contracts with the affected content providers, to be utilized as background
music for PEG electronic message systems at no cost to the city.
   (b)   Every franchise shall include a description of channels, funding,
facilities and equipment, as well as the operation and maintenance of the
channels by a grantee and included in a plan for public, educational and
governmental access. Given the ongoing changes in the state of technology as of
the effective date of this chapter, absent express written consent of the city,
grantee shall transmit the two PEG access channels in the format or technology
utilized to transmit the channels on basic cable.
   (c)   The city may request up to two additional PEG access channels of all
grantees at any time based on need. Whenever the existing PEG access channels
are in use during 80% of the weekdays, Monday through Friday, for 80% of the
time during a consecutive three hour period for six weeks running, and there is
a demand for use of an additional channel for the same purpose, the grantees
shall have six months in which to provide a new, specially designated PEG
access channel. In no event shall that total number of PEG access channels
exceed four.
(1992 Code, § 44-48) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.217 SAME CHANNEL DESIGNATION.
   Grantees, by acceptance of a franchise, agree that on the date of adoption
of its franchise, the PEG access channels on the basic cable service activated
and used by the city will have the same channel designations as other grantees.
(1992 Code, § 44-49) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.218 CITY APPROVAL REQUIRED TO CHANGE PEG CHANNEL DESIGNATION.
   Unless permitted by applicable law, a grantee may not change PEG access
channel designations on the basic cable service without city approval during
the term of a franchise except to the extent the channel designations are
changed by other grantees as approved by the city, provided, however, that the
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be deemed granted unless
the city council acts to deny the request within 90 days of receipt.
(1992 Code, § 44-50) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.219 INTERCONNECTION—ACCESS PROGRAM SHARING.
   Every grantee shall in good faith and with reasonable efforts ensure that
the transmission of public, educational and governmental access programming and
channel designations for PEG access channels between cable systems within the
city be accomplished in a reasonable and cost-effective manner through
interconnection. The city may exercise all lawful authority it has pursuant to
applicable law to assure that the goals of this section are accomplished if the
grantees are unable to reach an agreement. Every grantee shall be obligated to
participate in good faith with the city to accomplish the goals of this
section.
(1992 Code, § 44-51) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.220 USE OF PEG ACCESS CHANNELS MUST CONFORM WITH LAW AND RULES ENACTED.
   The use of PEG access channels by the city shall be in accordance with and
subject to the rules and procedures adopted by the city and as authorized under
the Cable Act.
(1992 Code, § 44-52) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.221 PEG ACCESS CHANNELS.
   A grantee shall include PEG access channel(s) in all cable services
packages.
(1992 Code, § 44-53) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.222 NONCOMMERCIAL USE OF PEG ACCESS CHANNELS.
   PEG access channels shall be for noncommercial, noncompetitive use, except
for programming sponsorship acknowledgments or for credit courses offered by
the state accredited educational institutions located in the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-54) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.223 PEG ACCESS CHANNELS TO MEET FCC TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   A grantee shall ensure that all access channels meet the technical standards
of the FCC, provided, however, a grantee shall not be responsible for defects,
flaws or other impairments in the PEG access programming delivered to a grantee
and shall only be responsible for maintenance up to the point 12 inches beyond
where the connection enters the building (Demark point) location agreed to with
city.
(1992 Code, § 44-55) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.224 CITY NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES TO CABLE SYSTEM.
   If a grantee makes changes to its cable system that necessitate
modifications to PEG access signal transmission facilities and equipment
(including, but not limited to, the upstream paths), a grantee shall provide
reasonable advance notice of the changes to the city and shall provide, at a
grantee’s expense, any additional or modified headend facilities necessary to
implement the modifications within a reasonable period of time prior to the
date that the system changes are to be made.
(1992 Code, § 44-56) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.225 DIGITAL FORMAT.
   The access channels shall be made available in digital formats comparable to
commercial offerings at the time a grantee converts its system to all digital
transmission.
(1992 Code, § 44-57) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.226 CAPITAL GRANTS.
   The city may require all grantees to provide financial support permissible
under the Cable Act, as a capital grant payable by each grantee to the city for
PEG capital requirements in the amount up to 1% of each grantee’s gross
revenue, as determined by the city no more frequently than once every two
years. The capital grant shall be payable by each grantee with the franchise
fee payment as required by this chapter and shall be itemized and passed
through to subscribers in the same manner. The city shall impose the same
percentage fee on all grantees or shall not impose the fee on any grantee. The
city shall provide all grantees with 180 days’ prior written notice for the
implementation or modification of the capital grant.
(1992 Code, § 44-58) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
CABLE SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS
§ 123.240 CABLE SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   A grantee, upon request, shall provide without charge, installation of one
outlet and free basic cable to those administrative buildings owned and
occupied by the city and county, library(ies), fire station(s), police station
(s), public works buildings and K-12 public and private school(s) that are
within 200 feet of its cable system. The city shall take reasonable precautions
to prevent any use of a grantee’s cable system in any manner that results in
the inappropriate use thereof or any loss or damage to the cable system. The
city shall hold a grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising
out of the provision and use of cable service required by this section. A
grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to the buildings where a
nonstandard installation is required, unless the city, county or building
owner/occupant agrees to pay the incremental cost of any necessary extension
and/or nonstandard installation. If additional outlets of basic cable are
provided to the buildings, the building owner/occupant shall pay the actual
cost associated therewith. See
Appendix B, Public Buildings to be connected which may from time to time be
amended by the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-59) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK AND SERVICES TO PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL
LOCATIONS
§ 123.255 INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK AND SERVICES TO PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND
GOVERNMENTAL LOCATIONS.
   (a)   Upon written request of the city, a grantee will assist the city in
the evaluation of an institutional network, as authorized and as defined in the
Cable Act that would interconnect specific public buildings for the
transmission and receipt of communications between specific points in the
discrete network within the service area at the city’s sole expense. The
construction and use of any institutional network provided by a grantee to
serve public buildings in the city shall be subject to the terms and conditions
of a franchise agreement, which is mutually acceptable to a grantee and the
city.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter or in a franchise shall be deemed as authority
to regulate a grantee as a common carrier within the meaning of applicable
state or federal law.
(1992 Code, § 44-60) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.256 INTERCONNECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK.
   To the extent an institutional network is required pursuant to §
123.255 herein, the institutional network shall be designed and constructed so
as to interconnect public buildings including educational institutions, city
facilities, libraries, police and fire departments and other institutions as
designated by the city and as described in a franchise.
(1992 Code, § 44-61) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.257 EQUAL PROTECTION REGARDING INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK(S).
   In the event a grantee has made available to the city an institutional
network, an additional grantee will be required in a franchise to provide a
comparable commitment, including funding on a per-subscriber basis, and further
described in a franchise.
(1992 Code, § 44-62) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
BROAD CATEGORIES OF PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
§ 123.270 PROVISION OF BROAD PROGRAMMING.
   Consistent with federal law, a grantee shall provide or enable the provision
of at least the following broad categories of programming to the extent the
categories are reasonably available on commercially reasonable terms:
   (a)   Local news, weather and information;
   (b)   Educational programming;
   (c)   Sports;
   (d)   General entertainment (including movies);
   (e)   Children/family-oriented;
   (f)   Arts, culture and performing arts;
   (g)   Food;
   (h)   Foreign language based on population;
   (i)   Science/documentary;
   (j)   National, state and local government affairs;
   (k)   Access programming, as provided by a franchise;
   (l)   Program channel guide; and
   (m)   National news, weather and information
(1992 Code, § 44-63) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
PERIODIC EVALUATION
§ 123.285 PERIODIC EVALUATIONS.
   (a)   The field of video communications is rapidly changing and may see many
regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes during the term
of a franchise.
   (b)   Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree of flexibility in
this chapter and a franchise, and to help achieve continued advanced and modern
systems serving the city that meet the needs of the city, the following
evaluation provisions shall apply.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions of this section and upon 30 days’ written
notice to a grantee, the city may require an evaluation session. The evaluation
session may occur no sooner than the fifth anniversary date of a grantee’s
franchise. The evaluation shall determine if it is appropriate to amend this
chapter and/or a franchise to address developments in the field of video
communications that may have taken place over the course of time. Any proposed
amendment of the franchise under this section shall be based upon the
reasonable cable needs and related needs and interests of the city and
subscribers and take into consideration the costs to a grantee of meeting those
needs and interests. The city and a grantee shall negotiate amendments to the
franchise in good faith.
      (2)   All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and notice of
sessions published in the same way as the city publishes other legal notices.
      (3)   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may
include, but are not limited to, application of new technologies, a grantee’s
performance, programming offered, access channels, facilities and support,
municipal uses of cable, customer complaints, amendments to this chapter and a
franchise, judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension policies and any other
topics city and a grantee deem relevant.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the city and a
grantee may at any time amend the franchise by mutual consent.
(1992 Code, § 44-64) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
REGULATION BY THE CITY
§ 123.300 CITY MAY DELEGATE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The city may delegate its obligations and duties under this chapter and a
franchise to any elected official, officer, employee, department, agent or
board of the city to the extent permitted by law, and a grantee shall recognize
the authority of any delegate, provided, however, that the city council shall
retain the sole authority to take enforcement action pursuant to this chapter
and a franchise. The city shall provide a grantee with written notices of any
delegation or transfer of functions.
(1992 Code, § 44-65) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.301 INSPECTION BY CITY.
   The city may inspect all construction or installation work performed
pursuant to a franchise granted under this chapter in order to ensure
compliance with the terms of the franchise grant, as well as all applicable
statutes and ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 44-66) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.302 FRANCHISE FEE.
   Franchise fee payments to city will be in accordance with:
   (a)   Every grantee shall pay to the city the same franchise fee which shall
be established by the city council by resolution in an amount of up to 5% of
its annual gross revenue, or as amended by the FCC from time to time;
   (b)   A portion of the franchise fee shall be separately designated as a
community grant (“community grant”). The maximum allowable amount to be
designated as a community grant is up to 1% of the total franchise fee
permissible under the Cable Act. The community grant shall be payable by each
grantee with its franchise fee payment. The community grant may be itemized and
passed through to subscribers separate from and in the same manner as franchise
fees. The city shall impose the same community grant percentage fee on all
grantees or shall not impose the community grant percentage fee on any grantor;
   (c)   This franchise fee may be reviewed every two years by the city. In the
event the franchise fee is increased, the city must give the grantee a 180-day
notice to implement the new fee. In accordance with the Cable Act, the 12-month
period applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee
shall be a calendar year;
   (d)   The franchise fee and community grant payment shall be due monthly and
payable within 30 days after the close of the preceding month. Each payment
shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of a
grantee showing the basis for the computation, the form of which is attached
hereto as
Appendix C, and which may be modified upon mutual consent by a grantee and the
city, provided, however, each grantee shall be required to provide the same
information regardless of the form agreed to by the city. Payments shall be
deposited to a city account electronically;
   (e)   The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable
hereunder shall be three years from the date on which payment by a grantee is
due;
   (f)   All amounts due and owing under this chapter and a franchise and not
paid by the dates specified herein shall bear interest at the prime rate listed
in the Wall Street Journal on the date payment was due and compounded daily and
calculated daily from the date due until the date of actual payment; and
   (g)   The franchise fee obligation herein is a material requirement of a
franchise and is considered payment by a grantee for use of rights-of-way.
(1992 Code, § 44-67) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.303 GOOD FAITH.
   (a)   A grantee and the city shall make good-faith efforts to work together
to prescribe reasonable standards governing the nature, extent and type of
accounting system and accounting procedures utilized by a grantee for the
purposes of promoting the efficient administration of the franchise fee
requirement of this franchise and which are consistent general accounting
standards.
   (b)   A grantee agrees, by acceptance of a franchise, that the city, upon 30
days’ written notice to a grantee, may during the term of a franchise, but not
more frequently than once each year, conduct an audit of the books, records and
accounts of a grantee for the purpose of determining whether a grantee has paid
franchise fees in the amounts prescribed herein. The notice shall specifically
reference the section of this chapter and/or the franchise to be reviewed so
that a grantee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by
the city. The audit may be conducted by the city or by an independent certified
public accounting firm retained by the city and shall be conducted at the sole
expense of the city. The party conducting the audit shall prepare a written
report containing its findings and the report shall be filed with the city and
mailed to the city and the grantee. A grantee shall make available for
inspection by authorized representatives of the city, its books, accounts and
all other financial records at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance
notice for the purpose of permitting exercise of the authorities conferred by
this section. A grantee shall not be required to maintain any books or records
for franchise compliance purposes longer than three years. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary set forth herein, and subject to the requirements of
the state’s Government Records Management Act (GRAMA), SDCL Chapter 1-27,
grantee shall not be required to disclose information that it reasonably deems
to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor disclose books and records of
any affiliate that is not providing cable service in the service area. The city
agrees to treat any information disclosed by a grantee as confidential and only
to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a
need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. A grantee shall not
be required to provide subscriber information in violation of § 631 of the
Cable Act.
(1992 Code, § 44-68) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.304 RATE REGULATION.
   The city may regulate rates for the provision of basic cable and equipment
as expressly permitted by federal or state law. The grantee shall at all times
maintain on file with the city finance director a schedule setting forth all
rates and charges to be made to subscriber for basic cable services, including
installation charges.
(1992 Code, § 44-69) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.305 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Renewal of franchise shall be in accordance with applicable law including:
   (a)   Any proceedings undertaken by the city that relate to the renewal of a
grantee’s franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of §
626 of the Cable Act, as amended;
   (b)   In addition to the procedures set forth in § 626(a) of the Cable Act,
the city agrees to notify a grantee of all of its assessments regarding the
identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the
past performance of a grantee under the then-current franchise term. The city
further agrees that the assessments shall be provided to a grantee promptly so
that a grantee has adequate time to submit a proposal under § 626(b) of the
Cable Act and complete renewal of the franchise prior to expiration of its
term;
   (c)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, a
grantee and the city understand that at any time during the term of the then-
current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and
opportunity to comment, the city and a grantee may agree to undertake and
finalize informal negotiations regarding renewal of the then-current franchise
and the city may grant a renewal thereof;
   (d)   A grantee and the city consider the terms set forth in this section to
be consistent with the express provisions of § 626 of the Cable Act; and
   (e)   Grantee shall promptly reimburse the city for actual out-of-pocket
expenses incurred to publish the franchise if the publication is required by
applicable law.
(1992 Code, § 44-70) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.306 FRANCHISE TERMINATED.
   (a)   If a renewal or extension of a grantee’s franchise is denied or the
franchise is lawfully terminated, and the city either lawfully acquires
ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of
ownership of the cable system to another party, any acquisition or transfer
shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in § 627
of the Cable Act and after a grantee has had the opportunity to effectuate a
lawful transfer of its system to a qualified third party pursuant to this
section.
   (b)   A grantee and the city will understand and agree that in the case of a
final determination of a lawful revocation, termination or nonrenewal of a
franchise, a grantee shall be given at least 12 months to effectuate a transfer
of its cable system to a qualified third party, approval for which by the city
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Furthermore, a grantee shall be authorized
to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise during this
period. If, at the end of that time, a grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a
qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably
acceptable to the city, the grantee and the city may avail themselves of any
rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law. It is further agreed
that a grantee’s continued operation of the cable system during the 12-month
period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights
of either the city or a grantee.
(1992 Code, § 44-71) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.307 ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS IN FRANCHISE.
   A grantee’s right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold,
transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a grantee, without the
prior consent of the city, the consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No
consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by
other hypothecation or by assignment of any rights, title or interest of a
grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness.
Within 30 days of receiving a request for transfer, the city shall notify a
grantee in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to
determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee.
If the city has not taken action on a grantee’s request for transfer within 120
days after receiving the request, consent by the city shall be deemed given.
(1992 Code, § 44-72) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
CUSTOMER PRACTICES
§ 123.320 NONDISCRIMINATION IN CUSTOMER RATES.
   A grantee shall not, as to rates and charges, make or grant any preference
or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage. This section shall not be construed to prohibit promotional or
bulk discounts, or discounts that may be made available to seniors or the
economically disadvantaged.
(1992 Code, § 44-73) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.321 COMPLIANCE WITH CABLE ACT.
   A grantee agrees to comply with the provisions of § 631 of the Cable Act.
(1992 Code, § 44-74) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.322 WRITTEN NOTICE.
   A grantee shall provide written notices to those subscribers notifying them
of their privacy rights in accordance with the provisions of § 631 of the Cable
Act.
(1992 Code, § 44-75) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.323 RULES PROMULGATED BY GRANTEE.
   A grantee shall have authority to promulgate the rules, regulations, terms
and conditions as it deems necessary in order to operate the franchise granted
under this chapter. Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions,
including subscriber agreements together with any amendments, additions or
deletions thereto, shall be made available to the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-76) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
§ 123.335 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   A grantee shall comply with the customer service standards of the FCC.
(1992 Code, § 44-77) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.336 RECORDS MAINTAINED BY GRANTEE.
   Subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., every grantee
shall prepare as necessary, and maintain records of complaints made to them and
the resolution of the complaints, including the date of the resolution. For the
purposes of this requirement, all complaints or cable service calls that result
in the dispatch of a cable service technician shall be individually logged and
for all other complaints, a grantee may satisfy this requirement by the
creation of a periodic written summary of the type of complaint and their
resolution. The complaint logs and summaries shall be on file at the office of
a grantee for three years and available for inspection by the city upon
request.
(1992 Code, § 44-78) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
ANNUAL REPORTS AND RECORDS OF GRANTEE
§ 123.350 ANNUAL REPORTS.
   Upon request, a grantee shall make available to the city the following
annual reports not later than 90 days after the request is made:
   (a)   Any publicly available reports or documents which a grantee must file
within a government agency, and that specifically address a grantee’s
obligation under a franchise, shall be provided to city, excepting federal and
state income tax returns and forms, and the reports not required to be filed
based on the Federal Securities Act;
   (b)   A copy of the publicly available consolidated report to its
stockholders issued at the end of a grantee’s fiscal year rendered by a
grantee’s parent company for all of its operations, if a report exists; and
   (c)   A copy of its annual reports to the FCC for cable video service and
cable systems. The grantee may request confidentiality to protect customer
privacy and proprietary information.
(1992 Code, § 44-79) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.351 RECORDS WHICH ARE TO BE MADE AVAILABLE TO CITY.
   Records for city review will include:
   (a)   The city shall have the right to inspect, upon reasonable notice and
during normal business hours, any records maintained by a grantee which relate
to cable system operations including specifically a grantee’s accounting and
financial records, provided, however, a grantee may withhold records it deems
to be confidential and proprietary until the parties execute a nondisclosure
agreement consistent with applicable law. A grantee shall produce the books and
records for the city’s inspection at a grantee’s local office or at another
mutually agreed upon location; and
   (b)   The city acknowledges that some of the records, including maps and
system location information, that may be provided by a grantee may be
considered confidential by a grantee and therefore may subject a grantee to
competitive disadvantage if made public. The city will maintain the
confidentiality of any records provided to it by a grantee that are identified
by grantee in writing as “confidential,” if they are not required to be made
public pursuant to applicable laws. Upon receipt of demand from any third party
for disclosure of records, the city shall advise a grantee and provide a
grantee with a copy of any written request by the party demanding access to the
records, if available. The city agrees that, to the extent permitted by state
and federal law, it shall deny access to any of a grantee’s books and records
marked confidential as set forth above. Subject to the city’s compliance with
this section, the city shall not be liable to a grantee for any submission or
disclosure of the information to a third party as required by applicable law or
to a government agency or regulatory body seeking the records and claiming
jurisdiction in any of these events. Nothing in this section shall limit the
right of a grantee to contest disclosure or submission to a third party as
required by law or to a government agency or regulatory body asserting
jurisdiction over it or the subject matter before the disclosure shall be
effected. A grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs and
attorneys’ fees incurred in any legal proceedings pursued under this section.
(1992 Code, § 44-80) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 123.365 INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS.
   A grantee agrees by acceptance of a franchise that it shall indemnify and
save free and harmless, and by the acceptance of a franchise, agrees to
indemnify and save free and harmless the city, the city council, each member
thereof, all officers, agents, employees and members of boards and commissions
of the city from and against any and all liability by reason of or arising out
of any and all claims, demands, causes of action or proceedings which may be
asserted, prosecuted or established against them or any of them, for injury to
persons or tangible damage to property of whatever nature arising out of the
use by a grantee of the rights-of-way, or of any other operations or activities
of a grantee pursuant to this chapter and a franchise and the operation of a
cable system, whether the damage shall be caused by negligence or otherwise
(including, but not limited to, any liability for damages for defamation and
damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by a grantee to secure
consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to
be delivered by a grantee’s cable system or vehicle operations) and
irrespective of the amount of the liability insurance policies required
hereunder, but excepting therefrom liability arising out of any claim, demand,
cause of action or proceeding resulting from the negligence or willful
misconduct of the city, the city council, each member thereof, or officers,
agents, employees or members of boards and commissions of the city, or
resulting from the negligence or willful misconduct of persons distributing
programs via the PEG access channels over which persons and programming a
grantee cannot legally and does not exercise control.
(1992 Code, § 44-81) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.366 DEFEND AT OWN COST.
   A grantee, by the acceptance of a franchise, agrees to defend at its own
cost and expense the city, the city council, each member thereof, all officers,
agents, employees and members of boards and commissions of the city against any
and all claims, demands, actions or proceedings brought against them or any of
them, in respect to the matters embraced by the indemnity set forth herein.
(1992 Code, § 44-82) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.367 INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   Concurrently, with the filing of the acceptance of award of a franchise, a
grantee shall furnish to the city and at all times during the existence of
franchise shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense,
a commercial general liability insurance policy and in a form reasonably
satisfactory to the city. The policy shall include, but shall not be limited
to, personal injury, broad-form property damage, blanket contractual, completed
operations, underground hazard, explosion and collapse hazard, independent
contractors, vaults and products liability insurance. The policy shall ensure a
grantee, the city, the city council, each member thereof, all officers, agents,
employees and members of boards or commissions of the city against liability
for all matters embraced herein with minimum combined single liability limit of
$2,000,000.
(1992 Code, § 44-83) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.368 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   A grantee will obtain and maintain workers’ compensation insurance for all
the grantee’s employees, and in case any work is sublet, a grantee will require
any subcontractor similarly to provide workers’ compensation insurance for all
subcontractor’s employees, in compliance with state laws, and to fully protect
the city from any and all claims arising out of work-related occurrences. A
grantee, by acceptance of a franchise, thereby agrees it indemnifies city for
any damage resulting to it from failure of either a grantee or any
subcontractor to obtain and maintain the insurance. A grantee will provide the
city with a certificate of insurance indicating workers’ compensation insurance
prior to operations under a franchise and the commencement of any construction,
system upgrade, reconstruction or maintenance of a system. The city’s approval
or acceptance of certificates of insurance does not constitute city assumption
of responsibility for the validity of any insurance policies nor does the city
represent that the above coverage is adequate to protect any individual/group/
business, its consultants’ or subcontractors’ interests, and assumes no
liability therefore.
(1992 Code, § 44-84) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.369 AUTO LIABILITY REQUIREMENT.
   A grantee shall provide automobile liability insurance covering all
grantee’s owned, nonowned and hired automobiles, trucks and trailers. The
insurance shall provide coverage at least as broad as that found in the
standard comprehensive automobile liability policy with limits of not less than
$2,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence. This insurance coverage shall
be increased/decreased annually to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index.
(1992 Code, § 44-85) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.370 ADDITIONAL INSUREDS.
   The policies of insurance shall contain an additional insured clause
providing that city, the city council, each member thereof, all officers,
agents, employees and members of boards and commissions of the city shall be
named as an additional insured under the policy. Each policy required above
shall provide that it is to be considered primary insurance in the event a
demand is made on the city. Each policy required above shall contain a
provision by the insurer to perform the covenant for defense set forth herein.
This provision shall not apply to workers’ compensation insurance.
(1992 Code, § 44-86) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.371 CANCELLATION OF INSURANCE.
   Each of the above-listed policies of insurance shall contain a provision
that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage shall be
delivered to the mayor 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof. If the
insurance is provided by a policy which also covers any other entity or person
other than those above-named, then the policy shall contain the standard cross-
liability enforcement. A grantee will not cancel or reduce the insurance
coverage without the city having been given 30 days’ prior written notice
thereof by a grantee.
(1992 Code, § 44-87) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.372 CERTIFICATE ON FILE.
   A certificate of insurance coverage shall be filed in the office of the
mayor concurrently upon the acceptance of the award of a franchise and shall be
updated annually if any changes to the policies occur. The grantee will provide
the city with at least 30 days’ written notice of an insurer’s intent to cancel
or not renew any of the insurance coverage. The grantee agrees to hold the city
harmless from any liability, including additional premium due because of the
grantee’s failure to maintain the coverage limits required.
(1992 Code, § 44-88) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.373 WAIVER OF SUBROGATION.
   Any insurance policies procured by the grantee shall provide that the
insurance carrier waives all rights of subrogation against the city, except as
cited in §
123.365 as they relate to gross negligence or willful misconduct on the part of
the city and except as related to workers’ compensation insurance.
(1992 Code, § 44-89) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.374 LIABILITY TO THIRD PARTIES.
   A grantee shall be liable for the acts of its third parties (contractors and
subcontractors) and ensure that before commencement of work regarding
construction, operation and maintenance of its cable system, any third parties
have provided insurance in compliance with this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 44-90) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.375 SURVIVAL OF OBLIGATION.
   A grantee’s covenants and obligations under this subchapter shall survive
the expiration or any termination of a franchise agreement for a period of two
years.
(1992 Code, § 44-91) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE
§ 123.390 BOND REQUIREMENT.
   Security fund for support of enforcement shall comply with:
   (a)   A grantee may be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety
as a condition of being awarded a franchise or continuing its existence. The
city shall determine whether or not a bond or surety is required based upon a
review of an applicant’s or a grantee’s legal, financial and technical
qualifications. If the qualifications of a grantee are sufficient for
compliance with the terms of this chapter and a franchise and the enforcement
thereof, the city may waive any requirement for a bond or surety. In the event
that a bond or other surety is required in the future, the city agrees to give
a grantee at least 60 days’ prior written notice thereof stating the amount and
the reason for the requirement;
   (b)   If a bond or other surety has been established, the security fund may
be drawn on by city for those purposes specified. In the event, after complying
with the due process procedures provided herein, the city finds that a material
violation exists and that a grantee has not corrected the same in a
satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced correction of the
violation, the city may establish a date, no earlier than 30 days following
notification, by which a grantee must comply with the obligation or the city
may thereafter impose damages, payable from the security fund;
   (c)   Within 30 days after notice to a grantee that any amount has been
withdrawn by the city from the bond or other surety, a grantee shall deposit a
sum of money or otherwise replace the bond or other surety in a manner
sufficient to restore the bond or other surety to its original amount; and
   (d)   Nothing herein will be deemed a waiver of the normal permit and
bonding requirements made of all contractors working within the city’s rights-
of-way, except as may be waived in accordance with a franchise.
(1992 Code, § 44-92) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.391 REMEDIES AVAILABLE TO CITY.
   If a grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation, as
determined by the city, required herein, following notice from the city and an
opportunity to cure the nonperformance, the city may remedy the violation in
accordance with the following procedures.
   (a)   (1)   The city will first notify a grantee of the violation in writing
by delivery of registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a
reasonable time.
      (2)   A grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice to:
         A.   Respond to the city, contesting the assertion of noncompliance,
which shall toll the running of any time frames hereunder until a grantee is
afforded the public hearing required herein and a written determination of the
city council has been issued;
         B.   Cure the default; or
         C.   In the event that, by the nature of default, the default cannot
be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy the
default and notify the city of the steps being taken and the projected date
that they will be completed.
      (3)   If a grantee fails to correct the violation within the time
prescribed or if grantee fails to commence corrective action within the time
prescribed and diligently remedy the violation thereafter, a grantee will then
be given 30 days’ prior written notice of a public hearing to be held before
the city council. The notice will specify the violations alleged to have
occurred.
   (b)   At the public hearing, the city council will hear and consider all
relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. The public
hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city which
is scheduled at a time which is no less than five business days therefrom. The
city shall notify a grantee in writing of the time and place of the meeting and
provide a grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
   (c)   In the event the city council finds that a grantee has corrected the
violation or has diligently commenced correction of the violation after notice
thereof from the city and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy the
violation, or that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings will
terminate and no penalty or other sanction will be imposed.
   (d)   Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the city
council finds that a material violation exists and that a grantee has not
corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced
correction of the violation, the city council may establish a date, no earlier
than 30 days following notification, by which grantee must comply with the
obligation or the city may thereafter seek specific performance of any
franchise provision, which reasonably lends itself to the remedy. In addition,
the city council may impose reasonable damages and enforce imposition of the
damages by payment from the security fund as described in §
123.390. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, the city council may also implement the franchise termination
procedures in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The city shall give written notice to a grantee of its intent to
revoke a franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by a grantee,
including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material
provision of the franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the
noncompliance. A grantee shall have 90 days from the notice to object in
writing and to state its reasons for the objection. In the event the city has
not received a satisfactory response from a grantee, it may then seek
termination of the franchise at a public meeting. The city shall cause to be
served upon a grantee, at least ten days prior to the public meeting, a written
notice specifying the time and place of the meeting and stating its intent to
request the termination;
      (2)   A.   At the designated meeting, the city shall give a grantee an
opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine
whether or not a franchise shall be revoked. A grantee may appeal the
determination to an appropriate court; and
         B.   The appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within 60 days
of the issuance of the determination of the city.
      (3)   The city may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which
it deems appropriate to enforce the city’s rights under a franchise in lieu of
revocation of a franchise.
   (e)   In determining whether a violation is material, the city will take
into consideration the reliability of the evidence of the violation, the nature
of the violation, and the damage, if any, caused to the city or the city’s
residents thereby, whether the violation was chronic, and any justifying or
mitigating circumstances, and those other matters as the city may deem
appropriate. The parties hereby agree that it is not the city’s intention to
subject a grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of a franchise
for so-called “technical” breach(es) or violation(s) of a franchise or local
cable ordinance, which shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   In instances or for matters where a violation or a breach by a
grantee of a franchise or local cable ordinance was a good-faith error that
resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the customers within the service
area; and
      (2)   Where there existed circumstances reasonably beyond the control of
a grantee and which precipitated a violation by a grantee of a franchise or
local cable ordinance, or which were deemed to have prevented a grantee from
complying with a term or condition of the franchise or local cable ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 44-93) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.392 NOTICE OF REVOCATION.
   (a)   Should the city seek to revoke a franchise after following the
procedures set forth above, the city shall give written notice to a grantee of
its intent. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. A
grantee shall have 90 days from the notice to object in writing and to state
its reasons for the objection. In the event the city has not received a
satisfactory response from a grantee, it may then seek termination of a
franchise at a public hearing. The city shall cause to be served upon a
grantee, at least 30 days prior to the public hearing, a written notice
specifying the time and place of the hearing and stating its intent to revoke a
franchise.
   (b)   At the designated hearing, the city shall give a grantee an
opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine
whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. A grantee may appeal the
determination to an appropriate court. The appeal to the appropriate court must
be taken within 60 days of the issuance of the determination of the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-94) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.393 FRANCHISE ENFORCEMENT.
   The city may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems
appropriate to enforce a franchise and the exercise of any of the remedies as
set forth herein shall not constitute an election of remedies or otherwise be
considered a waiver by the city to take any lawful action or exercise any
appropriate remedy it deems appropriate to enforce the terms and conditions of
this chapter and a franchise.
(1992 Code, § 44-95) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.394 GRANTEE TO RETAIN OWNERSHIP OF CABLE SYSTEM UPON TERMINATION OF
FRANCHISE.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary of this section, upon termination
of a franchise, a grantee or its successors and assigns shall retain ownership
of the cable system and shall be entitled at its option and expense to remove
the cable system from all rights-of- way, private property or to abandon the
cable system. Should a grantee elect to remove the cable system, it is
obligated to restore all property to its prior condition. If a grantee fails to
restore the property satisfactorily, the city may complete the work and a
grantee shall reimburse the city within 90 days of receipt of an itemized bill
for the work.
(1992 Code, § 44-96) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.395 NONCOMPLIANCE OR DEFAULT.
   (a)   A grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance
with, the provisions of this chapter or a franchise, nor suffer any enforcement
or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where the noncompliance or
alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the
ability of a grantee to anticipate and control. This provision includes work
delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their
utility poles to which a grantee’s cable system is attached, as well as
unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work
necessary.
   (b)   Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the city’s
intention to subject a grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation
of the franchise for violations of this chapter or the franchise where the
violation was a good-faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact
on the subscribers within the service area, or where strict performance would
result in practical difficulties and hardship to a grantee which outweigh the
benefit to be derived by the city and/or subscribers.
(1992 Code, § 44-97) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 123.410 GOOD FAITH OF BOTH PARTIES.
   A grantee and the city shall act reasonably and in good faith, deal fairly,
and cooperate with each other to enable performance of all obligations under
this chapter and achievements of the expected benefits.
(1992 Code, § 44-98) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.411 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.
   Compliance with federal, state and local laws and changes require:
   (a)   If any federal, state or local law or regulation requires or permits a
grantee or the city to perform any service or act or shall prohibit a grantee
or the city from performing any service or act which may be in conflict with
the terms of a franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof,
city and a grantee shall notify the other of the point of conflict believed to
exist between the law or regulation; and
   (b)   If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or a
franchise is for any reason held to be invalid, unenforceable or
unconstitutional by a decision of any authority or court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter or a franchise and the remainder shall remain in full
force and effect.
(1992 Code, § 44-99) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.412 NONWAIVER OF OBLIGATION.
   A grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or a franchise by reason of any failure of city to
enforce prompt compliance.
(1992 Code, § 44-100) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.413 APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   After this chapter becomes effective, it will supersede the provisions(s) of
any ordinance of city in conflict with the provision(s) of this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 44-101) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 123.414 DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a grantee shall be
allowed to utilize a door-to-door sales force to market its cable service to
the city.
(1992 Code, § 44-102) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
§ 123.425 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations for local
exchange carriers providing cable service to subscribers in their telephone
service area through an open video system.
(1992 Code, § 41-400) (Ord. 56-04, passed 5-10-2001)
§ 123.426 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter apply to an open video system operator
certified by the Federal Communications Commission that intends to deliver
cable services to consumers in the city over an open video system as defined by
federal law.
(1992 Code, § 41-401) (Ord. 56-04, passed 5-10-2001)
§ 123.427 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   Before commencing the delivery of cable services to consumers in the
city over an open video system, the open video system operator shall file an
application with the city.
   (b)   That application shall include or be accompanied by the following, as
applicable:
      (1)   The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates;
      (2)   Copies of FCC Form 1275, all notices of intent filed under 47
C.F.R. § 76.1503(b)(1), and the order of the FCC, all of which relate to
certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in the city in
accordance with § 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC’s rules;
      (3)   A description of the open video system services that will be
offered over existing or proposed facilities;
      (4)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used to
deliver the open video system services;
      (5)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the ownership and
operation of the open video system described in the application;
      (6)   Financial statements which shall not be considered public records
pursuant to SDCL 9-34-9 prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s financial ability to:
         A.   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant
that is proposed to be constructed in the city;
         B.   Comply with the city’s public, educational and governmental
access requirements as specified in this subchapter; and
         C.   Comply with the city’s requirement that gross revenue fees be
paid as specified in this subchapter.
      (7)   An accurate map showing the location of any of the applicant’s
existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends
to use;
      (8)   If the applicant’s operation of the open video system will require
the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the city, the
following additional information be provided:
         A.   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates; and
         B.   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map
of any new facilities to be constructed in the city.
      (9)   Additional information as may be requested by the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-402) (Ord. 56-04, passed 5-10-2001)
§ 123.428 REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION.
   Upon receipt of an application filed under this subchapter, city will give
written notice to the applicant of the city’s intent to negotiate an agreement
setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the
proposed open video system will be authorized by the city.
(1992 Code, § 41-403) (Ord. 56-04, passed 5-10-2001)
§ 123.429 AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No cable services may be provided in the city by an open video system
operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written agreement
setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the
proposed open video system will be authorized by the city.
   (b)   The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may
contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to
the extent that these terms, conditions and subject matters are not preempted
by federal law or regulations:
      (1)   The nature, scope and duration of the agreement, including
provisions for its renewal or extension;
      (2)   The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the
city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under §
622 of the Communications Act, fees on the gross revenue received by the
operator, as authorized by 47 C.F.R. § 76.1511, in accordance with the
following standards and procedures:
         A.   The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the rate
imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable operator;
         B.   1.   The term GROSS REVENUE has the meaning set forth in 47
C.F.R. § 76.1511, and includes:
               a.   All gross revenue received by an open video system operator
or its affiliates, including all revenue received from subscribers and all
carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and
               b.   All advertising revenue received by the operator or its
affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where the
revenue is included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the
city by the franchised cable operator.
            2.   The term gross revenue does not include revenue, such as
subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video programming
providers.
      (3)   The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with
requirements relating to information collection and recordkeeping, accounting
procedures, reporting, periodic audits and inspection of records in order to
ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenue;
      (4)   The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city’s
requirements with respect to public, educational and governmental access
channel capacity, services, facilities and equipment, as provided for in 47
C.F.R. § 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are
applicable:
         A.   The open video system operator is subject to the same public,
educational and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable
television franchise service area with which its system overlaps;
         B.   The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers
receive all public, educational and governmental access channels within the
franchise service area in which the city’s subscribers are located;
         C.   The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to
establish the operator’s obligations with respect to public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities and equipment. These
negotiations may include the city’s franchised cable operator if the city, the
open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire; and
         D.   If the open video system operator and the city are unable to
reach an agreement regarding the operator’s obligations with respect to public,
educational and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities and
equipment within the city’s jurisdiction, then the following obligations will
be imposed:
            1.   The open video system operator must satisfy the same public,
educational and governmental access obligations as the city’s franchised cable
operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public,
educational and governmental access and by matching the city’s franchised cable
operator’s annual financial contributions in support of public, educational and
governmental access services, facilities and equipment that are actually used
by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios,
the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by
negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city’s franchised cable operator,
so that public, educational and governmental access services to the city are
improved or increased. If these terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video
system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised
cable operator’s depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of
facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided
by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under
§ 611 of the Communications Act; and
            2.   The city will impose upon the open video system operator the
same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator
with regard to the open video system operator’s use of channel capacity
designated for public, educational and governmental access use when that
capacity is not being used for these purposes.
         E.   The city’s franchised cable operator is required under federal
law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public,
educational and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system
operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this
connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical
characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the
franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on
how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to decide. The city
may require that the connection occur on city-owned property or on public
rights-of-way;
         F.   All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator’s
public, educational and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the
open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video
system operator’s matching financial contributions set forth above in division
(b)(4)D.1. above;
         G.   The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any
public, educational or governmental access obligations that are greater than
those imposed upon the franchised cable operator; and
         H.   The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply
with new public, educational and access obligations imposed on the city’s
franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television
franchise, provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be
required to displace other programmers using its open video system to
accommodate public, educational and governmental access channels. The open
video system operator must comply with the new public, educational, and
governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes
available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased
demand for channel capacity.
      (5)   If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the
application of the FCC’s rules regarding the open video system operator’s
obligations to provide public, educational and governmental access under the
provisions of this section, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC
in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 C.F.R. §
76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the city until the dispute has been
finally resolved;
      (6)   If the open video system operator intends to maintain an
institutional network, as defined in § 611(f) of the Communications Act, the
city will require that educational and governmental access channels be
designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels
are designated on the institutional network of the city’s franchised cable
operator;
      (7)   The authority of an open video system operator to exercise
editorial control over any public, educational or governmental use of channel
capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 C.F.R. §
76.1505(f).
      (8)   The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations
relating to customer service standards;
      (9)   If a new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the
city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the
following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also
imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications service
providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:
         A.   Compliance with all applicable city codes, including applications
for excavation, encroachment and construction permits and the payment of all
required permit and inspection fees;
         B.   The coordination of construction activities;
         C.   Compliance with established standards and procedures for
constructing lines across private property;
         D.   Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification
requirements;
         E.   The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets; and
         F.   Compliance with all public safety requirements that are
applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers using
public property or public rights-of-way.
      (10)   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the
agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages and other remedies,
including fines or the suspension, revocation or termination of the agreement;
      (11)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment or transfer of the
open video system;
      (12)   Requirements relating to the open video system operator’s
compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules and
regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system; and
      (13)   Additional requirements, conditions, terms policies and procedures
as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system operator
and that will, in the judgment of the city, best serve the public interest and
protect the public health, welfare and safety.
(1992 Code, § 41-404) (Ord. 56-04, passed 5-10-2001)
§ 123.430 EXTENSION OF FACILITIES.
   Any open video system agreement approved by the city shall contain a
provision whereby the system operator agrees upon request to extend cable
service to all areas of the city, except the Main Street Business Improvement
District as defined in §
37.106 of this Code. Service to the Main Street Business Improvement District
shall be at the sole option of the system operator. If the system operator
determines that provision of cable service is not economically feasible, any
person requesting service may appeal the decision to the governing body of the
city.
(1992 Code, § 41-405) (Ord. 56-04, passed 5-10-2001)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR CABLE FRANCHISE (BY NAME OF APPLICANT)
1.   State applicant’s name:
Response:
2.   State the names of the applicant’s officers and directors:
Response:
3.   State applicant’s business address:
Response:
4.   Provide the name and contact information of the applicant’s contact:
Response:
5.   Provide a description of the initial geographic area that the applicant
proposes to serve:
Response:
6.   Provide a schedule for commencement and completion of construction:
Response:
7.   Provide a statement of compliance that service will not be denied to any
group of potential residential subscribers because of the income of the
residents of the area in which the group resides:
Response:
8.   Provide assurance the applicant will provide adequate public, educational
and governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial support:
Response:
9.   State the requested term of the agreement:
Response:
Initial term:
Franchise renewal:
10.   Does the applicant hold an existing authorization to access the
community’s public rights-of-way?
Response:
11.   State the amount of the fee the applicant agrees to pay (consistent with
the Communications Act and the standards set forth therein):
Response:
12.   Describe the authority granted by this franchise application:
Response:
13.   Describe what notice must be given and to whom:
Response:
14.   Describe the safety standards by which applicant shall abide, including
identification of applicable City Code requirements:
Response:
15.   Describe applicant’s compliance with applicable customer service
standards that it intends to employ throughout the term of the franchise:
   Response:
16.   Is the franchise transferable in the event of sale or merger? Is consent
from the city necessary?
   Response:
17.   Consistent with the Federal Cable Act, provide legal, technical and
financial qualifications information:
Response:
18.   Please describe any other miscellaneous provisions:
Response:
(1992 Code, ch. 44, app. A) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS TO BE CONNECTED TO CABLE SERVICE
(CITY TO PROVIDE EXACT ADDRESSES FOR EACH BUILDING LOCATION)
City of Sioux Falls Buildings:
Arena, 1211 N. West Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Carnegie Town Hall, 235 W. 10th St., Sioux Falls, SD
City Hall, 224 W. 9th St., Sioux Falls, SD
City Hall Annex, 132 N. Dakota Ave. Sioux Falls, SD
CityLink 16 Studio, 315 N. Phillips Ave., Suite 300, Sioux Falls, SD
Community Centers:
   Kenny Anderson Community Center, 3701 E. 3rd St., Sioux Falls, SD
   Kuehn Community Center, 2801 S. Valley View Rd., Sioux Falls, SD
   MariCar Community Center, 400 N. Valley View Rd., Sioux Falls, SD
   Morningside Community Center, 2400 S. Bahnson Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
   Oyate Community Center, 2421 W. 15th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Convention Center, 1101 N. West Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Fire Rescue (all stations):
   Station #1, 100 S. Minnesota Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #2, 301 S. Sycamore Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #3, 2820 S. Minnesota Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #4, 3100 W. 69th St., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #5, 2010 E. Nye St., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #6, 5200 W. 41st St., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #7, 1100 E. Benson Rd., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #8, 1000 N. Kiwanis Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #9, 2700 E. 49th St., Sioux Falls, SD
   Station #10, 320 S. Whitewood Cir., Sioux Falls, SD
Health and Human Services Building, 521 N. Main Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Orpheum, 315 N. Phillips Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Police Department, 320 W. 4th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Public Library (all branches):
   Main Library, 200 N. Dakota Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
   Caille Branch, 4100 Carnegie Cir., Sioux Falls, SD
   Oak View Branch, 3700 E. 3rd St., Sioux Falls, SD
   Ronning Branch, 3100 E. 49th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Transit, 500 E. 6th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Minnehaha County Buildings
County Administration Building, 415 N. Dakota Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Minnehaha County Courthouse, 425 N. Dakota Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Public Safety Building and Jail, 500 N. Minnesota Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Juvenile Detention Center, 4200 S. West Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
County Annex Building, 413 N. Main Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Civil Defense (Emergency Management), 608 Sigler Way, Sioux Falls, SD
Health and Human Services Building, 521 N. Main Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Sioux Falls School District Buildings:
High Schools
Joe Foss School (previously Franklin Elementary), 1200 E. 3rd St., Sioux Falls,
SD
Lincoln High School, 2900 S. Cliff Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Roosevelt High School, 6600 W. 41st St., Sioux Falls, SD
Washington High School, 501 N. Sycamore Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Middle Schools
Axtell Park Middle School, 201 N. West Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Edison Middle School, 2101 S. West Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Memorial Middle School, 1401 S. Sertoma Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Patrick Henry Middle School, 2200 S. 5th Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Whittier Middle School, 930 E. 6th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Elementary Schools
Jane Addams, 2511 W. Brookings St., Sioux Falls, SD
Laura B. Anderson, 1600 N. Wayland Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Cleveland, 1000 S. Edward Dr., Sioux Falls, SD
Discovery, 1506 S. Discovery Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Harvey Dunn, 2400 S. Bahnson Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Eugene Field, 501 S. Highland Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Robert Frost, 3101 S. 4th Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Garfield, 2421 W. 15th St., Sioux Falls, SD
John Harris, 3501 E. 49th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Hawthorne, 601 N. Spring Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Hayward, 400 N. Valley View Rd., Sioux Falls, SD
Oscar Howe, 2801 Valley View Rd., Sioux Falls, SD
Jefferson, 1610 S. Lake Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
JFK, 4501 S. Holbrook Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Longfellow, 1116 South 4th Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Lowell, 710 W. 18th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Horace Mann, 1401 E. 26th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Rosa Parks, 5701 E. Red Oak Dr., Sioux Falls, SD
Terry Redlin, 1721 E. Austin St., Sioux Falls, SD
Anne Sullivan, 3701 E. 3rd St., Sioux Falls, SD
Laura Wilder, 2300 S. Lyndale Ave., Sioux Falls, SD
Mark Twain, 315 W. 27th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Pettigrew Elementary, 7900 W. 53rd St., Sioux Falls, SD
CTE Academy, on the south end of Southeast Technical Institute’s campus near
Madison Street
Instructional Planning Center, 201 E. 38th St., Sioux Falls, SD
Note: Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, all of the public buildings
identified in this
Appendix B will receive installation of one outlet and free basic cable service
connection to the system without charge. During the term of a franchise, any
current or future city, county and school district buildings shall be added to
this
Appendix B in accordance with §
123.240 by the city notifying grantee in writing of the additions, subject to
grantee’s system being in operation and available for installation to any
additional buildings. Nothing in this section will preclude a grantee and city
from negotiating the terms of installation that may be of a greater distance as
provided for in §
123.240.
(1992 Code, ch. 44, app. B) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
APPENDIX C: FRANCHISE FEE WORKSHEET
   [SAMPLE]
Date: xx/xx/xxxx
To: The City of Sioux Falls
From:
Re: Franchise Fees for the month of __________, 20xx
Payment Calculation using revenue of __________, 20xx
Franchise fees payable for the current month were calculated using current
month revenue numbers as follows:
Revenue Type    Subscribers Revenue Rate    Franchise Fee
Basic           xx,xxx      $xxxxxx ______% $xxx
Premium         xx,xxx      $xxxxxx ______% $xxx
Other           xx,xxx      $xxxxxx ______% $xxx
Local Govt. Fee xx,xxx      $xxxxxx ______% $xxx
Total                                       $xxx
Payment is attached. If you have any questions or concerns, please contact
Accounts Payable.
Thank you.
 
(1992 Code, ch. 44, app. C) (Ord. 104-09, passed 11-16-2009)
CHAPTER 124: TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
124.001   Definitions
   
124.002   Inspection required
   
124.003   Frequency of inspection
   
124.004   Smoking prohibited in buses
   
124.005   Taxicab rates
   
124.006   Taxicab business requirements
   
124.007   [Reserved]
   
124.008   Driver prohibitions
   
124.009   Equipment of taximeter
   
124.010   Use of taximeter
   
124.011   Passenger must pay rate prescribed
   
124.012   Transit and paratransit fares
   
124.013   Wheelchair and stretcher transport rates
   
124.014   Livery vehicle operation
   
124.015   Identification and veterinarian certificate for animal used to pull
livery vehicles
   
124.016   Qualifications for transportation network company business
License; Generally
   
124.025   Required
   
124.026   Chapter 110 applicable
   
124.027   Determination of engaging in business
   
124.028   Vehicle for hire application
   
124.029   Vehicle for hire issuance
   
124.030   Application for transportation network company and issuance
   
124.031   Suspension and revocation
   
124.032   Application to increase number of vehicles for hire
   
124.033   Transfer
   
124.034   Expiration of licenses
Licenses; Financial Responsibility
   
124.045   Insurance required - vehicle for hire
   
124.046   Minimum limits of coverage
   
124.047   Bond
   
124.048   Approval
   
124.049   Insurance required - transportation network company
Drivers
   
124.060   License required
   
124.061   Application for driver’s license
   
124.062   Investigation, examination of applicant
   
124.063   Display of license
   
124.064   Business license inapplicable
   
124.065   Temporary permit
   
124.066   Transportation network company driver requirements
   124.067   Suspension and revocation
Alcoholic Beverages
   
124.070    Sale of alcoholic beverages
   
124.071   Carrier license
Surface Ambulance Services
   
124.080   Definitions
   
124.081   Grant of exclusive franchise
   
124.082   Ambulance service rates
Cross-references:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Airports, see
ch. 99
   Emergency vehicle warning device, see §
73.003
   Hospitals, see
ch. 114
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
   Public carrier stops and stands, see §§
77.063 through
77.065
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Traffic code, title VII
Statutory references:
   Authority to license, tax and regulate taxicab drivers, see SDCL 9-34-10
   Financial responsibility of vehicle owners and operators, see SDCL ch. 32-35
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 124.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUS or MOTORBUS. A motor vehicle for carrying of passengers with a seating
capacity of at least eight persons, not including the driver, and traveling a
prescribed route and carrying or accepting passengers for hire, but shall not
include funeral cars or ambulances.
   DIGITAL NETWORK. Any online-enabled application, software, website, or
system offered or utilized by a TNC that enables the prearrangement of rides
with TNC Drivers.
   DRIVER. One who actually engages in the driving of a vehicle for hire.
   LIMOUSINE. A full-size motor vehicle (automobile) with an extended wheel
base and which has a passenger compartment that can be sealed from the driver's
compartment, with a seating capacity for at least six persons, not including
the driver, not traveling any definite or prescribed route and operated by a
driver.
   LIVERY VEHICLE. An equine-type animal- drawn public passenger vehicle with
driver furnished and carrying or accepting passengers for hire.
   OPERATOR. A person engaged in business as an operator of a vehicle for hire.
   PARATRANSIT. A service provided for individuals with disabilities who are
unable to use fixed route systems.
   PASSENGER SERVICE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle for hire that carries passengers
for a fixed fee and by appointment.
   PERSONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is used by a TNC driver and is: owned,
leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the TNC driver; 10 model years or
newer; and not a taxicab, limousine, or vehicle for hire.
   PREARRANGED RIDE. The provision of transportation by a driver to a rider,
beginning when a driver accepts a ride requested by a rider through a digital
network controlled by a TNC, continuing while the driver transports a
requesting rider, and ending when the last requesting rider departs from the
personal vehicle. A PREARRANGED RIDE does not include transportation provided
by a vehicle for hire.
   SEATING CAPACITY. The number of persons, not including the driver, who can
be conveniently seated in a vehicle for hire without overdue crowding.
   STRETCHER TRANSPORT. A service providing nonemergency transport by stretcher
from licensed nursing home facilities to licensed hospitals, clinics, doctor
offices, hospice facilities, or home health care, or from licensed hospitals,
clinics, doctor offices, hospice facilities, or home health care to licensed
nursing homes when the person being transported presents written proof
authorizing the transport signed by the attending physician, registered nurse,
or licensed practical nurse, or when authorized by written standing orders.
   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle with business decals and/or markings that carries
passengers, with a seating capacity for seven persons or less, not including
the driver, not traveling any definite or prescribed route, operated by a
driver, and carrying or accepting passengers for hire, but shall not include
funeral cars or ambulances.
   TAXIMETER. Any instrument or device attached to a taxicab, and designed or
intended to measure mechanically the distance traveled by taxicab, to record
the time the taxicab is in waiting, and to indicate upon the record by figures
or designs the fare to be charged in dollars and cents.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY or TNC. An entity licensed pursuant to this
chapter that uses a digital network to connect passengers to transportation
network company services provided by transportation network company drivers. A
TNC shall not be deemed to control, direct or manage the personal vehicles or
TNC drivers, except where agreed to by written contract.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER or TNC DRIVER. An individual who
operates a personal vehicle who:
   (a)   Receives connections to potential passengers and related services from
a TNC in exchange for payment of a fee to the TNC; and
   (b)   Uses a personal vehicle to offer or provide a prearranged ride to
riders upon connection through a digital network controlled by a transportation
network company in return for compensation or payment of a fee.
   VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Any vehicle licensed under this chapter, including, but
not limited to, bus or motorbus, taxicab, wheelchair transport, limousine,
passenger service vehicle, and livery vehicle not including a personal vehicle
operated by a TNC driver.
   WHEELCHAIR, PARATRANSIT, AND STRETCHER TRANSPORT. A motor vehicle for
carrying wheelchair, paratransit, and stretcher passengers and their
accompanying guests or caregivers, with a seating capacity for 12 persons or
less, not including the driver, not traveling any definite or prescribed route
operated by a driver, and carrying or accepting wheelchair, paratransit, or
stretcher passengers and their accompanying guests or caregivers for hire, but
shall not include licensed ambulance services. The vehicles shall be equipped
with straps to secure wheelchairs and stretchers and in the case of stretchers
arranged so that the head of the passenger is visible to the driver.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.701; 1992 Code, § 43-1) (Ord. 42-74, passed 8-5-1974;
Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 36-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 137-98, passed
12-21-1998; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord.
45-18, passed 5-8-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 124.002 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   No vehicle for hire shall be operated in the city until it has been
thoroughly and carefully tested and inspected and found to be in a safe
condition for the transportation of passengers, and clean, fit, of good
appearance and in compliance with all other applicable state and federal motor
vehicle laws and standards.
(1992 Code, § 43-2) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-
1998)
§ 124.003 FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION.
   The owner of each vehicle for hire shall conduct thorough, periodic
inspections of each vehicle. The inspections must be conducted at least once
every three months or every 3,000 odometer miles, whichever occurs first.
Periodic inspections shall be governed by the city’s vehicle for hire
inspection form, which shall be available on the city website and the licensing
specialist office. The owner shall keep the completed vehicle for hire
inspection forms for up to 24 months for all vehicles regardless of ownership
status, which shall be completed and signed. Falsification of the vehicle for
hire inspection forms is prohibited and may result in suspension and/or
revocation of license. The records shall be open to the city for inspection at
the primary business location and subject vehicle. The city may inspect the
vehicles at any time to determine compliance with applicable state and federal
motor vehicle laws and standards.
(1992 Code, § 43-3) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-
1998; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.004 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN BUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke a cigar, pipe, cigarette or
other device or to carry any lighted cigar, pipe, cigarette or other device
within or on any bus licensed under this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 43-5) (Ord. 9-72, passed 3-6-1972; Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 124.005 TAXICAB RATES.
   (a)   Posted fare schedule. There must be a sign that is highly visible to
the passenger(s) showing the actual rate of fare and minimum amount charged by
the taxicab that is conspicuously displayed in the passenger compartments of
the taxicab. The licensing specialist shall prescribe the format of the posted
schedule.
   (b)   Receipt for payment of rates. If requested by the passenger, the
driver shall provide a receipt containing date, business name, vehicle for hire
license number, distance traveled, fare total, sales tax, and total payment.
   (c)   Overcharging. No person shall charge, or attempt to charge, a
passenger of a taxicab a higher rate of fare than is specified on the posted
fare schedule.
   (d)   Deceit as to direct route. No person owning or driving or operating a
vehicle for hire shall deceive by trick or device any passenger who may ride in
any such motor vehicle or who may desire to ride in any such motor vehicle as
to his or her destination or the fare allowed under this section for such
person, or shall convey such person or cause him or her to be conveyed to a
place other than that directed by him or her, or in any other manner convey
such person to the place directed by him or her except by the shortest and most
direct route unless directed to take a different route by the passenger.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.712; 1992 Code, § 43-6) (Ord. 2637, passed 9-22-1969;
Ord. 99-73, passed 11-19-1973; Ord. 68-75, passed 10-6-1975; Ord. 48-77, passed
6-27-1977; Ord. 120-78, passed 12-18-1978; Ord. 68-79, passed 7-23-1979; Ord.
90-80, passed 9-29-1980; Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 138-84, passed 11-
13-1984; Ord. 55-89, passed 6-12-1989; Ord. 96-91, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 114-
94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 2-97, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 28-98, passed 3-2-1998;
Ord. 17-00, passed 3-13-2000; Ord. 33-02, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 142-07, passed
8-20-2007; Ord. 163-07, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 67-09, passed 7-13-2009; Ord.
77-09, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 74-14, passed 10-14-
2014; Ord. 108-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 124.006 TAXICAB BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS.
   Each business operating as a taxicab shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
   (a)   Meet all applicable ordinance regulations.
   (b)   Activity log. Each taxicab business must keep a daily activity log
listing the total fare, date, time, trip origination and destination address of
each trip. The activity log must be available for inspection by and upon the
request of the city. The logs must be maintained by the taxicab business for a
period of one year.
   (c)   Fare schedule. Each taxicab business shall provide the city a copy of
their current fare schedule per §
124.005(a).
   (d)   Vehicle signs and markings. Each taxicab shall display on the outside
of a door on each side the business name, phone number, rate of fare and
minimum amount charged by the taxicab. The markings shall be affixed in letters
or figures at least two inches in height and in contrasting colors that are
highly visible to the public.
(Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 108-23,
passed 11-21-2023)
§ 124.007 [RESERVED].
§ 124.008 DRIVER PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or for any business to permit a driver
to operate a taxicab more than 12 hours out of every 24 hours. A driver shall
be deemed to be operating a taxicab within the terms of this section whenever
he or she is in charge of a taxicab or holding themselves in readiness to
convey passengers.
(Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 124.009 EQUIPMENT OF TAXIMETER.
   All taxicabs operated upon the streets shall be equipped with a taximeter
that complies with SDCL 37-21-6. The taximeter shall be fastened in front of
the passengers, visible to them at all times of the day and night, and, after
sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The city or their
designee is hereby authorized, either upon complaint of any person or without
such complaint, to inspect any taximeter, and upon discovery of an inaccuracy
beyond the tolerances allowed pursuant to SDCL 37-21-6, to notify the person
operating said taxicab to cease operation. The taxicab shall then be kept out
of service until the taximeter is repaired or replaced with another properly
functioning meter. Wheelchair transports are not required to be equipped with a
taximeter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.713; 1992 Code, § 43-7) (Ord. 42-74, passed 8-5-1974;
Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 74-14, passed
10-14-2014)
§ 124.010 USE OF TAXIMETER.
   (a)   When a taximeter is cleared, the indication "not registering,"
"vacant," or an equivalent expression shall be shown. Whenever a taximeter is
set to register charges, it shall indicate "registering," "hired," or an
equivalent expression and the rate at which it is set shall be automatically
indicated.
   (b)   When a taximeter is set for fare registration with the time mechanism
inoperative, it shall indicate "time not recording" or an equivalent
expression.
   (c)   Fare indications shall be identified by the word "fare" or by an
equivalent expression. Values shall be defined by suitable words or monetary
signs.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.714; 1992 Code, § 43-8) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 124.011 PASSENGER MUST PAY RATE PRESCRIBED.
   Pursuant to §
124.005, any person hiring or employing the use of a taxicab within the city
shall pay for transportation in the amount prescribed in the posted schedule.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.715; 1992 Code, § 43-9) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 124.012 TRANSIT AND PARATRANSIT FARES.
   Fares for Sioux Area Metro fixed-route service and paratransit service shall
be as follows:
Sioux Area Metro—fixed-route rates
     Adults                                             $1.50
   Book of ten tickets                                    $10.50
   Children 10 years and under (accompanied by adult)     Free
   Children 11-18 years of age (with School ID or Freedom Free
Pass***)
   Elderly (65 and over) and persons with disabilities    $0.75
   Monthly pass, adults                                   $30
   Monthly pass, elderly (65 and over) and persons with   $15
disabilities
   One-day pass, adults                                   $3
   One-day pass, elderly (65 and over) and persons with   $1.50
disabilities
   One-week pass, adults                                  $12.50
   One-week pass, elderly (65 and over) and persons with  $6.25
disabilities
   Other rates                                             
      Veterans                                         Free
      *College pass                                    $0.85 per ride
      Pass-it-on bus pass                              Free
      Replacement of reloadable fare card              $5
      Special promotions/marketing                     Negotiated
      Ten-year pass (fixed route)                      $3,600
Sioux Area Metro—paratransit rates **
   Trip rate                                              $2.50
Trip rate with School ID or Freedom Pass***                  Free
 
*   College passes allow all people with student/staff IDs to ride unlimited
with an approved agreement between the college and Sioux Area Metro. The
college pays the agreement amount based upon the previous semester’s ridership
or no less than 500 rides ($425).
**   Revenue generated from this ordinance will be used exclusively for
paratransit.
***   A SAM Freedom Pass can be issued in lieu of a school ID when a record of
enrollment from an accredited high school or verification of age 18 or under is
provided.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.721; 1992 Code, § 43-10) (Ord. 2594, passed 3-3-1969;
Ord. 2610, passed 6-9-1969; Ord. 9-72, passed 3-6-1972; Ord. 96-76, passed 11-
22-1976; Ord. 87-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord. 31-81, passed 4-6-1981; Ord. 84-
82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 105-95, passed 8-7-1995; Ord. 83-97, passed 11-17-
1997; Ord. 47-10, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 50-11, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. 24-14,
passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 74-15, passed 8-4-2015; Ord. 14-16, passed 2-16-2016;
Ord. 35-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 116- 16, passed 12-20-2016; Ord. 81-22,
passed 8-2-2022)
§ 124.013 WHEELCHAIR AND STRETCHER TRANSPORT RATES.
   (a)   Activity log. Each wheelchair and stretcher transport must keep a
daily activity log listing the total fare, date, time, trip origination and
destination address of each trip. The activity log must be available for
inspection by and upon the request of the city. The logs must be maintained by
the wheelchair and stretcher transport business for a period of one year.
   (b)   Posted fare schedule. There must be a sign that is highly visible to
the passenger(s) showing the actual rate of fare and minimum amount charged by
the wheelchair and stretcher transport that is conspicuously displayed in the
passenger compartments of the wheelchair and stretcher transport. The licensing
specialist shall prescribe the format of the posted schedule. Each wheelchair
and stretcher transport business shall provide the city a copy of their current
fare schedule per this section.
(1992 Code, § 43-11) (Ord. 42-74, passed 8-5-1974; Ord. 46-77, passed 6-20-
1977; Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 147-84, passed 12-3-1984; Ord. 137-98,
passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 48-99, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 36-10, passed 4-12-2010;
Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 124.014 LIVERY VEHICLE OPERATION.
   (a)   A livery vehicle shall not cruise in search of patronage.
   (b)   Every livery vehicle placed or driven anywhere in the city, whether in
motion or at rest, during the period from sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise or when streetlights are on shall display at the rear thereof a red
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
   (c)   Every equine-type animal used to pull a livery vehicle within the city
must be equipped with a manure collection device to prevent deposit of manure
on streets or other places within the city. The manure must be disposed of in a
proper manner so as not to create a public nuisance under §
92.071(e) of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 43-14) (Ord. 36-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-
2014)
§ 124.015 IDENTIFICATION AND VETERINARIAN CERTIFICATE FOR ANIMAL USED TO PULL
LIVERY VEHICLES.
   Requirements for equine-type animals used with livery vehicles shall be as
follows.
   (a)   Before any animal is brought into service by the license holder, the
license holder shall assign a different number to each animal which the license
holder intends to use and shall securely fix the number assigned to each animal
and the assigned number will remain on the animal to which it is assigned at
all times as a positive means of identification which may be safely read at a
distance of not less than three feet by a person with normal eyesight without
touching the animal, and the number shall be used to identify each animal in
all reports required by this section.
   (b)    Before any animal is brought into service by the license holder, the
license holder shall have it examined by a licensed veterinarian, who shall
certify in writing that the animal is suited for the use intended by the
license holder. The certification shall identify the animal by the number
provided for in division (a) above, by name, and by physical description. A
veterinarian certificate shall be filed with each license application.
(1992 Code, § 43-15) (Ord. 36-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-
2014)
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
ch. 90
§ 124.016 QUALIFICATIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY BUSINESS.
   (a)   No street hails. A TNC driver shall not solicit or accept street
hails.
   (b)   No cash trips. The TNC shall adopt a policy prohibiting solicitation
or acceptance of cash payments or other compensation directly from passengers
and notify TNC drivers of such policy. TNC drivers shall not solicit or accept
cash payments or other compensation for a fare directly from passengers. Any
payment for TNC services shall be made only electronically using the TNC’s
digital network or software application. This provision shall not be construed
to prohibit passengers from making a voluntary cash tip payment directly to the
TNC driver.
   (c)   Fare collected for services. On behalf of a TNC driver, a TNC may
charge a fare for the services provided to passengers; provided that, if a fare
is collected from a passenger, the TNC shall disclose to passengers the fare
calculation method on its website or within the software application service.
The TNC shall also provide passengers with the applicable rates being charged
and the option to receive an estimated fare before the passenger enters the TNC
driver's vehicle.
   (d)   Identification of TNC vehicles and drivers.  The TNC's software
application or website shall display a picture of the TNC driver, and the
license plate number of the motor vehicle utilized for providing the TNC
service before the passenger enters the TNC driver's vehicle.
   (e)    Electronic receipt. Within a reasonable period of time following the
completion of a trip, a TNC shall transmit an electronic receipt to the
passenger on behalf of the TNC driver that lists:
      (1)    The origin and destination of the trip;
      (2)    The total time and distance of the trip; and
      (3)    An itemization of the total fare paid, if any.
   (f)   Records. A TNC shall maintain the following records:
      (1)    Individual trip records of passenger customers for at least one
year from the date each trip was provided; and
      (2)    Individual records of TNC driver customers at least until the one
year anniversary of the date on which a TNC driver's customer relationship with
the TNC has ended.
   (g)    Record inspection authority.
      (1)   The city has the authority to inspect the records of the TNC as
necessary to investigate an alleged crime or violation of this chapter;
accident involving a TNC driver; or for other good cause. The TNC shall
cooperate with the city to facilitate the exchange of relevant information
required in an investigation. The city shall provide advance written notice at
least seven days prior to any inspection, which shall be conducted at a
mutually agreed upon third-party location, or pursuant to court order, grand
jury, or investigative subpoena.
      (2)   Any record or information made available by the TNC to the city
pursuant to this chapter is confidential and proprietary, and shall not be made
public without TNC's express written permission. If the city is required to
disclose confidential information under court order or other applicable law,
the city shall promptly notify the TNC of such requirement, prior to
disclosure, and shall make diligent efforts to limit disclosure pursuant to any
available basis in South Dakota open records law or other applicable law.
(Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 44-18, passed 5-8-2018)
LICENSE; GENERALLY
§ 124.025 REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a vehicle for hire upon
the streets or act as a driver of any vehicle for hire without a license to do
so.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.702; 1992 Code, § 43-21) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
Cross-reference:
   License fee for vehicles for hire, see §
110.026
§ 124.026 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 43-22) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
§ 124.027 DETERMINATION OF ENGAGING IN BUSINESS.
   Any person shall be deemed to have engaged in the business of operating a
vehicle for hire if he or she keeps or maintains any vehicle for the purpose of
engaging in a vehicle for hire business or if he or she accepts or permits any
employee to accept any money or other thing of value from any passenger for
transportation in a vehicle. Accepting a passenger under the guise that the
transportation is purely gratuitous and that no payment of compensation or
consideration is required shall not be deemed to remove the transaction from
the effect of this subchapter. In any case where the driver or any person in
charge of any vehicle does in fact accept any money or other thing of value,
even though the money or thing of value is accepted or purported to be accepted
as a gift or present or purported gift or present, the gift or present, or the
purported gift or present, shall constitute prima facie evidence of an intent
to accept compensation or hire for transportation.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.703; 1992 Code, § 43-23) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
§ 124.028 VEHICLE FOR HIRE APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring a license to engage in a vehicle for hire business in
the city shall complete an approved application, which shall include
information required by the city. This application will be available in the
city's licensing specialist office and shall include the following:
   (a)   Previous experience in a motor vehicle transportation business if
applicable;
   (b)   A description of the motor vehicle proposed to be operated, including
the seating capacity, the make, model, year, vehicle identification number
(VIN), and commercial license plate number; and
   (c)   Any information deemed necessary by the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.704; 1992 Code, § 43-24) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 139-08, passed 12-1-2008; Ord. 36-10,
passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015;
Ord. 108-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 124.029 VEHICLE FOR HIRE ISSUANCE.
   The city shall grant a vehicle for hire business license if satisfied that
the applicant has complied with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter
and if the evidence submitted in support of the application meets the
conditions precedent to granting the license. A license decal issued by the
city shall be permanently affixed to the lower left corner of the rear window
of each vehicle for hire. The decal shall be visible at all times. A business
license shall not be issued until:
   (a)   The vehicle for hire is in compliance with SDCL 32-9 Commercial Motor
Vehicle Certificates.
   (b)   The city has determined that the applicant is in compliance with city
ordinance.
   (c)   The applicant provides proof of sales tax license.
   (d)   The applicant is in good standing with the Department of Labor.
   (e)   All drivers are licensed per this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.709; 1992 Code, § 43-25) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 74-14,
passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.030 APPLICATION FOR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY AND ISSUANCE.
   (a)   A person shall not operate a TNC in Sioux Falls without first having
obtained a license from the city licensing specialist. The city shall grant a
business license if satisfied that the applicant has complied with all of the
terms and provisions of this chapter and if the evidence submitted in support
of the application meets the conditions precedent to granting the license.
   (b)   The City Licensing Specialist shall issue a license to each applicant
that meets the requirements for a TNC set forth in this chapter, and pays an
annual permit fee of $1,500 to the city. A licensing year, for the purposes of
this section, begins February 1 and ends January 31 of the next year.
   (c)   The application shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Trade name if any under which the license is to be exercised;
      (3)   If a partnership, the name and address of each partner;
      (4)   If a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers;
      (5)   Description of the activity to be carried on under the license;
      (6)   The name and contact information for an agent to be maintained for
service of process in the State of South Dakota.
      (7)   The applicant provides proof of sales tax license if applicable.
   (d)   On a monthly basis, a TNC shall submit to the city a list of driver's
license numbers and state of issuance for each active driver.
(Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.031 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   Any license issued under this subchapter may be suspended or revoked
by the licensing specialist for the violation by the licensee of any applicable
provision of city ordinance, state or federal law, rule or regulation, or for
other good cause. The licensee may appeal through the procedures established by
the administrative code provisions of this code according to the procedure set
forth in § 30.040.
   (b)   If the licensing specialist finds good cause to suspend or revoke a
business license, the licensing specialist may take immediate action to suspend
or revoke the business license. A license suspension shall be temporary in
nature and the terms of any suspension shall be specified at the time of
issuance; however, if no other time period is specified for a license
suspension, the suspension shall be deemed in effect for the initial maximum
time period of 90 days. The suspension period may be reviewed and increased by
up to 90-day increments if there is a valid reason for the extension. However,
a total period of suspension shall not exceed one year under any circumstances.
The business shall be informed of any temporary suspension or extension(s) of
the suspension period. A business shall have the right to appeal any
suspension, extension of a suspension, or revocation pursuant to the provisions
of this code. Any circumstances or events that lead to a license suspension
herein can similarly amount to good cause for a license revocation. A
revocation may be ordered immediately without a suspension or at any time
during or after a suspension.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.711; 1992 Code, § 43-26) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 36-10,
passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.032 APPLICATION TO INCREASE NUMBER OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   Any person to whom a license to operate vehicles for hire has been granted
may increase the number of vehicles authorized by making application to the
city’s licensing specialist describing the additional vehicles which he or she
proposes to operate by original application.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.716; 1992 Code, § 43-27) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 36-10, passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 24-14,
passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 108-23, passed 11-21-
2023)
§ 124.033 TRANSFER.
   No license decal for a taxicab, limousine or wheelchair, paratransit or
stretcher transport may be transferred from one vehicle to another. Any license
holder of a vehicle which is no longer in use as a vehicle for hire must either
surrender or destroy the vehicle license decal. A public vehicle business
license may only be transferred from one owner to another, upon review and
approval by the city.
(1992 Code, § 43-28) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-
1998; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.034 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   (a)    Any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
expire on January 31 in the licensing year for which the license was issued.
Upon the expiration of the license, the owner shall remove the license to
operate vehicles for hire from the vehicle and remove all markings from the
exterior of the vehicle.
   (b)    A licensing year, for the purposes of this section, begins February 1
and ends January 31 of the next year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.720; 1992 Code, § 43-29) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
LICENSES; FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
§ 124.045 INSURANCE REQUIRED - VEHICLE FOR HIRE.
   Before any vehicle for hire license is granted, or any preexisting license
renewed under this subchapter, the applicant shall file with the city's
licensing specialist a certificate or policy of insurance issued by a
responsible insurer covering the vehicles to be operated by the applicant. The
applicant shall list the city as an additional insured.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.706; 1992 Code, § 43-34) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 36-83, passed 6-6-1983; Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 36-10, passed
4-12-2010; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.046 MINIMUM LIMITS OF COVERAGE.
   (a)   (1)   The liability insurance required by this division (a) for a
vehicle for hire shall provide at least the following coverage:
         A.    Auto liability of comprehensive form shall be provided on all
vehicles of not less than $500,000 bodily injury and property damage combined
single limit.
         B.    The policy or certificate shall not be modified or canceled
without 30 days' actual notice to the city's licensing specialist.
         C.   The cancellation or other termination of any required insurance
policy shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued for the
business, independent contractors, and the vehicles covered by such insurance
policy(ies), unless another policy(ies), complying with this section, shall be
provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
      (2)    The limits established in this division (a) can be provided on one
policy or base policy in combination with excess limits policy in a manner and
combination acceptable to the city.
   (b)   The coverage shall be continuing, notwithstanding any recovery or
settlement thereunder.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.706; 1992 Code, § 43-35) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 33-02, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 140-06,
passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 36-10, passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014;
Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.047 BOND.
   In lieu of the policy or certificate of liability insurance required by this
subchapter, the applicant for a license required by this subchapter may furnish
a corporate surety bond, issued by a surety company authorized to do business
in the state if it meets the requirements of this subchapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.706; 1992 Code, § 43-37) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
§ 124.048 APPROVAL.
   The policy, or certificate, of liability insurance or bond required by this
subchapter shall be approved by the city’s licensing specialist prior to
issuance of the license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 7.1205; 1992 Code, § 43-38) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 140-06, passed 10-16-2006; Ord. 36-10, passed 4-12-2010)
§ 124.049 INSURANCE REQUIRED - TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY.
   (a)   Financial responsibility of transportation network companies. A
transportation network company driver or transportation network company on the
driver's behalf shall maintain primary automobile insurance that:
      (1)   Recognizes that the driver is a transportation network company
driver or otherwise uses a vehicle to transport passengers for compensation and
covers the driver:
         A.   While the driver is logged on to the transportation network
company's digital network; or
         B.   While the driver is engaged in a prearranged ride.
      (2)   The following automobile insurance requirements shall apply while a
participating transportation network company driver is logged on to the
transportation network company's digital network and is available to receive
transportation requests but is not engaged in a prearranged ride:
         A.   Primary automobile liability insurance in the amount of at least
$50,000 for death and bodily injury per person, $100,000 for death and bodily
injury per incident, and $25,000 for property damage.
         B.   Uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage at the minimum
limits required by SDCL § 58-11-9.4.
         C.   The coverage requirements of this division may be satisfied by
any of the following:
            1.   Automobile insurance maintained by the transportation network
company driver; or
            2.   Automobile insurance maintained by the transportation network
company; or
            3.   Any combination of subparagraphs (1) and (2).
      (3)   The following automobile insurance requirements shall apply while a
transportation network company driver is engaged in a prearranged ride:
         A.   Primary automobile liability insurance that provides at least
$1,000,000 for death, bodily injury and property damage;
         B.   Uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage at the minimum
limits required by SDCL § 58-11-9.4.
         C.   The coverage requirements of this subsection may be satisfied by
any of the following:
            1.   Automobile insurance maintained by the transportation network
company driver; or
            2.   Automobile insurance maintained by the transportation network
company; or
            3.   Any combination of subparagraphs (2) and (3).
      (4)   If insurance maintained by driver in division (a) has lapsed or
does not provide the required coverage, insurance maintained by a
transportation network company shall provide the coverage required by division
(a) beginning with the first dollar of a claim and have the duty to defend such
claim.
      (5)   Coverage under an automobile insurance policy maintained by the
transportation network company shall not be dependent on a personal automobile
insurer first denying a claim nor shall a personal automobile insurance policy
be required to first deny a claim.
      (6)   Insurance required by division (a) may be placed with an insurer
licensed in the state or with a surplus lines insurer eligible under Chapter
58-32 of the South Dakota Insurance Code.
      (7)   A transportation network company driver shall carry physical or
digital proof of coverage satisfying division (a) with him or her at all times
during his or her use of a vehicle in connection with a transportation network
company's digital network. In the event of an accident, a transportation
network company driver shall provide this insurance coverage information to the
directly interested parties, automobile insurers and investigating police
officers, upon request pursuant to Chapter 32-35 of the South Dakota Insurance
Code. Upon such request, a transportation network company driver shall also
disclose to directly interested parties, automobile insurers, and investigating
police officers, whether he or she was logged on to the transportation network
company's digital network or on a prearranged ride at the time of an accident.
      (8)   In a claims coverage investigation, transportation network
companies shall cooperate to facilitate the exchange of relevant information
with directly involved parties and any insurer of the transportation network
company driver if applicable, including the precise times that a transportation
network company driver logged on and off of the transportation network
company's digital network in the 12 hour period immediately preceding and in
the 12 hour period immediately following the accident and disclose to one
another a clear description of the coverage, exclusions and limits provided
under any automobile insurance maintained under division (a).
   (b)   A TNC automobile insurance policy shall not be modified or canceled
without 30 days' actual notice to the city's licensing specialist.
   (c)   The cancellation or other termination of any required automobile
insurance policy shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued
for the TNC, unless another policy(ies), complying with this section, shall be
provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
(Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
DRIVERS
§ 124.060 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or for any business to permit a driver
to operate a vehicle for hire for the conveyance of passengers without first
obtaining a license as the driver. Transportation network company drivers shall
not be required to obtain a license from the city. If a TNC driver meets the
requirements of this chapter, a TNC may allow access for that TNC driver to the
TNC's digital network.
(1992 Code, § 43-49) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-
2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
Cross-reference:
   License fee for driver of vehicle for hire, see §
110.032
§ 124.061 APPLICATION FOR DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Each applicant for a vehicle for hire driver's license must comply with the
following:
   (a)   Be of the age of 18 years or over.
   (b)   Be not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs.
   (c)   Make a sworn statement on a form approved by the city giving his or
her full name, residences during the last 10 years, length of time he or she
has resided in the city, place of previous employment, whether he or she has
ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and whether he or she has been
previously licensed as a driver, and if so, where and when, and whether his or
her license has ever been revoked, and for what cause, and provide any other
information required by the city.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.707; 1992 Code, § 43-50) (Ord. 10-72, passed 3-6-1972;
Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 124.062 INVESTIGATION, EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.
   (a)   The application for a driver's license for a vehicle for hire shall be
investigated by the police chief or his or her designee. No license shall be
granted to any person:
      (1)   Who does not possess a valid driver's license.
      (2)   Who has been convicted for a sex crime as defined by SDCL 22-24b-
1 or any indecent exposure for which they are still subject to registration
requirements.
      (3)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years for all other indecent exposure
(Class 1 misdemeanor).
      (4)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last ten years of application for a crime of
violence as defined by SDCL 22-1-2(9).
      (5)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years of application for a felony
possession/distribution of controlled substances.
      (6)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within one year of application for a simple assault.
      (7)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within the last five years of application for a felony
driving or control of vehicle with alcohol in blood or while under influence of
alcohol, drug, or intoxicant.
      (8)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within two years of application for any driving or control
of vehicle with alcohol in blood or while under influence of alcohol, drug, or
intoxicant.
      (9)   Who has a conviction or date of discharge from prison, jail,
probation, or parole within two years of application for a hit/run or leaving
the scene.
      (10)   For any good cause.
   (b)   Convictions in other states considered. Any conviction for an offense
in another state which, if committed in this state, would be a violation of one
of the offenses listed in subsection (a) shall be used to determine if
applicant is eligible for a license.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.707; 1992 Code, § 43-51) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 137-98, passed 12-21-1998; Ord. 19-01, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 24-14, passed
4-15-2014)
§ 124.063 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensed driver of a vehicle for hire shall exhibit his or her license
in the vehicle. The license shall be conspicuously displayed and contain a
photograph of the licensee.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 8.707; 1992 Code, § 43-53) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 124.064 BUSINESS LICENSE INAPPLICABLE.
   The issuance of a business license under the provisions of this chapter
shall not constitute nor allow or permit the business licensee to operate a
taxicab without a driver’s license as required by this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 43-54) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
§ 124.065 TEMPORARY PERMIT.
   In any emergency, the police chief may issue a temporary permit in writing
to a person not licensed under the provisions of this subchapter to drive a
vehicle for hire for a temporary, but definite, period of time.
(1992 Code, § 43-55) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982)
§ 124.066 TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Before allowing an individual to accept trip requests through a TNC's
digital platform:
      (1)   The individual shall submit an application to the TNC, which
includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's license,
driving history, motor vehicle registration for vehicle ten model years or
newer, automobile liability insurance, and other information required by the
TNC;
      (2)   The TNC shall have a third party conduct, a local and national
criminal background check for each applicant that shall include:
         A.    Multi-State/Multi-Jurisdiction Criminal Records Locator or other
similar commercial nationwide database with validation (primary source search);
and
         B.   National Sex Offender Registry database;
      (3)   The TNC shall obtain, and review, a driving history research report
for such individual.
   (b)   The TNC shall not permit an individual to act as a TNC driver on its
digital platform who:
      (1)   Has had more than three traffic offenses in the prior three-year
period, or one major violation in the prior three-year period (including, but
not limited to, attempting to elude the police, reckless driving, hit/run or
leaving the scene, or driving on a suspended or revoked license);
      (2)   Has been convicted, within the past seven years, of driving under
the influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, indecent exposure
(Class 1 misdemeanor), use of a motor vehicle to commit a felony, a crime
involving property damage, and/or theft, crimes of violence, felony possession/
distribution of controlled substances or acts of terror;
      (3)   Is a match in the National Sex Offender Registry database;
      (4)   Does not possess a valid driver's license;
      (5)   Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle(s)
used to provide TNC services;
      (6)   Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the
motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC services; or
      (7)   Is not at least 18 years of age.
   (c)   The TNC shall prohibit the use or influence of drugs or alcohol by a
driver while providing TNC services requested through the TNC's digital
platform. If a TNC receives a complaint of such drug or alcohol influence or
other activity prohibited in §
124.066, the TNC shall:
      (1)   Immediately revoke the driver's access to the TNC's digital
platform until the duration of the investigation; and
      (2)   If the complaint is found to be true, the TNC shall permanently
revoke the driver's license access to the TNC's digital platform. If the
complaint is found to be untrue, the driver's access to the TNC's digital
platform may be immediately reinstalled.
(Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.067 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any license or temporary permit issued under this subchapter may be
suspended or revoked by the police chief or his or her designee for the
violation by the licensee or permittee of any applicable provision of city
ordinance, state or federal law, rule or regulation, or for other good cause.
The licensee may appeal through the procedures established by the
administrative code provisions of this code according to the procedure set
forth in §
30.040.
   If the police chief or his or her designee finds good cause to suspend or
revoke a driver's license, the police chief or his or her designee may take
immediate action to suspend or revoke the driver's license. A license
suspension shall be temporary in nature and the terms of any suspension shall
be specified at the time of issuance; however, if no other time period is
specified for a license suspension, the suspension shall be deemed in effect
for the initial maximum time period of 90 days. The suspension period may be
reviewed and increased by up to 90-day increments if there is a valid reason
for the extension. However, a total period of suspension shall not exceed one
year under any circumstances. The driver shall be informed of any temporary
suspension or extension(s) of the suspension period. A driver shall have the
right to appeal any suspension, extension of a suspension, or revocation
pursuant to the provisions of this code. Any circumstances or events that lead
to a license suspension herein can similarly amount to good cause for a license
revocation. A revocation may be ordered immediately without a suspension or at
any time during or after a suspension.
(1992 Code, § 43-56) (Ord. 84-82, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 24-14, passed 4-15-
2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 124.070 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for hire business to sell or serve or
to allow the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages to passengers without first
obtaining a carrier license pursuant to SDCL 35-4-2(9). A carrier license shall
not be issued to a TNC or TNC driver.
(Ord. 74-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 108-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 124.071 CARRIER LICENSE.
   Pursuant to SDCL 35-4-2 and 35-4-2.12, a carrier's licensee must comply with
the following:
   (a)   The driver and server must be at least 21 years of age.
   (b)   Alcoholic beverage, open or closed, shall not be accessible to the
driver while he/she is seated in the driver’s seat of the vehicle.
   (c)   An approved security management plan shall be required and address
operational issues including, but not limited to, employee training,
supervision of customers, and enforcement of age-restrictive product sales. If
the conditions of the management plan are violated, the city may suspend or
revoke the business license under §
124.031.
(Ord. 74-14, passed 10-14-2014)
SURFACE AMBULANCE SERVICES
§ 124.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association or other
business entity.
   SURFACE AMBULANCE SERVICE. Any transportation service for hire which is
required to be licensed by SDCL ch. 34-11 and which utilizes authorized
emergency vehicles.
(1992 Code, § 43-60) (Ord. 33-83, passed 5-16-1983)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
§ 124.081 GRANT OF EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
   The city shall grant an exclusive franchise for providing ground ambulance
transport services within the city as the official policy and regulatory scheme
of the city for ground ambulance services.
(1992 Code, § 43-61) (Ord. 33-83, passed 5-16-1983; Ord. 74-07, passed 5-21-
2007)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
§ 124.082 AMBULANCE SERVICE RATES.
   Per franchise agreement, rate references within this subchapter shall be
adjusted annually by the city council through ordinance and remain on file in
the office of the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 43-68) (Ord. 33-83, passed 5-16-1983; Ord. 50-97, passed 7-7-
1997; Ord. 118-99, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 31-00, passed 4-10-2000; Ord. 109-00,
passed 12-22-2000; Ord. 7-03, passed 1-21-2003; Ord. 15-05, passed 2-14-2005;
Ord. 74-07, passed 5-21-2007)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
   
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
   
133.   WEAPONS
   
134.   MINORS
   
135.   LASER POINTERS
   
136.   PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.001   Parties to crimes
   
130.002   Assaulting officers
   
130.003   Definitions
   
130.004   Indecency
   
130.005   Keeping discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or airtight containers
declared nuisance
   
130.006   Railroad trains blocking street
   
130.007   Prohibition on certain forms of solicitation
   
130.008   Weights and measures
   
130.009   Delay, obstruction or resistance of public officer
   
130.010   Smoking in city-owned buildings
   
130.011   Being in or on water illegal
 
   
130.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Noise control, see §§
93.001 through
93.011
   Permit for parade or assembly required, see §
96.181
Statutory reference:
   Crimes, see SDCL title 22
   Law enforcement, see SDCL title 23
§ 130.001 PARTIES TO CRIMES.
   All persons concerned in the commission of any offense against the city,
whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense or aid and abet
in its commission, though not present, shall be deemed guilty as a principal in
that unlawful act.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 16.301; 1992 Code, § 26-1) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Parties to crimes, see SDCL ch. 22-3
§ 130.002 ASSAULTING OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault or strike any officer of the
city when the officer is in the discharge of his or her duty.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.207; 1992 Code, § 26-2) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Assaults and personal injuries, see SDCL ch. 22-18
§ 130.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ULTIMATE FIGHTING. Any activity, regardless of how named or described, which
involves any scheduled, sponsored or permitted physical exhibition or contest
involving two or more persons engaged in fighting. This shall include any
contest or event where kicking, punching, martial arts or submission holds are
permitted, but shall not include contest of only wrestling or boxing sanctioned
by law, or any school events or competitions, or any martial arts training or
contests governed and sponsored by schools of martial arts.
(1992 Code, § 26-3) (Ord. 87-05, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 130.004 INDECENCY.
   No person shall expose her breasts, his or her genitals, anus or pubic area
under circumstances in which the person knows or reasonably should know that
the conduct is likely to cause annoyance or alarm, nor shall any person urinate
or defecate in any public place other than at facilities provided for that
purpose.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.210; 1992 Code, § 26-6) (Ord. 16-87, passed 3-30-1987)
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Indecent exposure, see SDCL 22-24-1.2
§ 130.005 KEEPING DISCARDED ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS OR AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS
DECLARED NUISANCE.
   The keeping of any discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight
container is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and the nuisance
shall be abated as provided by state law and the abatement of the nuisance
shall not, in any manner, affect any penalty which may be imposed for the
violation of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 26-10) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Remedies against nuisances, see SDCL ch. 21-10
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 34-28-3
§ 130.006 RAILROAD TRAINS BLOCKING STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any
railroad train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the train or car
in a manner as to prevent unnecessarily the use of any street for purposes of
travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this section
shall not apply to trains or cars in continuous motion.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 13.146; 1992 Code, § 26-11) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.007 PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN FORMS OF SOLICITATION.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE MANNER.
         A.   Approaching or speaking to a person before, during, or after
soliciting if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear bodily harm to oneself or another, or damage to or loss of
property or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value.
         B.   Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a
negative response to the soliciting.
         C.   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another
person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting.
         D.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free
passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing
a pedestrian or vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.
         E.   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited.
         F.   Following the person being solicited.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A place where a governmental entity has title, to which the
public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited
to any street, highway, parking lot, school, place of amusement, park, or
playground.
      SOLICITING. Asking for money, objects of value, or soliciting the sale of
goods or services with the intention that the money or object be transferred,
the goods sold, or services rendered immediately at that time, and at that
place. Soliciting shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word,
bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an
immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of
goods or services.
   (b)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public
place.
      (2)   No person shall solicit on private property without first having
obtained the permission of the owner or other person lawfully in possession of
the property.
      (3)   No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor
vehicle while the vehicle is in motion or part of traffic on a street or
highway. This prohibition shall not include the advertisement of the sale of
goods or services to be accomplished when the vehicle is no longer on a public
street or highway.
      (4)   No person shall solicit by stating that funds are needed to meet a
specific need, when the solicitor does not intend to use the funds to meet that
need or does not have that need.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.204; 1992 Code, § 26-13) (Ord. 86-80, passed 9-22-1980;
Ord. 78-12, passed 10-16-2012) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.008 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or expose for sale, sell,
use in buying or selling of any commodity or thing, or for hire or reward, or
retain in his or her possession a false weight or measure or measuring or
weighing device, or any weight or measure or weighing or measuring device which
has not been sealed as provided by state statutes.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer or expose for
sale less than the quantity or measurement he or she represents.
   (c)   The health officer and the sanitary officer and their deputies and
assistants and any other person specially appointed for that purpose by the
city council are authorized and empowered to inspect and test all weights and
measures and weighing and measuring devices kept, offered or exposed for sale,
sold or used by any person in proving or ascertaining the size, quantity,
extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles of
distribution or consumption purchased or offered or submitted by the person for
sale, hire or reward.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.1106; 1992 Code, § 26-14) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of weights and measures standards, see SDCL ch. 37-21
   Standard weights and measures, see SDCL ch. 37-20
§ 130.009 DELAY, OBSTRUCTION OR RESISTANCE OF PUBLIC OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully delay, obstruct or resist
any public officer in the discharge or attempt to discharge any duty of his or
her office.
(1992 Code, § 26-16) (Ord. 83-73, passed 10-8-1973) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.010 SMOKING IN CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS.
   No person shall smoke in any city-owned building.
(1992 Code, § 26-17) (Ord. 72-91, passed 9-30-1991; Ord. 55-94, passed 6-20-
1994; Ord. 29-99, passed 3-15-1999) Penalty, see §
130.999
Cross-reference:
   Tobacco-Free Policy, see §§
92.210 through
92.212
Statutory reference:
   Smoking in certain places, see SDCL 34-46-14
§ 130.011 BEING IN OR ON WATER ILLEGAL.
   If the governor, or the governor’s designee, has declared an emergency or
disaster and controlled the movement of persons in or upon the Big Sioux River
and its tributaries, no person shall be in or upon the waters thereof without
the express consent of an emergency official.
(1992 Code, § 26-18) (Ord. 18-97, passed 3-27-1997; Ord. 54-12, passed 7-17-
2012) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.999.
   (b)   Any person convicted of violating §
130.011 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned in the county jail not
longer than 30 days, or shall receive both a fine and imprisonment. In
addition, a civil penalty for the cost of the person’s removal or rescue from
the water shall be assessed by the court.
(1992 Code, § 26-18) (Ord. 18-97, passed 3-27-1997; Ord. 54-12, passed 7-17-
2012)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
Offenses Against Public Peace
   
131.001   Disorderly conduct
   
131.002   Disturbing the peace
   
131.003   Disorderly assemblies
   
131.004   Loitering prohibited
   
131.005   Sexual touching for money or other thing of value, offers and
agreements to do so prohibited
   
131.006   (Repealed)
   
131.007   Ticket scalping
Offenses Involving Police
   
131.020   Aiding police
   
131.021   Fleeing from law enforcement officer
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Bicycles, see
ch. 81
   Emergency management, see
ch. 33
   Emergency vehicle warning device, see §
73.003
   Licenses issued by police department, see §
110.032
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
   Notification of fumigation by holder of pest control license, see §
120.002
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Permit for parade or assembly required, see §
96.181
Statutory reference:
   Breach of the peace and disorderly conduct generally, see SDCL ch. 22-13
   Law enforcement agencies, see SDCL 23-3-1 et seq.
   Prohibition of disorders and disturbances, see SDCL 9-29-3
   Regulation of police, see SDCL 9-29-2
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
§ 131.001 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
   (a)   Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by
an act likely to produce violence;
   (b)   Engages in, promotes, instigates, encourages, aids or abets fighting
or any similar violent threatening or tumultuous behavior;
   (c)   Makes or causes any unreasonably loud noise;
   (d)   Addresses profane, obscene or abusive language or threats of violence
to any person present so as to create a clear and present danger of violence;
   (e)   Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity
likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the
otherwise peaceful conduct and activity and have requested that the conduct and
activity be stopped and explained the request if there is time;
   (f)   Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him or
her to be a peace officer under circumstances where three or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
   (g)   Unreasonably obstructs or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or use thereof or so as to create an unsafe condition for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or use of the street or sidewalk;
   (h)   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or private property of
another so as to create an unsafe, unhealthy or unsanitary condition; or
   (i)   Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law,
any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance
or other dangerous weapon.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.202; 1992 Code, § 26-25) (Ord. 80-79, passed 8-20-1979;
Ord. 48-88, passed 6-20-1988; Ord. 30-93, passed 4-12-1993; Ord. 88-24, passed
10-1-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see SDCL 22-18-35
§ 131.002 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall disturb the peace of the city or of any person by violent,
tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by loud or unusual noises, or by obscene,
indecent, violent or threatening language, or actions or by assaulting,
striking or attempting to assault or strike another person, or inviting or
defying another person to fight or quarrel, or by engaging in a fight with
another.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.203; 1992 Code, § 26-26) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.003 DISORDERLY ASSEMBLIES.
   (a)   A disorderly assembly of persons in a public place is hereby
prohibited and the police department or any law enforcement officer shall have
the authority to disperse those persons and to require them to remove
themselves from the place of assembly. Any person participating in a disorderly
assembly who fails or refuses to disperse or vacate the place after having been
commanded to do so by a law enforcement officer shall be guilty of disorderly
assembly.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY means an assembly
of two or more persons, some or all of whom are engaged in conduct which
threatens the public peace or safety through fighting or violent or threatening
behavior, loud language, unreasonable noise, obstructing vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or by littering or breakage.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE means any place, whether
within or without a building, commonly and customarily open to or used by the
general public.
(1992 Code, § 26-27) (Ord. 38-80, passed 5-19-1980) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.004 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOITERING means remaining in a public place in the downtown loop area
which, for purposes of this article, includes the central business district of
the city and the area bordered by the west side of Minnesota Avenue to Grange
Avenue between Eighth Street and Thirteenth Street, with the apparent purpose
of establishing control over an identifiable area, intimidating others from
entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities. LOITERING includes, but
is not limited to:
         A.   Creating or causing to be created any disturbance or annoyance to
the passage, access and comfort of any person:
         B.   Obstructing, impeding or restricting in any manner the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; and
         C.   Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully in
any public place.
   (b)   No person shall be guilty of violation of this section unless a law
enforcement officer has:
      (1)   Informed the person or persons within a group that the person or
group is engaged in loitering within an area in which loitering is prohibited,
and order the person or group to disperse and remove himself, herself or
themselves from the area or from the place at which the order was issued; and
      (2)   Informed the person or persons within a group that he, she or they
will be subject to arrest if the person or group fails to obey the order
promptly or engages in loitering within sight or hearing of the location on
which the order was issued during the next three hours.
(1992 Code, § 26-28) (Ord. 69-00, passed 8-14-2000) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.005 SEXUAL TOUCHING FOR MONEY OR OTHER THING OF VALUE, OFFERS AND
AGREEMENTS TO DO SO PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place their hands upon, or touch with any part of their
body, or fondle in any manner, or massage a sexual or genital part of any other
person for any money or other thing of value or offer to or agree to do so
(with the intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of either party), nor
shall any person solicit those act or acts by offering money or other thing of
value. SEXUAL OR GENITAL PARTS include the genitals, pubic area, anus or
perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. A violation of
this section shall be grounds to deny, suspend or revoke any license issued
under
chapter 110 of this Code. Practitioners of the healing arts lawfully practicing
within the scope of their profession are not included within the provisions of
this section.
(1992 Code, § 26-29) (Ord. 96-04, passed 9-13-2004) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.006 (REPEALED).
§ 131.007 TICKET SCALPING.
   Sale of tickets at more than face value prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to resell or attempt to resell a
ticket to an event to be held at any sporting event, theatre, music hall, or
other place of public entertainment, amusement, or instruction (collectively
the "event") for an amount greater than the face value printed on such ticket
on the grounds of such event or within a one-half-mile radius of each such
event. No ticket stub which has provided the bearer entry to the first game of
a double header and serves to provide re-entry to the second game of a double
header event at that event may be resold or attempted to be resold for any
amount.
   (b)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Resell" or "attempt to resell" shall mean to advertise or solicit
for resale, and shall include any sale or attempted sale subsequent to the
initial offer to the public; and
      (2)   "Ticket stub" shall mean a portion of a ticket retained by the user
which has provided entry to the first game of a double header at that facility
and which serves to provide re-entry for the second game.
(Ord. 51-13, passed 8-20-2013)
OFFENSES INVOLVING POLICE
§ 131.020 AIDING POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of all persons in the city when called upon by any
police officer to promptly aid and assist the police in the execution of their
duties.
(1992 Code, § 34-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 131.021 FLEEING FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to stop, or otherwise flee when
given a visual or audible signal to stop by a uniformed law enforcement
officer. The signal given by the law enforcement officer may be by hand, voice,
emergency light or siren.
(1992 Code, § 34-2) (Ord. 44-94, passed 5-23-1994) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
132.001   Malicious mischief
   
132.002   Wells and cisterns covered
   
132.003   Graffiti illegal
   
132.004   Connecting, disconnecting or tampering with service connections of a
franchised cable television company
   
132.005   Building climbing and roof occupancy
§ 132.001 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, damage, deface, break, tamper
with or otherwise harm any property, public or private, real or personal, not
his or her own without the lawful consent of the owner.
(1957 Rev. Ords., §§ 9.901, 9.904, 9.909, 9.910, 9.912; 1992 Code, § 26-37)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Intentional damage to property, see SDCL 22-34-1
§ 132.002 WELLS AND CISTERNS COVERED.
   No person owning or in control of any property shall allow upon any property
any well, cistern, vault or other pit unless it is covered by a good, safe and
substantial covering made of iron, lumber or other like material and securely
fastened in a manner that the cover cannot be removed by children, provided
that any person may have upon his or her premises a well, cistern, vault or
other opening if such is completely enclosed by a high board fence or other
substantial enclosure at least five feet high.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.905; 1992 Code, § 26-38) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 132.003 GRAFFITI ILLEGAL.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GRAFFITI. Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs,
inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn or
otherwise placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence, sidewalk,
curb or other permanent structure on a public or private property which has the
effect of defacing the property.
   (b)   No person shall intentionally place graffiti on any surface located on
public or private property.
   (c)   No owner of any property may allow graffiti to be placed on any
external surface on the owner’s property. The owner of any property shall
remove there from graffiti which has been placed thereon.
(1992 Code, § 26-39) (Ord. 111-95, passed 9-5-1995) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 132.004 CONNECTING, DISCONNECTING OR TAMPERING WITH SERVICE CONNECTIONS OF A
FRANCHISED CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or disconnect or otherwise
tamper with any service connection of any franchised cable television company
without the expressed prior approval from a designated agent of the cable
television company.
(1992 Code, § 26-41) (Ord. 20-76, passed 3-22-1976) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Cable television offenses, see SDCL ch. 22-44
§ 132.005 BUILDING CLIMBING AND ROOF OCCUPANCY.
   No person shall, without authorization by the building owner or occupant,
climb upon any structure or enter upon the roof of any structure in the city.
(1992 Code, § 26-42) (Ord. 93-92, passed 10-26-1992) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 133: WEAPONS
Section
   
133.001   Carrying concealed weapons
   
133.002   Drawing deadly weapons
   
133.003   Discharging weapon
   
133.004   Missile defined
§ 133.001 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall carry concealed about his or her person any
slingshot, brass knuckle, or knuckles of other material, or any sandbag,
dagger, Bowie knife, or dirk knife.
      (2)    No person shall carry concealed about his or her person any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or any instrument or device which when used is
likely to produce death or great bodily harm if such dangerous or deadly
weapon, instrument, or device is customarily used as or is intended for
probable use as a dangerous weapon.
      (3)    If the person is carrying a weapon other than the type listed in
division (a)(1), it is an affirmative defense that the person was engaged in
any lawful business, calling, or employment at the time he or she was carrying
any weapon or weapons and the circumstances in which such person was placed at
the time were such as to justify a prudent person in carrying the weapon or
weapons for carrying out his or her employment duties.
      (4)    If the person is carrying a weapon other than the type listed in
division (a)(1), it is an affirmative defense if the circumstances in which
such person was placed at the time were such to justify a prudent person in
carrying the weapon or weapons for the defense of his or her person, property,
or family.
   (b)    This section does not apply to the carrying of firearms.
   (c)    This section does not apply to an ordinary pocket knife carried in
the closed position. As used in this section, "ordinary pocket knife" means a
small knife designed for carrying in a pocket or purse, that has its cutting
edge and point entirely enclosed by its handle, and that may not be opened
automatically by a throwing, explosive, or spring action.
   (d)    This section does not apply to any person who possesses the concealed
weapon in his or her own dwelling house or place of business or on land owned
or rented by himself or herself or by a member of his or her household.
   (e)    Any peace officer may wear or carry any such weapons as may be
necessary and proper for the discharge of his or her official duties.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.206; 1992 Code, § 26-51) (Ord. 86-12, passed 11-20-2012)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Concealment of weapon with intent to commit felony, see SDCL 22-14-8
§ 133.002 DRAWING DEADLY WEAPONS.
   No person, except an officer of the law in the execution of his or her duty,
or a person in self-defense, shall draw a pistol, gun, revolver, knife or any
other deadly or dangerous weapon so that the weapon may be used against or upon
another person.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.205; 1992 Code, § 26-52) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 133.003 DISCHARGING WEAPON.
   (a)   No person shall discharge any species of firearm, air gun or other
weapon, or throw any missile in the city. The following uses are exempt from
this section:
      (1)   Proper use of weapons in a licensed shooting gallery;
      (2)   Use by law enforcement or animal control officers in the discharge
of their official duties, or to persons who are authorized by the chief of
police and have been issued a special access permit by the state department of
game, fish and parks for a specific area being hunted;
      (3)   Use by employees of the Sioux Falls Zoological Society on the
property of the Great Plains Zoo;
      (4)   Use by employees of the Sioux Falls Zoological Society off the
property of the Great Plains Zoo if supervised by law enforcement personnel;
      (5)   Use by persons engaged in instructional courses using air guns, BB
guns or bows and arrows if the course has obtained a permit from the police, is
conducted by a certified instructor, is covered by adequate liability
insurance, and has been approved by the supervising unit if conducted on city
property. The police chief may establish conditions for granting a permit to
protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public; and
      (6)   Use by persons at field archery courses on city property that
conform to target course and safety requirements of the National Field Archery
Association.
   (b)   It shall be a defense to a charge of violation of this section that a
person was engaged in lawful self defense, as set forth in SDCL 22-5-1, SDCL
22-5-9 and SDCL 22-18-4.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.703; 1992 Code, § 26-53) (Ord. 63-78, passed 6-12-1978;
Ord. 78-96, passed 7-15-1996; Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 67-10, passed
8-16-2010) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Reckless discharge of firearm, see SDCL 22-14-7
§ 133.004 MISSILE DEFINED.
   As used in §
133.003, MISSILE means any object thrown or projected, or intended to be thrown
or projected, including, without limitation thereto, class C (common)
fireworks, as defined in SDCL 34-37-1(1).
(1992 Code, § 26-54) (Ord. 22-03, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 134: MINORS
Section
   
134.001   Curfew hours
   
134.002   Exceptions to curfew
   
134.003   Responsibility of parents
   
134.004   Responsibility of officers
§ 134.001 CURFEW HOURS.
   No minor under the age of 18 years shall be or remain in or upon the public
streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public grounds, public places, public
buildings, public places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other
unsupervised public places within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
4:00 a.m. of the following day.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.501; 1972 Code, §§ 26-93, 26-94; 1992 Code, § 26-94)
§ 134.002 EXCEPTIONS TO CURFEW.
   This chapter does not apply to a minor who is:
   (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
   (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (e)   Involved in an emergency;
   (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
   (g)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious,
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
   (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
   (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.501; 1992 Code, § 26-95)
§ 134.003 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to knowingly permit
the minor to be or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, public grounds, public places, public buildings, public places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised public places
within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following
day except when the minor is:
   (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
   (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (e)   Involved in an emergency;
   (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
   (g)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious,
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor;
   (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
   (i)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.502; 1992 Code, § 26-96)
§ 134.004 RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICERS.
   (a)    Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the
public place. The officer shall not detain the minor, issue a citation or make
an arrest under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
including any investigation that a reasonable person would deem necessary, none
of the exceptions enumerated in this section apply.
   (b)    Upon determining that enforcement action is warranted under this
chapter, a police officer may arrest and detain any minor violating this
chapter until the parent, guardian or custodian is notified. The minor may be
released upon the giving of a promise by the minor and his or her parent or
guardian or custodian that the minor together with his or her parent, guardian
or custodian will appear at a stated time before the proper authority to answer
to the charges.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 9.502; 1992 Code, § 26-97)
CHAPTER 135: LASER POINTERS
Section
   
135.001   Definition
   
135.002   Prohibited; use against an uniformed law enforcement officer
   
135.003   Prohibited; use against another person or animal
   
135.004   Exemptions
§ 135.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LASER POINTER. Any device that emits light amplified by the stimulated
emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye.
(1992 Code, § 26-120)
§ 135.002 PROHIBITED; USE AGAINST AN UNIFORMED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   No person shall direct light from a laser pointer at a uniformed law
enforcement officer.
(1992 Code, § 26-121) (Ord. 74-99, passed 7-6-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 135.003 PROHIBITED; USE AGAINST ANOTHER PERSON OR ANIMAL.
   No person shall direct light from a laser pointer into or about the eyes of
another person or animal, or in any manner that would reasonably be expected to
annoy, harass or alarm any person or animal.
(1992 Code, § 26-122) (Ord. 74-99, passed 7-6-1999) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 135.004 EXEMPTIONS.
   The temporary transfer of possession or use of laser pointers for valid
instructional school or employment purposes when the use is under the
supervision of school staff or an employer is exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 26-123) (Ord. 74-99, passed 7-6-1999)
CHAPTER 136: PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC PLACES
Section
   
136.001   Definitions
   
136.002   Prohibition on certain structures
   
136.003   Enforcement of prohibition
§ 136.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING. Any structure including but not limited to tents, huts, shelters,
or any assemblance of material(s) that provides shelter for a permanent or
temporary residence as opposed to recreation or that provides shelter for any
purpose lasting more than two hours.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person
and having apparent utility or monetary value.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, whether in or out of a building, owned, leased, or
managed by the city and any public street, public alley, public highway, public
right-of-way or public sidewalk. For purposes of this chapter, the term public
place includes city parks.
   SERVICE PROVIDER. An organization skilled and experienced in services to the
homeless and associated with human services.
   SHELTER. Any structure including but not limited to tents, huts, or any
assemblance of material(s) that provides shelter for recreation or leisure
lasting one hour or less as opposed to permanent or temporary residence or
other occupation lasting more than two hours.
(Ord. 49-25, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 136.002 PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN STRUCTURES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, maintain, or occupy any dwelling on, in, or
within any public place unless approved through a permit or other authorized
process or grant of approval from the city.
   (b)   No person shall erect, maintain, or occupy any shelter on, in, or
within any public place other than a city park.
   (c)   No person shall, on, in, or within any public place, erect, maintain,
or occupy any shelter or dwelling in a manner that compromises public safety or
that masks, hinders, or otherwise delays the recognition of or response to any
medical emergency involving any person. Shelters and dwellings shall not be
erected, maintained, or occupied in a manner that prevents exterior visibility
throughout the entire shelter or dwelling.
   (d)   No person shall, on, in, or within any public place, erect, maintain,
or occupy any shelter or dwelling connected to any building, fence, wall lamp,
flagpole, construction improvement, facility, or any other feature or property
to include trees and shrubbery.
   (e)   No person shall, on, in, or within any public place, erect, maintain,
or occupy any shelter with a floor.
(Ord. 49-25, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 136.003 ENFORCEMENT OF PROHIBITION.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provision in §
10.999, no violation of this section shall be issued until a representative
from the city has made an effort to connect the person to a service provider in
the community and the interaction with a service provider is documented. This
section shall not apply in cases where there is an imminent health or safety
threat.
   (b)   Prior to removing the dwelling, the city shall post a notice at the
dwelling if a person is not present. The notice shall state the time the notice
was issued, the name, address and telephone number of a designated city
contact; that the dwelling is in violation of the requirements of this chapter;
that the user is ordered to cause immediate removal from the public property,
which date of removal shall be no less than 24 hours unless the park land or
public access is obstructed.
   (c)   At the time of removal, items having no apparent utility or monetary
value and items in unsanitary condition may be immediately discarded. Weapons,
drug paraphernalia, items appearing to be stolen, and evidence of a crime may
be retained as evidence by the city until an alternate disposition is
determined. All personal property removed from the dwelling that is not
disposed of or retained as evidence pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be
stored for no more than 60 days and no less than 30 days.
(Ord. 49-25, passed 8-19-2025)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
   
150.   BUILDING
   
151.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
   
152.   MANUFACTURED HOMES
   
153.   ANNEXATION POLICIES
   
154.   PLANNING
   
155.   SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
   
156.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
   
157.   SUBDIVISIONS
   
158.   2006 JOINT ZONING REGULATIONS LINCOLN COUNTY AND SIOUX FALLS
   
159.   COMPREHENSIVE EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING REGULATIONS
   
160.   ZONING
   
161.   SIOUX FALLS DOWNTOWN RAILYARD ENVIRONMENTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING
Section
Residential Code
   
150.001   Adopted
   
150.002   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2021 International
Residential Code
Building Code
   
150.015   Adopted
   
150.016   Conflicts
   
150.017   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2021 International
Building Code
Mechanical and Fuel Gas Code
   
150.030   Adopted
   
150.031   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2021 International
Mechanical Code
   
150.032   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the International Fuel Gas
Code
   
150.033   Definitions
   
150.034   License required
   
150.035   Employment of master mechanic
   
150.036   Termination of master mechanic or refrigeration mechanic
   
150.037   License use restricted
   
150.038   Bond required
   
150.039   Vehicle identification
   
150.040   License application
   
150.041   License term and renewal
   
150.042   Examination
   
150.043   Installation by owner
   
150.044   Suspension or revocation of license
   
150.045   Administrative appeal of license suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew
   
150.046   Time of hearing and notice
   
150.047   Hearing procedures
   
150.048   Appeal to circuit court
Existing Building Code
   
150.060   Adopted
   
150.061   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2021 International
Existing Building Code
Building Security
   
150.075   Purpose
   
150.076   Scope
   
150.077   Obstructing exits
   
150.078   Entry vision
   
150.079   Doors
   
150.080   Windows
   
150.081   Alternate materials or methods
Property Maintenance Code
   
150.095   Adopted
   
150.096   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2021 International
Property Maintenance Code
Residential Building Contractors
   
150.125   Definitions
   
150.126   License required
   
150.127   License application
   
150.128   Inactive construction supervisor’s license
   
150.129   Bond required
   
150.130   General liability insurance required
   
150.131   Construction supervisor’s examination
   
150.132   Designation of construction supervisor
   
150.133   Termination of designated construction supervisor
   
150.134   License use restricted
   
150.135   License term renewal
   
150.136   Continuing education requirements
   
150.137   Suspension, revocations, and censure of license
   
150.138   Administrative appeal of license suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew
   
150.139   Time of hearing and notice
   
150.140   Hearing procedures
   
150.141   Appeal to circuit court
Vacant Buildings
   
150.155   Purpose
   
150.156   Definitions
   
150.157   Vacant building registration
   
150.158   Vacant building fees
   
150.159   Exemptions
   
150.160   Inspections
   
150.161   Alternative procedures
Rental Housing
   
150.175   Purpose
   
150.176   Definitions
   
150.177   Residential rental permit requirements
   
150.178   Permit revocation
   
150.179   Correction of defects and enforcement
   
150.180   Property transfers
   
150.181   No waiver of code compliance
   
150.182   Short-term rental unit guest notice/information
Electricity
   
150.201   Electrical code adopted
   
150.201.1      Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2023 National
Electrical Code
   
150.202   Title
   
150.203   Purpose
   
150.204   Scope
   
150.205   New electrical work
   
150.206   Application to existing electrical systems
   
150.207   Powers and duties of building official
   
150.208   Liability
   
150.209   Cooperation of other officials and officers
   
150.210   Unsafe electrical systems, apparatus, wiring or equipment
   
150.211   Electrical board of appeals and examiners
   
150.212   Violations and prosecution thereof
   
150.213   Permits required
   
150.214   Permit application
   
150.215   Plan review fees
   
150.216   Homeowner permit expiration
   
150.217   Permit suspension or revocation
   
150.218   Fees
   
150.219   Inspections
   
150.220   Connection approval
   
150.221   Temporary connections
   
150.222   Definitions
   
150.223   License required
   
150.224   Apprentice ratio
   
150.225   License use restricted
   
150.226   Bond required
   
150.227   Vehicle identification
   
150.228   License application
   
150.229   License term and renewal
   
150.230   Examinations
   
150.231   [Reserved]
   
150.232   Bond required
   
150.233   Installation by owner
   
150.234   Termination or death of electrical contractor
   
150.235   Suspension or revocation of license
   
150.236   Administrative appeal of license suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew
   
150.237   Time of hearing and notice
   
150.238   Hearing procedures
   
150.239   Appeal to circuit court
Plumbing
   
150.301   Plumbing Code adopted
   
150.302   Modifications by the city to the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code
   
150.303   Definitions
   
150.304   Licenses
   
150.305   Registrations
   
150.306   License use restricted
   
150.307   Bond required
   
150.308   Vehicle identification
   
150.309   License and registration application
   
150.310   License term and renewal
   
150.311   Examination
   
150.312   Installation by owner
   
150.313   Suspension or revocation of license
   
150.314   Administrative appeal of license suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew
   
150.315   Time of hearing and notice
   
150.316   Hearing procedures
   
150.317   Appeal to circuit court
Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
150.401   Adopted
   
150.402   Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2021 International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code
 
   
150.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Certificate of occupancy under zoning ordinance, see §§
160.725 through
160.730
   Electric lines and wires in parks, see §
95.027
   Electric utility, see §§
51.025 through
51.033
   Electricity in mobile home parks, see §
152.069
   Extraterritorial zoning regulations, see
ch. 159
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
   Historic preservation, see
ch. 151
   Licenses issued by planning and building services, see §
110.028
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Permit to raze or remove building connected to utility, see §
50.020
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Storm drainage fee, see §
51.100
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Utilities, see title V
   Utility service to comply with technical regulations, see §
50.004
   Work in mobile home parks exempt from building code, see §
152.049
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory references:
   Authority to regulate electrical work and electricians, see SDCL 9-33-5, 9-
34-12, 36-16-35
   Municipal building regulations, see SDCL 9-33-4 et seq.
RESIDENTIAL CODE
§ 150.001 ADOPTED.
   (a)    The International Residential Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix
AE, Appendix AG, Appendix AH, and Appendix AQ as published by the International
Code Council Inc. as amended, is hereby adopted as the residential building
code by the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, movement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and town houses not more than three stories in height with a separate
means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories in
height, and provides for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees
therefor.
   (b)   The adoption of the International Residential Code, 2021 edition, will
become effective January 1, 2022. The minimum building standards in the 2021
edition of the International Residential Code and amendments thereto shall be
applied to any building permit issued after December 31, 2021.
   (c)    The city shall publish this ordinance, without attachments, after its
passage. The attachments are on file and available for inspection at the office
of the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. 114-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 23-04, passed 3-1-
2004; Ord. 30-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 18-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 101-12,
passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 126-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 29-19, passed 3-19-
2019; Ord. 141-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.002 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL
RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Residential
Code adopted in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or not adopted by the
city as follows. All other sections or subsections of the 2021 International
Residential Code as published shall remain the same.
   R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the residential code for
one- and two-family dwellings of the city of Sioux Falls and shall be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
   R101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and town houses not more than three stories above grade plane in
height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more
than three stories above grade plane in height.
   Exception 1: The following shall be permitted to be constructed in
accordance with this code where provided with an automatic sprinkler system
complying with Section P2904:
      1.   A care facility with five or fewer persons receiving custodial care
within a dwelling unit.
      2.   A care facility with five or fewer persons receiving medical care
within a dwelling unit.
      3.   A care facility for five or fewer persons receiving care that are
within a single- family dwelling.
   Exception 2: The following shall be permitted to be constructed in
accordance with this code. A fire sprinkler system if installed may be in
accordance with Section P2904.
      1.   Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the
requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code.
      2   Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms.
   Exception 3: Existing buildings undergoing repair, alteration or additions
and change of occupancies may be permitted to comply with the International
Existing Building Code.
   R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Building services is hereby created
and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
   R103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   R104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered civilly or criminally liable personally and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or the city be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the inspection authorized by this code or any permits or
certificates issued under this code.
   R104.8.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against an
officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be
afforded all the protection provided by the city’s insurance pool and any
immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal law and
defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall
not be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   R105.1 Required. Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to
be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain
the required permit. The building official may exempt permits for minor work.
   Exclusive of a homeowner, no person or firm shall be issued a building
permit for residential building defined as owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings, including accessory garages, until that person or firm has been
issued a residential contractor’s license required by this chapter.
   R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit requirements of this
code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
   Building:
   1.   Other than storm shelters, one-story detached accessory structures,
provided that the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet (18.58 m2). A
placement permit is required by the zoning division.
   2.    Fences not over 7 feet (2,134 mm) high. A fence permit is required by
the zoning division.
   3.    Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height measured
from the bottom of the grade elevation to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge.
   4.    Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2 to 1.
   5.    Sidewalks and driveways. A driveway permit is required by the zoning
division. A sidewalk permit is required by the engineering division.
   6.    Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and
similar finish work.
   7.    Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm)
deep.
   8.    Swings and other playground equipment.
   9.    Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more
than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support.
   Electrical:
   1.    Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
   2.    Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets
therefor.
   3.    Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required
capacity in the same location.
   4.    Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts
of energy.
   5.    Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles.
   Gas:
   1.    Portable heating, cooking, or clothes drying appliances.
   2.    Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
   3.    Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   Mechanical:
   1.    Portable heating appliances.
   2.    Portable ventilation appliances.
   3.    Portable cooling units.
   4.    Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
   5.    Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
   6.    Portable evaporative coolers.
   7.    Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or
less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or
less.
   8.    Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   Plumbing:
   1.    The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
   2.    The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves,
or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes, or fixtures.
   R106.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of construction
documents and other data shall be submitted with each application for a permit.
The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design
professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the
project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building
official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be
prepared by a registered design professional.
      Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of
construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary
to obtain compliance with this code.
   R106.1.6 Energy efficiency. Construction documents for detached one- and
two-family dwellings and townhomes shall be provided with the intended R-value
for the ceilings, walls, floors, basement walls (if finished), slab perimeter
R-value and depth, and crawl space walls.
   R106.1.7 Foundation reinforcement. Construction for detached one- and two-
family dwellings and town houses shall be provided with the intended
reinforcement of foundation walls referenced in Tables R404.1.1(2), R404.1.1
(3), and R404.1.1(4) for reinforced masonry foundation walls; Tables R404.1.2
(2), R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4), and R404.1.1(8) for flat concrete foundation
walls; Tables 404.1.2(5) and R404.1.2(6) for waffle-grid basement walls; and
Table R404.1.2(7) for screed-grid basement walls where the foundation wall
exceeds the provisions for plain masonry and concrete foundation walls.
   R106.2 Site plan or plot plan. The construction documents submitted with the
application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and
location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances
from lot lines. Site plans for new dwellings are required to specify the corner
pin elevations and the minimum ground elevation (MGE) which designates the
elevation of the top of the black dirt under the grass, or the top of the
landscape rock or other landscape material at the lowest exposed part of the
house. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be
demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction
that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to
waive or modify the requirement for a site plan where the application for
permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted.
   R106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. Where the building official
issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved. One set of
construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official.
   R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas,
mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the schedule as
established by the city.
    The fee for each residential building permit shall be set forth in Table 1-
A, and other inspections and fees shall be in accordance with Table 1-C.
Table No. 1-A. Residential Building Permit Fees
Group R Division 3
(Including Congregate Residences Defined as R-3 and Accessory Group U
Occupancies)
Total Valuation Fee
Table No. 1-A. Residential Building Permit Fees
Group R Division 3
(Including Congregate Residences Defined as R-3 and Accessory Group U
Occupancies)
Total Valuation           Fee
$1.00 to $4,000.00        $40
                          For valuations in excess of $4,000, $32.50 for the
$4,000.01 to $25,000.00   first $2,000, plus $6 for each additional $1,000 or
                          fraction thereof, to and including $25,000
                          $170.50 for the first $25,000, plus $4.50 for each
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00  additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $50,000
                          $283 for the first $50,000, plus $3 for each
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00 additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $100,000
$100,000.01 and up        $433 for the first $100,000 plus $2.50 for each
                          additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
 
Table 1-C. Other Inspections and Fees
Table 1-C. Other Inspections and Fees
1.   Inspection outside of normal business hours, per hour* (minimum charge—o$200
hour)
2.   Reinspection fees, per hour                                               $200
3.   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour* (minimum$100
charge-one-half hour)
4.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to    $100
approved plans, per hour* (minimum charge-one-half hour)
*   Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This
cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe      
benefits of the employees involved.
5.   Wrecking permit fees                                                      $40
6.   Residential reshingles                                                    $40
7.   Residential resides                                                       $40
8.   Residential window replacements with no structural modifications (Group R $40
and U occupancies)
9.   Board of appeals fees: Before any action is taken by the board, the party or
parties requesting such hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board, or
his or her authorized agent, the sum of $100 to cover the approximate cost of the $100
procedure. Under no condition shall the sum or any part thereof be refunded for
failure of the request to be approved.
10.   A mileage fee at the current rate per mile as established by the finance  
department shall be charged for any inspection occurring outside city limits.
11.   Residential contractor's license examination fee                         $75
12.   Bond claims. An administrative fee shall be charged to cover the         $250
administrative cost of filing a claim
13.   Fee for late corrections. If corrections listed on an inspection report are
not completed within the specified time, the inspector shall issue a correction   $100
order and assess a $100 administrative fee. The inspector shall also assess a
reinspection fee.
14.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where building
construction work is completed without a request for an inspection, an            $250
administrative fee of $250.00 may be charged.
 
   R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences work
requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or
plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a
fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition
to the required permit fees. Administrative citations and legal and/or civil
proceedings may also be commenced.
   R108.7 Delinquent accounts. The administrative authority may refuse to issue
permits or conduct inspections for any person or business whose account is
delinquent.
   R109.1.1 Footing inspection. Inspection of the footing shall be made after
poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any
required forms erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place and
supported prior to the placing of concrete. The footing inspection shall
include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing
walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment and special requirements
for wood foundations.
   R109.1.3 Floodplain inspections. For construction in flood hazard areas as
established by
Chapter 156, Floodplain Management, upon placement of the lowest floor,
including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the floodplain
administrator shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by
a registered design professional, of the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, required in
Chapter 156, Floodplain Management.
   R109.1.6.1 Elevation documentation. If located in a flood hazard area, the
documentation of elevations required in Chapter 156, Floodplain Management
shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator or his designated official
prior to the final inspection.
   R110.1 Use and change of occupancy. A building or structure shall not be
used or occupied in whole or part, and a change of occupancy or change of use
of a building or structure or portion thereof shall not be made, until the
building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided
herein and final inspections have been obtained from the electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, and building inspection divisions of building services.
An inspection placard shall be posted on the electrical panel, which is signed
after final inspections have occurred by the electrical inspector, mechanical
inspector, and plumbing inspector for new one- and two-family dwelling units
and multiple single-family dwellings (town houses). Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the
provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the city. Certificates
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or
other ordinances of the city shall not be valid.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from
permits under Section R105.2.
      2.    Accessory buildings or structures.
   R110.6 Placards. Placards or inspection record tags placed on the job by the
inspectors to indicate approval of the work inspected shall not be removed,
except when authorized by the building official.
   R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, to review all proposed changes to the respective
codes and to submit recommendations to the responsible official and the city
council, to review requests for house moves, to examine applicants for
licensing, and to investigate matters brought before the board, there shall be
and is hereby created a building board of appeals and examiners. The building
official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall not have a vote
on any matter before the board. Members shall be appointed by the mayor with
the consent of the council and shall hold office for a term of three years. The
board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall
render decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy
to the building official and/or the fire marshal.
   The board, in exercising its authority over house moving, may deny the
building request or may require additional stipulations to be placed on the
building permit to address the protection of the property values and
neighborhood compatibility.
   R112.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on
a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The board shall not have authority relative to the interpretation of the
administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to
waive requirements of this code.
   R113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied
with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized
to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to deem the violation as a
strict liability offense and institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto.
   Section R202. Definitions. Add the following definition.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
Table R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
       WIND DESIGN                                 SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
GROUND                    Special Wind-  SEISMIC               Frost           ICE BARRIER  FLOOD     AIR      MEAN
SNOW   Speedd Topographic wind    borne  DESIGN    Weatheringa line   Termitec UNDERLAYMENT HAZAR DSg FREEZING ANNUAL
LOADo  (mph ) effectsk    regionl debris CATEGORYf             depthb          REQUIREDh              INDEXi   TEMPj
                                  zone m
                                                                                            Sioux
                                                                                            Falls
                                                                                            entered
                                                                                            the
                                                                                            regular
                                                               42     Slight                phase of           46
40 psf 112    No          No      No     A         Severe      inches to       Yes          the       3,000    degrees
                                                               (106 7 moderate              National           F
                                                               mm)                          Flood
                                                                                            Insurance
                                                                                            Program
                                                                                            on
                                                                                            September
                                                                                            17, 1979.
 
MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIAn
 
                                Indoor      Indoor      Outdoor
          Altitude   Coincident winter      winter      winter      Heating
Elevation correction wet bulb   design dry- design dry- design dry- temperature
          factor                bulb        bulb        bulb        difference
                                temperature temperature temperature
1418      0.95       72 degrees 70 degrees  70 degrees  -11 degrees 81 degrees
                     F          F           F           F           F
                     Indoor     Indoor      Indoor      Outdoor
          Daily      summer     summer      summer      summer      Cooling
Latitude  range      design     design      design dry- design dry- temperature
                     relative   relative    bulb        bulb        difference
                     humidity   humidity    temperature temperature
43                   50%        50%         75 degrees  90 degrees  15 degrees
degrees   M          relative   relative    F           F           F
north                humidity   humidity
 
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
   a.   Where weathering requires a higher strength concrete or grade of
masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code, the
frost line depth strength required for weathering shall govern. The weathering
column shall be filled in with the weathering index, "negligible," "moderate,"
or "severe" for concrete as determined from Figure R301.2(1). The grade of
masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C34, ASTM C55, ASTM C62, ASTM C73,
ASTM C90, ASTM C129, ASTM C145, ASTM C216, or ASTM C652.
   b.   Where the frost line depth requires deeper footings than indicated in
Figure R403.1(1), the frost line depth strength required for weathering shall
govern. The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the
minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
   c.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the
need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local
subterranean termite damage.
   d.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind
speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(2)]. Wind exposure category
shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section
R301.2.1.4.
   e.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this section of the table to establish
the design criteria using Table 10A from ACCA Manual J or established criteria
determined by the jurisdiction.
   f.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic
design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.
   g.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the date of
the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of
adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas);
and the title and date of the currently effective Flood Insurance Study or
other flood hazard study.
   h.   In accordance with Sections R905.1.2, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1,
R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1, and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local
damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this
part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this
part of the table with "NO."
   i.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year
return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the
100-year (99 percent) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table
"Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)."
   j.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean
annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air
Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)."
   k.   In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical
data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-
up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES."
Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.
   l.   In accordance with Figure R301.2(2), where there is local historical
data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this
part of the table with "YES" and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise,
the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table.
   m.   In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2 the jurisdiction shall indicate
the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate
"NO" in this part of the table.
   n.   The jurisdiction shall fill in these sections of the table to establish
the design criteria using Table 1a or 1b from ACCA Manual J or established
criteria determined by the jurisdiction.
   o.   The jurisdiction shall fill in this section of the table using the
Ground Snow Loads in Figures R301.2(3) and R301.2(4).
Table R301.5
Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads
(in pounds per square foot)
Use Uniform Load (psf) Concentrated Load (lb)
Use                                  Uniform Load (psf) Concentrated Load (lb)
Uninhabitable attics without storage 10                 —
b
Uninhabitable attics with limited    20                 —
storage b, g
Habitable attics and attics served   30                 —
with fixed stairs
Balconies (exterior) and decks e     40                 —
Fire escapes                         40                 —
Guards                               —                200h, i
Guardrails in-fill components f      —                50h
Handraild                            200h               —
Passenger vehicle garages a          50 a               2,000h
Rooms                                40                 —
Stairs                               40 c               300c
 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 square inch =
645 mm2, 1 pound = 4.45N.
   a.   Elevated garage floors shall be capable of supporting the uniformly
distributed live load or a 2,000-pound concentrated load applied on an area of
4 1/2 inches by 4 1/2 inches, whichever produces the greater stresses.
   b.   Uninhabitable attics without storage are those where the clear height
between joists and rafters is not more than 42 inches, or where there are not
two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating
an assumed rectangle 42 inches in height by 24 inches in width, or greater,
within the plane of the trusses. This live load need not be assumed to act
concurrently with any other live load requirements.
   c.   Individual stair treads shall be capable of supporting the uniformly
distributed live load or a 300-pound concentrated load applied on an area of 2
inches by 2 inches, whichever produces the greater stresses.
   d.   A single concentrated load applied in any direction at any point along
the top. For a guard not required to serve as a handrail, the load need not be
applied to the top element of the guard in a direction parallel to such
element.
   e.   See Section R507.1 for decks attached to exterior walls.
   f.   Guard in-fill components (all those except the handrail), balusters,
and panel fillers shall be designed to withstand a horizontally applied normal
load of 50 pounds on an area equal to 1 square foot. This load need not be
assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirement.
   g.   Uninhabitable attics with limited storage are those where the clear
height between joists and rafters is 42 inches or greater, or where there are
two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating
an assumed rectangle 42 inches in height by 24 inches in width, or greater,
within the plane of the trusses. The live load need only be applied to those
portions of the joists or truss bottom chords where all of the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The attic area is accessed from an opening not less than 20 inches
in width by 30 inches in length that is located where the clear height in the
attic is not less than 30 inches.
      2.   The slopes of the joists or truss bottom chords are no greater than
2 inches vertical in 12 units horizontal.
      3.   Required insulation depth is less than the joist or truss bottom
chord member depth.
      The remaining portions of the joists or truss bottom chords shall be
designed for a uniformly distributed concurrent live load of not less than 10
pounds per square foot.
   h.   Glazing used in handrail assemblies and guards shall be designed with a
load adjustment factor of 4. The load adjustment factor shall be applied to
each of the concentrated loads applied to the top of the rail, and to the load
on the in-fill components. These loads shall be determined independent of one
another, and loads are assumed not to occur with any other live load.
   i.   Where the top of a guard system is not required to serve as a handrail,
the single concentrated load shall be applied at any point along the top in the
vertical downward direction and in the horizontal direction away from the
walking surface. Where the top of a guard is also serving as the handrail, a
single concentrated load shall be applied in any direction at any point along
the top. Concentrated loads shall not be applied concurrently.
Table R302.1(1) Exterior Walls
Exterior Wall Element Minimum Fire-Resistance Rating Minimum Fire Separation
                                                     Distance
Table R302.1(1) Exterior Walls
                                                                                                     Minimum
Exterior Wall Element  Minimum Fire-Resistance Rating                                                Fire
                                                                                                     Separation
                                                                                                     Distance
            (Fire-     1 hour – tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 or Section 703.3 of
            resistance the International Building Code with exposure from both sides                 0 feet
Walls       rated)
            (Not fire-
            resistance 0 hours                                                                       5 feet
            rated)
            Not        N/A                                                                           < 2 feet
            allowed
            (Fire-                                                                                   > 2 to < 3
Projections resistance 1 hour on the underside, or heavy timber or fire-retardant treated wooda, b   feet
            rated)
            (Not fire-
            resistance 0 hours                                                                       > 3 feet
            rated)
            Not        N/A                                                                           < 3 feet
            allowed
Openings    25%
            Maximum of 0 hours                                                                       3 feet
            wall area
            Unlimited  0 hours                                                                       5 feet
Penetratio  All        Comply with Section R302.4                                                    < 3 feet
ns                     None required                                                                 3 feet
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
N/A = Not Applicable
 
a.    The fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on
the underside of the eave overhang if fireblocking is provided from the wall
top plate to the underside of the roof sheathing.
b.    The fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on
the underside of the rake overhang where gable vent openings are not installed.
   R302.2.2 Common walls. Common walls separating town house units shall be
assigned a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Item 1 or 2 and shall be
rated for fire exposure from both sides. Common walls shall extend to and be
tight against the exterior sheathing of the exterior walls, or the inside face
of exterior walls without stud cavities, and the underside of the roof
sheathing. The common wall shared by two town house units shall be constructed
without mechanical equipment, ducts or vents, other than water-filled fire
sprinkler piping in the cavity of the common wall. Electrical installations
shall be in accordance with the National Electric Code. Penetrations of the
membrane of common walls for electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance
with Section R302.4. Plumbing installations shall be in accordance with the
Uniform Plumbing Code. Membrane or through penetrations of common walls for
plumbing systems shall be in accordance with Section 302.4.
   1.   Where an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904 is
provided, the common wall shall be not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E119, UL 263, or Section 703.3.2.2
of the International Building Code.
   2.   Where an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904 is
not provided, the common wall shall be not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance-
rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E119, UL 263, or Section
703.3.2.2 of the International Building Code.
      Exception: Common walls are permitted to extend to and be tight against
the inside of the exterior walls if the cavity between the end of the common
wall and the exterior sheathing is filled with a minimum of two 2-inch nominal
thickness wood studs.
   R302.2.3 Continuity. The fire-resistance-rated wall or assembly separating
town house units shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside of
the roof sheathing, deck, or slab. The fire-resistance rating shall extend the
full length of the wall or assembly, including wall extensions through and
separating attached enclosed accessory structures.
   Exterior walls that extend beyond an adjacent structure that has a fire
separation distance less than 5 feet (1,523 mm) to a common property line shall
have not less than a one-hour fire rating with exposure from both sides with no
openings allowed therein.
   Projections such as a deck that have a fire separation distance of less than
3 feet (914 mm) to a common property line shall have a 1-hour fire rating with
exposure from both sides with no openings allowed therein that extends at least
30 inches (762 mm) above the projection.
   R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be
separated from each other by wall and floor assemblies having not less than a
1-hour fire-resistance rating where tested in accordance with ASTM E119, UL
263, or Section 703.2.2 of the International Building Code. Such separation
shall be provided regardless of whether a lot line exists between the two
dwelling units or not. Fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and wall assemblies
shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies
shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing.
      Exception: A fire-resistance rating of 1/2 hour shall be permitted in
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with Section P2904.
   R302.13 Fire protection of floors. Not adopted by the city.
   R303.5.1 Intake openings. Mechanical and gravity outdoor air intake openings
shall be located not less than 10 feet (3,048 mm) from any hazardous or noxious
contaminant, such as vents, chimneys, plumbing vents, streets, alleys, parking
lots, and loading docks.
   For the purpose of this section, the exhaust from dwelling unit toilet
rooms, bathrooms, and kitchens shall not be considered as hazardous or noxious.
      Exceptions:
      1.    The 10-foot (3,048 mm) separation is not required where the intake
opening is located 3 feet (914 mm) or greater below the contaminant source.
      2.    Vents and chimneys serving fuel-burning appliances shall be
terminated in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapters 18 and 24.
      3.    Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall be terminated in accordance with
Section M1502.3.
      4.    For equipment replacements on existing structures, gravity outdoor
intake openings for combustion air shall be located a minimum of 3 feet (914
mm) from any hazardous or noxious contaminant.
   R307.1 Space required. Fixtures shall be spaced in accordance with Figure
R307.1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7428.png]
 
   R308.4.2 Glazing adjacent to doors. Glazing in an individual fixed or
operable panel adjacent to a door shall be considered to be a hazardous
location where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches
(1524 mm) above the floor or walking surface and it meets either of the
following conditions:
   1.   Where the glazing is within 24 inches (610 mm) of either side of the
door in the plane of the door in a closed position.
   2.   Where the glazing is on a wall perpendicular to the plane of the door
in a closed position and within 24 inches (610 mm) of the hinge side of an in-
swinging door.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Decorative glazing.
   2.   Where there is an intervening wall or other permanent barrier between
the door and the glazing.
   3.   Where access through the door is to a closet or storage area 3 feet
(914 mm) or less in depth. Glazing in this application shall comply with
Section R308.4.3.
   4.   Glazing that is adjacent to the fixed panel of patio doors.
   R309.5 Fire sprinklers. Not adopted by the city.
   R310.2.1 Minimum size. Emergency and escape rescue openings shall have a net
clear opening of not less than 5.0 square feet (0.465 m2).
   R310.2.3 Maximum height from floor. Emergency escape and rescue openings
shall have the bottom of the clear opening not greater than 48 inches (1,219
mm) above the floor.
   R310.4.2 Ladder and steps. Area wells with a vertical depth greater than 48
inches (1,219 mm) shall be equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps.
The ladder or steps shall not be obstructed by the emergency escape and rescue
opening where the window or door is in the open position. Ladders or steps
required by this section shall not be required to comply with Section R311.7.
   R311.3.1 Floor elevations at the required egress doors. Landings or finished
floors at the required egress door shall be not more than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm)
lower than the top of the threshold.
      Exception: The landing or floor on the exterior side shall be not more
than 8 inches (202 mm) below the top of the threshold, provided the door does
not swing over the landing or floor.
   Where exterior landings or floors serving the required egress door are not
at grade, they shall be provided with access to grade by means of a ramp in
accordance with Section R311.8 or a stairway in accordance with Section R311.7.
   R311.3.2 Floor elevations for other exterior doors. Doors other than the
required egress door shall be provided with landings or floors not more than 8
inches (202 mm) below the top of the threshold.
      Exception: A top landing is not required where a stairway of not more
than two risers is located on the exterior side of the door, provided that the
door does not swing over the stairway.
   R311.7.5.1 Risers. The riser height shall be not more than 8 inches (202
mm). The riser shall be measured vertically between leading edges of the
adjacent treads. The greatest riser height within any flight of stairs shall
not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Risers shall be
vertical or sloped from the underside of the nosing of the tread above at an
angle not more than 30 degrees (0.51 rad) from the vertical. Open risers are
permitted.
      Exceptions:
      1.    The opening between adjacent treads is not limited on spiral
stairways.
      2.    The riser height of spiral stairways shall be in accordance with
Section R311.7.10.1.
   R311.7.8 Handrails. Handrails shall be provided on not less than one side of
each flight of stairs with four or more risers.
      Exception: When the landing at the top of the stair is not required to
have a guardrail.
   R311.7.8.4 Continuity. Handrails for stairways shall extend for the full
length of the flight from a point directly above the top riser of the flight to
a point directly above the lowest riser of the flight. Handrail ends shall be
returned toward a wall, guard, walking surface continuous to itself, or
terminate to a post.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Handrails shall be permitted to be interrupted by a newel post at
the turn.
      2.    The use of a volute, turnout, starting easing, or starting newel
shall be allowed over the lowest tread and over the top landing.
   R311.7.8.5 Grip size. Required handrails shall be of one of the following
types or provide equivalent graspability:
   1.    Type I. Handrails with a circular cross section shall have an outside
diameter of not less than 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) and not greater than 2 inches
(51 mm). If the handrail is not circular, it shall have a perimeter dimension
of not less than 4 inches (102 mm) and not greater than 6 1/4 inches (160 mm)
with a cross section of dimension of not more than 2 1/4 inches (57 mm). Edges
shall have a radius of not less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm).
   2.    Type II. Handrails with a perimeter greater than 6 1/4 inches (160 mm)
shall have a graspable finger recess area on both sides of the profile. The
finger recess shall begin within a distance of 3/4 inch (19 mm) measured
vertically from the tallest portion of the profile and achieve a depth of not
less than 5/16 inch (8 mm) within 7/8 inch (22 mm) below the widest portion of
the profile. This required depth shall continue for not less than 3/8 inch (10
mm) to a level that is not less than 1 3/4 inches (45 mm) below the tallest
portion of the profile. The width of the handrail above the recess shall be not
less than 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) and not more than 2 3/4 inches (70 mm). Edges
shall have a radius of not less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm).
      Exception: Exterior stairs are allowed to have a horizontal 2X member to
form a 1 1/2-inch graspable dimension in lieu of the above-referenced perimeter
dimensions.
   R312.1.3 Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings from
the walking surface to the required guard height that allow passage of a sphere
5 inches (127 mm) in diameter.
      Exception: The triangular openings at the open side of stair, formed by
the riser, tread, and bottom rail of a guard, shall not allow passage of a
sphere 6 inches (153 mm) in diameter.
   R312.2.1 Window opening height. In dwelling units, where the bottom of the
clear opening of an operable window opening is located less than 24 inches (610
mm) above the finished floor and greater than 72 inches (1829 mm) above the
finished grade or other surface below on the exterior of the building, the
operable window shall comply with one of the following:
   1.   Operable window openings will not allow a 5-inch-diameter (102 mm)
sphere to pass through where the openings are in their largest opened position.
   2.   Operable windows are provided with window opening control devices or
fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2090.
   R313.1 Town house automatic fire sprinkler systems. Not adopted by the city.
   R313.1.1 Design and installation. When an automatic sprinkler system for
town houses is installed, it shall be designed and installed in accordance with
Section P2904 or NFPA 13D.
   R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. Not adopted by
the city.
   R313.2.1 Design and installation. When automatic sprinkler systems are
installed, it shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904
or FPA 13D.
   R314.2.2 Alterations, repairs, and additions. Where alterations, repairs, or
additions requiring a permit occur with a valuation of more than $1,000, the
individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms located as
required for new dwellings.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the
replacement of roofing or siding, the addition or replacement of windows or
doors, or the addition of a porch or deck.
   2.   Installation, alteration, or repairs of plumbing or mechanical systems.
   R314.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
   1.    In each sleeping room.
   2.    Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the
bedrooms.
   3.    On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and
habitable attics and not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In
dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than
one full story below the upper level.
   4.    Not less than 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally from the door or opening of
a bathroom that contains a bathtub or shower unless this would prevent
placement of a smoke alarm required by this section.
   5.    In the hallway and in the room open to the hallway in dwelling units
where the ceiling height of a room open to a hallway serving bedrooms exceeds
that of the hallway by 24 inches (610 mm) or more.
      Exception. Hallways less than 4 feet (1,220 mm) in length are allowed to
omit the smoke detector within the hallway adjacent to the bedrooms.
   R314.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit in accordance with Section R314.3,
the alarm devices shall be interconnected in such a manner that the actuation
of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual dwelling unit.
Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed
wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of one
alarm.
   Exception: Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be
required where alterations or repairs do not result in removal of interior wall
or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl
space, or basement available that could provide access for interconnection
without the removal of interior finishes.
   R315.2.2 Alterations, repairs, and additions. Where alterations, repairs, or
additions requiring a permit occur with a valuation of more than $1,000, the
individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with carbon monoxide alarms located
as required for new dwellings.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the
replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition or replacement of windows or
doors, or the addition of a porch or deck.
   2.   Installation, alteration, or repairs of plumbing systems.
   3.   Installation, alteration, or repairs of mechanical systems that are not
fuel fired.
   R326.3 Story above grade plane. A habitable attic shall be considered a
story above grade plane.
      Exceptions: A habitable attic shall not be considered to be a story above
grade plane provided that the habitable attic meets all the following:
      1.   The aggregate area of the habitable attic is either of the
following:
         1.1.   Not greater than one-third of the floor area of the story
below.
         1.2.   Not greater than one-half of the floor area of the story below
where the habitable attic is located within a dwelling unit equipped with a
fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904.
      2.   The occupiable space is enclosed by the roof assembly above, knee
walls, if applicable, on the sides and the floor-ceiling assembly below.
      3.   The floor of the habitable attic does not extend beyond the exterior
walls of the story below.
   R403.1.4.1 Frost protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost,
foundation walls, piers, and other permanent supports of buildings and
structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the following
methods:
   1.    Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.2.
   2.    Constructed in accordance with Section R403.3.
   3.    Constructed in accordance with ASCE 32.
   4.    Erected on solid rock.
   Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the frozen condition is
permanent.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of
1,500 square feet (139 m2) or less, of light-frame construction, with an eave
height of 10 feet (3,048 mm) or less shall not be required.
      2.    Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 400
square feet (37 m2) or less, of other than light-frame construction, with an
eave height of 10 feet (3,048 mm) or less shall not be required.
   R502.3.1 Sleeping areas and attic joists. Table R502.3.1(1) shall be used to
determine the maximum allowable span of floor joists that support sleeping
areas and attics that are accessed by means of a fixed stairway in accordance
with Section R311.7, provided that the design live load does not exceed 40
pounds per square foot (1.92 kPa) and the design dead load does not exceed 20
pounds per square foot (0.96 kPa). The allowable span of ceiling joists that
support attics used for limited storage or no storage shall be determined in
accordance with Section R802.5.
   R506.2.3 Vapor retarder. A minimum 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm) vapor
retarder conforming to ASTM E1745 Class A requirements with joints lapped not
less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the concrete floor slab and
the base course or the prepared subgrade where a base course does not exist.
      Exception: The vapor retarder is not required for the following:
      1.   Garages, utility buildings, and other unheated accessory structures.
      2.   For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square
feet (6.5 m2) and carports.
      3.   Driveways, walks, patios, and other flatwork not likely to be
enclosed and heated at a later date.
      4.   Where approved by the building official, based on local site
conditions.
   R507.3 Footings. Decks shall be supported on concrete footings or other
approved structural systems designed to accommodate all loads in accordance
with Section R301. Deck footings shall be sized to carry the imposed loads from
the deck structure to the ground as shown in Figure R507.3.
      Exception: Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with
footings that extend below the frost line.
   R602.10.1.2 Location of braced wall lines and permitted offsets. Each braced
wall line shall be located such that no more than two-thirds of the required
braced wall panel length is located to one side of the braced wall line. Braced
wall panels shall be permitted to be offset not more than 4 feet (1,219 mm)
from the designated braced wall line. Braced wall panels parallel to a braced
wall line shall be offset not more than 4 feet (1,219 mm) from the designated
braced wall line location as shown in Figure R602.10.1.1.
   Exterior walls parallel to a braced wall line shall be offset not more than
4 feet (1,219 mm) from the designated braced wall line location as shown in
Figure R602.10.1.1.
   Interior walls used as bracing shall be offset not more than 4 feet (1,219
mm) from a braced wall line through the interior of the building as shown in
Figure R602.10.1.1.
      Exception: The offset out-of-plane may exceed 4 feet (1,219 mm) and the
out-to-out offset dimension may exceed 8 feet (2,438 mm) if the area of the
offset is less than 200 square feet (18.6 m2).
   R602.12 Simplified wall bracing. Buildings meeting all of the conditions
listed below shall be permitted to be braced in accordance with this section as
an alternate to the requirements of Section R602.10. The entire building shall
be braced in accordance with this section; the use of other bracing provisions
of Section R602.10, except as specified herein, shall not be permitted.
   1.    There shall be not more than three stories above the top of a concrete
or masonry foundation or basement wall. Permanent wood foundations shall not be
permitted.
   2.    Floors shall not cantilever more than 24 inches (607 mm) beyond the
foundation or bearing wall below.
   3.    Wall height shall not be greater than 12 feet (3,658 mm).
   4.    The building shall have a roof eave-to-ridge height of 20 feet (6,096
mm) or less.
   5.    Exterior walls shall have gypsum board with a minimum thickness of 1/
2 inch (12.7 mm) installed on the interior side fastened in accordance with
Table R702.3.5.
   6.    The structure shall be located where the ultimate design wind speed is
less than or equal to 130 mph (58 m/s) and the exposure category is B or C.
   7.    The structure shall be located in Seismic Design Category A, B, or C
for detached one- and two-family dwellings or Seismic Design Category A or B
for town houses.
   8.    Cripple walls shall not be permitted in three-story buildings.
   R806.2 Minimum vent area. The minimum net free ventilating area shall be 1/
150 of the area of the vented space.
   Exception: The minimum net free ventilation area shall be 1/300 of the
vented space provided one or more of the following conditions are met:
   1.   In Climate Zones 6, 7, and 8, a Class I or II vapor retarder is
installed on the warm-in-winter side of the ceiling.
   2.   Not less than 40 percent and not more than 50 percent of the required
ventilating area is provided by ventilators located in the upper portion of the
attic or rafter space. Upper ventilators shall be located not more than 3 feet
(914 mm) below the ridge or highest point of the space, measured vertically.
The balance of the required ventilation provided shall be located in the bottom
one-third of the attic space. Where the location of wall or roof framing
members conflicts with the installation of upper ventilators, installation more
than 3 feet (914 mm) below the ridge or highest point of the space shall be
permitted.
   N1101.2 (R101.3) Intent. This chapter shall regulate the design and
construction of buildings for the effective use and conservation of energy over
the useful life of each new building. Additions, alterations, renovations, or
repairs to an existing building, building system, or portion thereof may
conform to the provisions of this code as they relate to new construction
without requiring the unaltered portion(s) of the existing building or building
system to comply with this code. This chapter is intended to provide
flexibility to permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to
achieve this objective. This chapter is not intended to abridge safety, health,
or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes or
ordinances.
   N1101.13 (R401.2) Application. Not adopted by the city.
   N1101.14 (R401.3) Certificate. Not adopted by the city.
TABLE N1102.1.3 (R402.1.3)
INSULATION MINIMUM R-VALUES AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENTa
        Fenestratio                                Wood   Mass   Floor                    Crawl
Climate n           Skylightb Glazed       Ceiling Frame  Wall         Basementc, Slabd  Spacec,
Zone    U-Factorb,  U-Factor  Fenestration R-      Wall   R-     R-    g Wall R-  R-Value g Wall
        i                     SHGC b, e    Valuek  R-     Valueh Value Value              R-
                                                   Valueg                                 Value
TABLE N1102.1.3 (R402.1.3)
INSULATION MINIMUM R-VALUES AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENTa
        Fenestratio                                Wood   Mass   Floor                    Crawl
Climate n           Skylightb Glazed       Ceiling Frame  Wall         Basementc, Slabd  Spacec,
Zone    U-Factorb,  U-Factor  Fenestration R-      Wall   R-     R-    g Wall R-  R-Value g Wall
        i                     SHGC b, e    Valuek  R-     Valueh Value Value              R-
                                                   Valueg                                 Value
                                                   20 or                          10, 4
6       0.32        0.55      NR           49      13 + 5 15/19  30g   10/13      ft      10/13
                                                   h
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm
NR = Not Required.
a.   R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. Where insulation is installed in a
cavity which is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value
of the insulation shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table.
b.   The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed
fenestration.
   Exception: Skylights may be excluded from glazed fenestration SHGC requirements in Climate
Zones 1 through 3 where the SHGC for such skylights does not exceed 0.30.
c.   "5ci or 13" means R-5 continuous insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the
wall or R-13 cavity insulation on the interior side of the wall. "10ci or 13" means R-10
continuous insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the wall or R-13 cavity
insulation on the interior side of the wall. "15ci or 19 or 13 + 5ci" means R-15 continuous
insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the wall; or R-19 cavity insulation on the
interior side of the wall; or R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the wall in addition to
R-5 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior surface of the wall.
   "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13
cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall. "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulation
on the interior or exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement
wall. Alternatively, compliance with "15/19" shall be R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of
the basement wall plus R-5 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home.
d.   R-5 insulation shall be provided under the full slab area of a heated slab in addition to
the required slab edge insulation R-value for slabs, as indicated in the table. The slab edge
insulation for heated slabs shall not be required to extend below the slab.
e.   There are no SHGC requirements in the Marine Zone.
f.   Basement wall insulation is not required in warm humid locations as defined by Figure
N1101.7 and Table N1101.7.
g.   The first value is cavity insulation; the second value is continuous insulation. Therefore,
as an example, "13 + 5" means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 continuous insulation.
h.   Mass walls shall be in accordance with Section N1102.2.5. The second R-value applies where
more than half of the insulation is on the interior of the mass wall.
i.   A maximum U-factor of 0.32 shall apply in Climate Zones 3 through 8 to vertical fenestration
products installed in buildings located either:
   1.   Above 4,000 feet in elevation; or
   2.   In windborne debris regions where protection of openings is required by Section
R301.2.1.2.
j.   Alternatively, insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity providing not less than an
R-value of R-19.
k.   The minimum R-value for ceilings is further based on a minimum 6-inch (152 mm) heel height
to allow the ceiling insulation to extend over the top plate.
 
   N1102.2.8.1 (R402.2.8.1) Basement wall insulation installation. Where
basement walls are insulated, the insulation shall be installed from the top of
the basement wall down to 10 feet (3,048 mm) below grade or to the basement
floor, whichever is less.
      Exception: Exterior basement walls of enclosed mechanical rooms.
   N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing. Not adopted by the city.
   N1102.4.1.3 (R402.4.1.3) Leakage rate. Not adopted by the city.
   N1102.4.4 (R402.4.4) Rooms containing fuel-burning appliances. Not adopted
by the city.
   N1102.4.6 (R402.4.6) Electrical and communication outlet boxes (air-sealed
boxes). Not adopted by the city.
   N1103.3.1 (R403.3.1) Ducts located outside conditioned space. Supply and
return ducts located outside conditioned space shall be insulated to an R-value
of not less than R-8 for ducts 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter and larger and not
less than R-6 for ducts smaller than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter.
   N1103.3.5 (R403.3.5) Duct testing (Mandatory). Not adopted by the city.
   N1103.5 (R403.5) Service hot water systems. Energy conservation measures for
service hot water systems shall be in accordance with the plumbing code.
   N1103.6.3 (R403.6.3) Testing. Not adopted by the city.
   N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment. Not adopted by the city.
   N1109.2 (R501.2) Compliance. Additions, alterations, repairs or changes of
occupancy to, or relocation of, an existing building, building system, or
portion thereof may comply with Section N1110, N1111, N1112, or N1113,
respectively, in this code. Changes where unconditioned space is changed to
conditioned space shall comply with Section N1110.
   N1110.1 (R502.1) General. Additions to an existing building, building
system, or portion thereof may conform to the provisions of this chapter as
they relate to new construction without requiring the unaltered portion of the
existing building or building system to comply with this chapter. Additions
shall not create an unsafe or hazardous condition or overload existing building
systems. An addition shall be deemed to comply with this chapter where the
addition alone complies, where the existing building and addition comply with
this chapter as a single building, or where the building with the addition does
not use more energy than the existing building. Additions shall be in
accordance with Section N1110.2 or N1110.3.
   N1111.1 (R503.1) General. Alterations to any building or structure may
comply with the requirements of the code for new construction, without
requiring the unaltered portions of the existing building or building system to
comply with this chapter. Alterations shall be such that the existing building
or structure is no less conforming with the provisions of this chapter than the
existing building or structure was prior to the alteration.
   Alterations to an existing building, building system, or portion thereof may
conform to the provisions of this chapter as they relate to new construction
without requiring the unaltered portions of the existing building or building
system to comply with this chapter. Alterations shall not create an unsafe or
hazardous condition or overload existing building systems. Alterations shall be
such that the existing building or structure uses no more energy than the
existing building or structure prior to the alteration. Alterations to existing
buildings shall comply with Sections N1111.1.1 through N1111.1.4.
   N1112.1 (R504.1) General. Buildings, structures, and parts thereof may be
repaired in compliance with Section N1109.3 and this section. Work on
nondamaged components necessary for the required repair of damaged components
shall be considered part of the repair and shall not be subject to the
requirements for alterations in this chapter. Routine maintenance required by
Section N1109.3, ordinary repairs exempt from permit, and abatement of wear due
to normal service conditions shall not be subject to the requirements for
repairs in this section.
   M1305.1.3.1 Ground clearance. Equipment and appliances supported from the
ground shall be level and firmly supported on a concrete slab or other approved
material extending not less than 1 ½ inches (38 mm) above the adjoining ground.
Such support shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions. Appliances suspended from the floor shall have a clearance of not
less than 6 inches (152 mm) from the ground.
   M1305.1.3.3 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch
located at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be
installed at or near the appliance location in accordance with National
Electric Code. Exposed lamps shall be protected from damage by location or lamp
guards.
   M1502.4.2 Duct installation. Exhaust ducts shall be supported at 4-foot
(1,219 mm) intervals and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct
shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow.
Exhaust duct joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1. Ducts
shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude into the
inside of the duct. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without
deformation.
   M1504.2 Duct length. The length of exhaust and supply ducts used with
ventilating equipment shall not exceed the lengths determined in accordance
with Table M1504.2 as revised.
      Exception: Duct length shall not be limited where the duct system
complies with the manufacturer’s design criteria or where the flow rate of the
installed ventilating equipment is verified by the installer or approved third
party using a flow hood, flow grid, or other airflow measuring device.
TABLE M1504.2
DUCT LENGTH
 
Fan airflow rating (CFM)       0-80 81-125 126-200 201-300 Over 300
Minimum duct diameter (inches) 4    5      6       7       8
 
   M1504.3 Exhaust openings. Air exhaust openings shall terminate as follows:
   1.   Not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from property lines.
   2.   Not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from gravity air intake openings,
operable windows, and doors.
   3.   Not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from mechanical air intake openings
except where the exhaust opening is located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above
the air intake opening. Openings shall comply with Sections R303.5.2 and
R303.6.
   4.   Minimum clearance between the exhaust and intake openings of an HRV/PRV
system shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions.
   M1505.4 Whole-house mechanical ventilation system. Whole-house mechanical
ventilation systems shall be designed in accordance with Sections M1505.4.1
through M1505.4.4.
      Exceptions:
      1.   A bathroom exhaust fan shall operate continuously at a minimum rate
of 20 cfm. A 6-inch-round passive makeup air shall be provided. If opening
directly into the occupied space, such opening shall not decrease the comfort
conditions of the occupied space. Such opening may also be used to provide
combustion air for fuel-fired appliances if sized and designed for combustion
air purposes. If opening into the mechanical room, permanent openings shall be
provided between the mechanical room and occupied space to provide a path of
travel for the air. The exhaust fan shall be located in the bathroom farthest
away from the source of makeup air and shall be rated for 0.8 sones or less.
      2.   A 4-inch-round outdoor air duct connected to the return side of the
air handler. The duct shall be insulated to a minimum R-6 and shall connect to
the return duct within 8 feet of the air handler connection, not above a
finished ceiling.
TABLE M1505.4.4
MINIMUM REQUIRED LOCAL EXHAUST RATES FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
 
AREA TO BE EXHAUSTED   EXHAUST RATES
Bathrooms—Toilet RoomMechanical exhaust capacity of 50 cfm intermittent or 20
                       cfm continuous
 
   Section M1506 Subslab Soil Exhaust Systems.
   M1506.1 General. When a subslab soil exhaust system is provided, the duct
shall conform to the requirements of this section.
   M1506.2 Materials. Subslab soil exhaust system duct material shall be air
duct material listed and labeled to the requirements of UL 181 for Class 0 air
ducts, or any of the following piping materials that comply with the plumbing
code as building sanitary drainage and vent pipe: cast iron; galvanized steel;
copper or copper-alloy pipe and tube of a weight not less than type DWV; and
plastic piping.
   M1506.3 Grade. Exhaust system ducts shall not be trapped and shall have a
minimum slope of 1/8 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1 percent slope).
   M1506.4 Termination. Subslab soil exhaust system ducts shall extend through
the roof and terminate at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the roof and at least
10 feet (3,048 mm) from any operable openings or air intake.
   M1506.5 Identification. Subslab soil exhaust ducts shall be permanently
identified within each floor level by means of a tag, stencil or other approved
marking.
   M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems. Above-ground duct systems shall conform
to the following:
   1.    Equipment connected to duct systems shall be designed to limit
discharge air temperature to not greater than 250°F (121°C).
   2.    Factory-made ducts shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL
181 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Flexible
air ducts shall be limited in length to 14 feet. Flexible air connectors are
not allowed.
   3.    Fibrous glass duct construction shall conform to the SMACNA Fibrous
Glass Duct Construction Standards or NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction
Standards.
   4.    Field-fabricated and shop-fabricated metal and flexible duct
constructions shall conform to the SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction
Standards—Metal and Flexible except as allowed by Table M1601.1.1. Galvanized
steel shall conform to ASTM A 653, except that sheet steel and strip used for
duct, connectors, and round duct shall be G40 galvanized steel of lock-forming
quality.
   5.    The use of gypsum products to construct return air ducts or plenums is
permitted, provided that the air temperature does not exceed 125°F (52°C) and
exposed surfaces are not subject to condensation.
   6.    Duct systems shall be constructed of materials having a flame spread
index of not greater than 200.
   7.    Stud wall cavities and the spaces between solid floor joists to be
used as air plenums shall comply with the following conditions:
      7.1.    These cavities or spaces shall not be used as a plenum for supply
air.
      7.2.   These cavities or spaces shall not be part of a required fire-
resistance-rated assembly.
      7.3.    Stud wall cavities shall not convey air from more than one floor
level.
      7.4.    Stud wall cavities and joist-space plenums shall be isolated from
adjacent concealed spaces by tight-fitting fire blocking in accordance with
Section R302.11. Fireblocking materials used for isolation shall comply with
Section R302.11.1.
      7.5.    Stud wall cavities in the outside walls of the building envelope
assemblies shall not be utilized as air plenums.
      8.   Volume dampers, equipment, and other means of supply, return, and
exhaust air adjustment used in system balancing shall be provided with access.
   M1601.1.2 Underground duct systems. Underground duct systems shall be
constructed of approved concrete, clay, metal, or plastic. The maximum design
temperature for systems utilizing plastic duct and fittings shall be 150°F
(66°C). Metal ducts shall be protected from corrosion in an approved manner or
shall be completely encased in concrete not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick.
Nonmetallic ducts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. Plastic pipe and fitting materials shall conform to cell
classification 12454-B of ASTM D1248 or ASTM D1784 and external loading
properties of ASTM D2412. Ducts shall slope to a drainage point that has
access. Ducts shall be sealed and secured prior to encasing the ducts in
concrete or direct burial. Metallic ducts having an approved protective coating
and nonmetallic ducts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
   M1601.4.1 Joints, seams, and connections. Longitudinal and transverse
joints, seams, and connections in metallic and nonmetallic ducts shall be
constructed as specified in SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards—Metal and
Flexible and NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards. Joints,
longitudinal and transverse seams, and connections in ductwork outside the
building thermal envelope, all return ducts located within 10 feet (3.05 m) of
any appliance or all return ducts within a mechanical room, and all supply main
trunk ducts and branch duct connections to the main trunk ducts shall be
securely fastened and sealed with welds, gaskets, mastics (adhesives), mastic-
plus-embedded-fabric systems, liquid sealants, or tapes. Tapes and mastics used
to seal fibrous glass ductwork shall be listed and labeled in accordance with
UL 181A and shall be marked “181A-P” for pressure-sensitive tape, “181 A-M” for
mastic, or “181 A-H” for heat-sensitive tape.
   Tapes and mastics used to seal metallic and flexible air ducts and flexible
air connectors shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked “181 B-FX” for
pressure-sensitive tape or “181 B-M” for mastic. Duct connections to flanges of
air distribution system equipment shall be sealed and mechanically fastened.
Mechanical fasteners for use with flexible nonmetallic air ducts shall comply
with UL 181B and shall be marked 181 B-C. Crimp joints for round metallic ducts
shall have a contact lap of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) and shall be
mechanically fastened by means of not less than three sheet metal screws or
rivets equally spaced around the joint.
   Closure systems used to seal all ductwork shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Spray polyurethane foam shall be permitted to be applied without
additional joint seals.
      2.    Where a duct connection is made that is partially inaccessible,
three screws or rivets shall be equally spaced on the exposed portion of the
joint so as to prevent a hinge effect.
      3.    For ducts having a static pressure classification of less than 2
inches of water column (500 Pa), additional closure systems shall not be
required for continuously welded joints and seams and locking-type joints and
seams. This exception shall not apply to snap-lock and button-lock type joints
and seams that are located outside of conditioned space.
   M1601.4.4 Support. Factory-made ducts listed in accordance with UL 181 shall
be supported in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Field- and shop-fabricated fibrous glass ducts shall be supported in accordance
with the SMACNA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards or the NAIMA Fibrous
Glass Duct Construction Standards. Field- and shop-fabricated metal and
flexible ducts shall be supported in accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Duct
Construction Standards—Metal and Flexible. Metal ducts shall be supported by 1/
2-inch-wide (13 mm) 18-gage, 1-inch-wide (25 mm) 24-gage, or 1 1/2-inch-wide
(39 mm) 26-gage metal straps or 12-gage galvanized wire at intervals not
exceeding 10 feet (3,048 mm), or other approved means.
   G2402.3 (201.3) Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in
this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International
Fire Code, NFPA-70, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
or Uniform Plumbing Code, such terms shall have meanings ascribed to them as in
those codes.
   G2407.6 (304.6) Outdoor combustion air. Outdoor combustion air shall be
provided through opening(s) to the outdoors in accordance with Section
G2407.6.1, G2407.6.2, or G2407.6.3. The minimum dimension of air openings shall
be not less than 3 inches (76 mm).
   Combustion air intake opening shall be located a minimum of 3 feet (914 mm)
from a gas meter.
   G2407.6.3 Alternate combustion air sizing. As an alternate, the net free
area of openings, ducts, or plenums supplying air to an area containing gas-
and oil-burning appliances shall be in accordance with CSA B149.1:20, Natural
Gas and Propane Installation Code, published by the Canadian Standards
Association (CSA).
   The combustion air duct is required to be upsized one diameter size when a
dryer is installed in the same room as the combustion air.
   G2408.1 (305.1) General. Equipment and appliances shall be installed as
required by the terms of their approval in accordance with the conditions of
listing, the manufacturer's instructions, and this code. Manufacturer's
installation instructions shall be available on the job site at the time of
inspection. Where a code provision is less restrictive than the conditions of
the listing of the equipment or appliance or the manufacturer's installation
instructions, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation
instructions shall apply.
   After completion of the installation, all safety and operating controls and
venting shall be tested before placing the burner in service in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions. The following requirements need
to be recorded and affixed to the inside of the gas train access panel:
   1.   The rate of flow of the gas or fuel shall be adjusted to within plus or
minus 5 percent of the required Btu/hr rating at the manifold pressure
specified by the manufacturer. When the prevailing pressure is less than the
manifold pressure specified, the rates shall be adjusted at the prevailing
pressure.
   2.   The gas inlet pressure per the manufacturer's installation settings.
   3.   The temperature rise across the heat exchanger per the manufacturer's
installation settings.
   4.   The static pressure of the supply and return ducts per the
manufacturer's installation settings.
   Unlisted appliances approved in accordance with Section G2404.3 shall be
limited to uses recommended by the manufacturer and shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the provisions of this code,
and the requirements determined by the code official.
   G2408.4 (305.7) Clearances from grade. Equipment and appliances installed at
grade level shall be supported on a level concrete slab or other approved
material extending not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) above adjoining grade or
shall be suspended not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above adjoining grade. Such
supports shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
   G2410.2 (309.2) Connections. Electrical connections between appliances and
the building wiring, including the grounding of the appliances, shall conform
to the National Electric Code.
   G2415.2 (404.2) CSST. CSST piping systems shall be installed in accordance
with the terms of their approval, the conditions of listing, the manufacturer’s
instructions, and this code.
   The piping located on the exterior extending from the gas meter to the
inside of the structure shall be a metallic pipe in compliance with Section
G2414.3. The entrance into the structure shall be provided with the appropriate
transition flange where an alternate gas piping material is utilized on the
inside of the structure.
   G2415.3 (404.3) Prohibited locations. Piping shall not be installed in or
through a ducted supply, return or exhaust, or a clothes chute, chimney or gas
vent, dumbwaiter, or elevator shaft.
   G2415.6 (404.6) Piping through foundation walls. Underground piping, where
installed through the outer foundation or basement wall of a building, shall be
encased in a protective sleeve or protected by an approved device or method.
The space between the gas piping and the sleeve and between the sleeve and the
wall shall be sealed to prevent the entry of gas and water.
   G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. The minimum depth shall be increased
to 18 inches (457 mm) if external damage to the piping or tubing from external
forces is likely to result. Where a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) of depth
cannot be provided, the pipe shall be installed in conduit or bridged
(shielded).
   G2415.12.1 (404.12.1) Individual outdoor appliances. Not adopted by the
city.
   G2420.1.2 (409.1.2) Prohibited locations. Shutoff valves shall be prohibited
in concealed locations, furnace plenums, and accessible spaces between a fixed
ceiling and a dropped ceiling unless serving a gas appliance installed in that
space.
   Part VII—Plumbing. The following chapters are not adopted by the city:
Chapter 25—Plumbing Administration; Chapter 26—General Plumbing Requirements;
Chapter 27—Plumbing Fixtures; Chapter 28—Water Heaters; Chapter 29—Water Supply
and Distribution except Section P2904 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems;
Chapter 30—Sanitary Drainage; Chapter 31—Vents; Chapter 32—Traps; and Chapter
33—Storm Drainage.
   The provisions of the plumbing code of the city of Sioux Falls or the most
current Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the South Dakota State Plumbing
Commission shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and
replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, and
appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system for detached
one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (town
houses) not more than three stories high with separate means of egress and
their accessory structures.
   Part VIII—Electrical. The following chapters are not adopted by the city:
Chapter 34—General Requirements; Chapter 35—Electrical Definitions; Chapter
36—Services; Chapter 37—Branch Circuit and Feeder Requirements; Chapter
38—Wiring Methods; Chapter 39—Power and Lighting Distribution; Chapter
40—Device and Luminaires; Chapter 41—Appliance Installation; Chapter
42—Swimming Pools; Chapter 43—Class 2 Remote- Control, Signaling and Power-
Limited Circuits.
   The provisions of the electrical code of the city of Sioux Falls or the most
current code adopted National Electrical Code by the South Dakota State
Electrical Commission shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of any electrical
system, apparatus, wiring, or equipment for electrical, light, heat, power,
fire alarms, and associate controls for detached one- and two-family dwellings
and multiple single-family dwellings (town houses) not more than three stories
high with separate means of egress and their accessory structures.
(1992 Code, § 11-2) (Ord. 114-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-
2003; Ord. 23-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 30-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 105-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 18-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 101-12, passed 12-18-2012;
Ord. 126-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 29-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 141-21,
passed 11-16-2021; Ord. 95-22, passed 8-9-2022)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.015 ADOPTED.
   (a)   The International Building Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix C,
Appendix I, and Appendix O as published by the International Code Council Inc.,
and amendments and additions thereto as provided in this article are hereby
adopted as the building code by the city for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all
buildings and structures in the city providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor.
   (b)   The adoption of the International Building Code, 2021 edition, will
become effective January 1, 2022. The minimum building standards in the 2021
edition of the International Building Code and amendments thereto shall be
applied to any building permit issued after December 31, 2021.
   (c)   The city shall publish this ordinance, without attachments, after its
passage. The attachments are on file and available for inspection at the office
of the city clerk.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 1.6005; 1992 Code, § 11-17) (Ord. 2530, passed 3-11-1968;
Ord. 33-72, passed 5-30-1972; Ord. 61-80, passed 7-7-1980; Ord. 103-85, passed
12-2-1985; Ord. 110-88, passed 12-28-1988; Ord. 11-92, passed 2-3-1992; Ord.
74-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 113-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 22-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 28-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 16-10,
passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 99-12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 125-15, passed 12-15-2015;
Ord. 28-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 138-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.016 CONFLICTS.
   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by
this subchapter and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law
or city ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and
be controlling.
(1992 Code, § 11-18)
§ 150.017 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL
BUILDING CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Building
Code adopted in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or not adopted by the
city as follows. All other sections or subsections of the 2021 International
Building Code as published shall remain the same.
   [A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the building code of
the city of Sioux Falls, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
   [A] 101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code or the
plumbing code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of
delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These
requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery
to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of
residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.
   [A] 101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the plumbing code shall apply to the
installation, alteration, repair, and replacement of plumbing systems,
including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and
where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas
system.
   101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the NFPA 70 shall apply to the
installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs,
replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances
thereto.
   [A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Building services is hereby
created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building
official. The function of the agency shall be the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals
or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
civilly or criminally rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of
any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or structure for any
damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city, or its
officers and employees, be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under
this code.
   [A] 104.8.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against
an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall
be afforded all the protection provided by the city's insurance pool and any
immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal law and
defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall
not be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The floodplain administrator shall not
grant modifications to any provision required in flood hazard areas as
established by Chapter 156: Floodplain Management, unless a determination has
been made that:
   1.    A showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics
of the size, configuration, or topography of the site render the elevation
standards of Chapter 156: Floodplain Management, inappropriate.
   2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable.
   3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing laws or ordinances.
   4.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford
relief, considering the flood hazard.
   5.   Submission to the applicant of written notice specifying the difference
between the design flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is
to be built, stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation, and stating that
construction below the design flood elevation increases risks to life and
property.
   [A] 105.1 Required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to
be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain
the required permit. The building official may exempt permits for minor work.
   [A] 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of
this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in
any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
   Building:
   1.    One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater
than 200 square feet (18.6 m2). A placement permit is required by the zoning
division.
   2.    Fences not over 7 feet (2,134 mm) high. A fence permit is required by
the zoning division.
   3.    Oil derricks.
   4.    Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height measured
from the bottom grade elevation to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids.
   5.    Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not greater
than 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width is
not greater than 2:1.
   6.    Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route. A driveway permit is required by the zoning division. A
sidewalk permit is required by the engineering division.
   7.    Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and
similar finish work.
   8.   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and
scenery.
   9.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that
are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.
   10.    Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
   11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and
two-family dwellings.
   12.   Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by an
exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the
exterior wall and do not require additional support.
   13.    Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters, and partitions
not over 5 feet 9 inches (1,753 mm) in height.
   Electrical:
   1.   Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement
of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to
approved permanently installed receptacles.
   2.   Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code
shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the
installations of towers and antennas.
   3.   Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
   Gas:
   1.    Portable heating appliance.
   2.    Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
   Mechanical:
   1.    Portable heating appliance.
   2.    Portable ventilation equipment.
   3.    Portable cooling unit.
   4.    Steam, hot, or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.
   5.    Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it
unsafe.
   6.    Portable evaporative cooler.
   7.    Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or
less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (0.75 kW) or less.
   Plumbing:
   1.    The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
   2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves,
or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes, or fixtures.
   105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application therefor in writing on a form for that purpose. Such
application shall:
   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.
   2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
   3.   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
   4.   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in Section 107.
   5.   State the valuation of the proposed work.
   6.   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.
   7.   Give such other data and information as required by the building
official.
   [A] 107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of one complete set of
plans in an electronic submittal in PDF format along with other construction
documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report, and other
data shall be submitted with each permit application. The construction
documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required
by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed.
Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require
additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional.
      Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of
construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.
   [A] 107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official
issues a permit, the construction documents shall be reviewed for compliance.
One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building
official.
   [A] 109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical,
gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee
for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the schedule as
established by the applicable governing authority.
   The fee schedules for the issuance of a building permit shall be as follows:
Table No. 1-A. Residential Building Permit Fees
Group R Division 3
   (Including Congregate Residences Defined as R-3 and Accessory Group U
Occupancies)
Total Valuation Fee
Table No. 1-A. Residential Building Permit Fees
Group R Division 3
   (Including Congregate Residences Defined as R-3 and Accessory Group U
Occupancies)
Total Valuation           Fee
$1 to $4,000.00           $40.00
                          For valuations in excess of $4,000.00, $32.50 for the
$4,000.01 to $25,000.00   first $2,000.00, plus $6.00 for each additional
                          $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
                          $25,000.00
                          $170.50 for the first $25,000.00, plus $4.50 for each
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00  additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $50,000.00
                          $283.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus $3.00 for each
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00 additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $100,000.00
$100,000.01 and up        $433.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $2.50 for each
                          additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
 
Table No. 1-B. Commercial Building Permit Fees
Commercial Building Permit Fees Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, S, Group R
Divisions 1, 2, and 4
(including Group U's accessory to the R-1, R-2, and R-4 occupancies)
Total Valuation Fee
Table No. 1-B. Commercial Building Permit Fees
Commercial Building Permit Fees Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, S, Group R
Divisions 1, 2, and 4
(including Group U's accessory to the R-1, R-2, and R-4 occupancies)
Total Valuation            Fee
$1.00 to $2,000.00         $40.00
                           For valuation in excess of $2,000.00, $45.00 for the
$2,000.01 to $25,000.00    first $2,000.00 plus $9.00 for each additional
                           $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
                           $25,000.00
                           $252.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $6.50 for each
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00   additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                           including $50,000.00
                           $414.50 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.50 for each
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00  additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                           including $100,000.00
                           $639.50 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.50 for
$100,000.01 to $500,000.00 each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to
                           and including $500,000.00
Greater than $500,000.00   $2,039.50 for the first $500,000.00, plus $3.00 for
                           each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
 
Table 1-C. Other Inspections and Fees
Table 1-C. Other Inspections and Fees
1.   Inspection outside of normal business hours, per hour* (minimum charge-one$200
hour)
2.   Reinspection fees, per hour                                               $200
3.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
approved plans, per hour* (minimum charge-one-half hour)
   *Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. Th$100
cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe
benefits of the employees involved.
4.   Wrecking permit fees                                                      $40
5.   Residential reshingles                                                    $40
6.   Residential resides (Group R and U occupancies)                           $40
7.   Residential window replacements with no structural modifications (Group R $40
and U occupancies)
8.   Board of appeals fees: Before any action is taken by the board, the party or
parties requesting such hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board, or
his or her authorized agent, the sum of $100 to cover the approximate cost of the  
procedure. Under no condition shall the sum or any part thereof be refunded for   $100
failure of the request to be approved.
   Exception. Appeals referred to the board from the International Property
Maintenance Code.
9.   A mileage fee at the current rate per mile as established by the finance   
department shall be charged for any inspection occurring outside city limits.
10.   Residential contractor's license examination fee                         $75
11.   When submittal documents are required by Section 106, a plan review fee
shall be paid when it is deemed that a plan review is required. Said plan review
fee shall be 25 percent of the building permit fee as specified on Table 1-B. The
plan review fee specified herein is a separate fee from the building permit fee
and is in addition to the building permit fee. When submittal documents are        
incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan reviews or when a project
involves deferred submittals as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, an additional plan
review fee may be charged at 25% of the building permit fee specified on Table 1-
B.
12.   Fee for late corrections. If corrections listed on an inspection report are
not completed within the specified time, the inspector shall issue a correction   $100
order and assess a $100 administrative fee. The inspector shall also assess a
reinspection fee.
13.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where building
construction work is completed without a request for an inspection, an            $250
administrative fee of $250.00 may be charged.
 
   Exception: Group R Division 3 and Group U occupancies.
   109.7 Delinquent accounts. The city may refuse to issue permits or conduct
inspections for any person or business whose account is delinquent.
   [A] 110.3.1 Footing inspection. Footing inspections shall be made after
excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in
place. If an inspection is required for concrete foundations, any required
forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall
be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C
94, the concrete need not be on the job.
   [A] 111.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the
building or structure and does not find violations of the provisions of this
code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the
building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the
following:
   1.    The building permit number.
   2.    The address of the structure.
   3.   A statement that the described portion of the structure has been
inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy
and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is
classified.
   4.    The name of the building official.
   5.   The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
   6.   The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.
   7.   The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.
   8.   The design occupant load.
   9.   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler
system is required.
   10.   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
   [A] 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code and the fire code, to review all prospective
changes to the respective codes and to submit recommendations to the
responsible official and the city council, to review requests for house moves,
and to examine applicants for licensing and to investigate matters brought
before the board, there shall be and is hereby created a building board of
appeals and examiners. The building official shall be an ex officio member of
said board but shall not have a vote on any matter before the board. The board
of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor with consent of the city council and
shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the building and/or fire official.
   [A] 114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the
legal counsel of the jurisdiction to deem the violation as a strict liability
offense and institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation
of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
   201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and
terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this
chapter. In addition, the following words and terms are being added and/or
modified to the defined terms already incorporated by reference in Section
150.017 of this code.
   FIRE AREA. The aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by fire walls, fire
barriers, exterior walls, or horizontal assemblies of a building.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   305.2.2 Twelve or fewer children. A facility having twelve or fewer children
receiving such day care shall be classified as part of the primary occupancy.
   305.2.3 Twelve or fewer children in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the
above within a dwelling unit and having twelve or fewer children receiving such
day care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the
International Residential Code.
   308.5.4 Twelve or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling unit. A
facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having twelve or fewer
persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy
or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
   310.4.2 Lodging houses. Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer
guest rooms and 10 or fewer total occupants shall be permitted to be
constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code.
   423.4 Group E occupancies. All Group E occupancies with an occupant load of
50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed to withstand a wind of 200
mph.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Group E day care facilities.
   2.   Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.
   3.   Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.
   [F] 501.2 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be
provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall
be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road
fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with
their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical
letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be a minimum of
4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where
required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in
additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Multi-building
campus/complex developments addressed on private or public streets shall be
provided with signage at the entrance to the campus/complex indicative of the
address ranges within. Where access is by means of a private road and the
building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or
other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address
identification shall be maintained.
   603.1.2 Piping. The use of combustible piping materials shall be permitted
where installed in accordance with the limitations of the International
Mechanical Code and the Plumbing Code.
   706.6.2 Buildings with sloped roofs. Where a fire wall serves as an interior
wall for a building, and the roof on one side or both sides of the fire wall
slopes toward the fire wall at a slope greater than 2 units vertical in 12
units horizontal (2:12), the fire wall shall extend to a height equal to the
height of the roof located 4 feet (1,219 mm) from the fire wall plus 30 inches
(762 mm). In no case shall the extension of the fire wall be less than 30
inches (762 mm).
      Exception: The fire wall may terminate at the underside of the roof
sheathing, deck, or slab of the lower roof, provided:
      1.   The roof assemblies within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the wall has not
less than a 1-hour fire resistance rating and the entire length and span of
supporting elements for the rated roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of
not less than 1 hour.
      2.   Openings in the roof on each side of the fire wall shall not be
located within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the fire wall.
   714.5.1.2 Through-penetration firestop system. Through penetrations of the
fire-resistive membrane shall be protected by an approved through-penetration
fire-stop system installed and tested in accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479,
with a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch of water (2.49 Pa).
The system shall have an F rating/T rating of not less than 1 hour but not less
than the required rating of the floor penetrated.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Floor penetrations contained and located within the cavity of a wall
above the floor or below the floor do not require a T rating.
      2.   Floor penetrations by floor drains, tub drains, or shower drains
contained and located within the concealed space of a horizontal assembly do
not require a T rating.
      3.   Floor penetrations of maximum 4-inch (102 mm) nominal diameter
penetrating directly into metal-enclosed electrical power switchgear do not
require a T rating.
   716.2.6.1 Door closing. Fire doors shall be latching and self- or automatic-
closing in accordance with this section.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Fire doors located in common walls separating sleeping units in
Group R-1 shall be permitted without automatic- or self-closing devices.
      2.   The elevator car doors and the associated hoistway enclosure doors
at the floor level designated for recall in accordance with Section 3003.2
shall be permitted to remain open during Phase I emergency recall operation.
      3.   Interior doors located in exit enclosures, smokeproof enclosures,
and exit passageways in Group R and I-1 occupancies shall be automatic closing
fire door assemblies in accordance with NFPA 80 and controlled in accordance
with NFPA 72.
   717.5.2 Fire barriers. Ducts and air transfer openings of fire barriers
shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their
listing. Ducts and air transfer openings shall not penetrate enclosures for
interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways, except as permitted by
Sections 1023.5 and 1024.6, respectively.
      Exceptions: Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of fire
barriers where any of the following apply:
      1.   Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as
part of the fire-resistance-rated assembly.
      2.   Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke control system in
accordance with Section 909 and where the use of a fire damper would interfere
with the operation of a smoke control system.
      3.   Such walls are penetrated by fully ducted HVAC systems, have a
required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, are in areas of other than
Group H, and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. For the purposes of
this exception, a fully ducted HVAC system shall be a duct system for conveying
supply, return, or exhaust air as part of the structure's HVAC system. Such a
duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel not less than No. 26 gage
thickness and shall be continuous from the air-handling appliance or equipment
to the air outlet and inlet terminals. Nonmetal flexible air ducts shall be
permitted in the following locations:
         3.1   At the duct connection to the air handling unit or equipment
located within the mechanical room in accordance with Section 603.9 of the
International Mechanical Code.
         3.2   From an overhead metal duct to a ceiling diffuser within the
same room in accordance with Section 603.6.2 of the International Mechanical
Code.
   [F] 903.2.6 Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings with a Group I fire area.
      Exceptions:
      1.   An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 is required in Group I-1 Condition 1 or 2 facilities.
      2.   An automatic sprinkler system is not required where Group I-4 day
care facilities are at the level of exit discharge and where every room where
care is provided has not fewer than one exterior exit door.
      3.   In buildings where Group I-4 day care is provided on levels other
than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be installed on the entire floor where care is
provided, all floors between the level of care and the level of exit discharge,
and all floors below the level of exit discharge other than areas classified as
an open parking garage.
   [F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with Groups R-
1 and R-4 fire areas and Group R-2 multifamily residences having six or more
dwelling units.
   [F] 903.2.10 Group S-2 parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings classified as parking garages where any of the
following conditions exist:
      1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage in accordance
with Section 406.6 exceeds 12,000 square feet (1,115 m2).
      2.   Where the enclosed parking garage in accordance with Section 406.6
is located beneath other groups.
      Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-
3 occupancies.
   [F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be required
in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an
approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that
will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall
not be omitted from a room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated
construction, or contains electrical equipment.
   1.    A room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes
a serious life or fire hazard.
   2.   A room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of
the nature of the contents, where approved by the fire code official. Such
rooms shall be separated from the remainder of the building by fire barrier
walls and horizontal assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than two hours.
   3.   Generator and transformer rooms separated from the remainder of the
building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-
resistance rating of not less than two hours.
   4.   Rooms or areas that are of noncombustible construction with wholly
noncombustible contents.
   5.   Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces.
   6.   Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms, and control spaces
associated with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with
Section 3008.
   [F] 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in
Group R occupancies shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance
with NFPA 13R where the Group R occupancy meets all of the following
conditions:
   1.   Four stories or fewer above grade plane.
   2.   The floor level of the highest story is 60 feet (18,288 mm) or less
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   3.   The floor level of the lowest story is 60 feet (18,288 mm) or less
below the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with
Sections 510.2 and 510.4 shall be measured from grade plane.
   [F] 903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems
shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1.
The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with
the requirements of this section and the Plumbing Code. For connections to
public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire
protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure
fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as
approved by the fire code official.
   [F] 904.13.2 System interconnection. The actuation of the fire suppression
system shall automatically shut down the fuel and/or electrical power supply to
the cooking equipment and all electrical receptacles located beneath the hood.
The fuel and electrical supply reset shall be manual.
   [F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load
of 1,000 or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an
occupant load of 1,000 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency
voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Group A-3 occupancies used for religious worship.
      2.   Where approved, the prerecorded announcement is allowed to be
manually deactivated for a period of time, not to exceed three minutes, for the
sole purpose of allowing a live voice announcement from an approved, constantly
attended location.
   [F] 907.2.2 Group B. A manual fire alarm system, which activates the
occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5, shall be
installed in Group B occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
   1.    The combined Group B occupant load of all floors is 500 or more.
   2.    The Group B occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the
lowest level of exit discharge.
   3.   The fire area contains an ambulatory care facility.
   4.   The Group B occupancy has more than two occupied levels.
      Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.
   [F] 907.2.6.2 Group I-2. An automatic smoke detection system shall be
installed in corridors in Group I-2 Condition 1 facilities and spaces permitted
to be open to the corridors by Section 407.2. The system shall be activated in
accordance with Section 907.4. Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancies shall be
equipped with an automatic smoke detection system as required in Section 407.
      Exception: Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments
that contain sleeping units where such units are provided with smoke detectors
that comply with UL 268. Such detectors shall provide a visual display on the
corridor side of each sleeping unit and shall provide an audible and visual
alarm at the care providers' station attending each unit. Smoke detectors
installed as part of an intelligent or addressable fire alarm system capable of
annunciation of room origin at a constantly attended location shall be
acceptable.
   [F] 907.2.8.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An automatic smoke detection
system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all interior corridors serving
sleeping units and at the top of each stairwell.
      Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in
buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where
each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to
an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit.
   [F] 907.2.9 Group R-2. Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be
installed in Group R-2 occupancies as required in Sections 907.2.9.1 through
907.2.9.4.
   [F] 907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual fire alarm system that
activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5
shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies where any of the following
conditions apply:
   1.    Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located three or more stories
above the lowest level of exit discharge.
   2.    Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located more than one story
below the highest level of exit discharge of exits serving the dwelling unit or
sleeping unit.
   3.    The building contains more than 16 dwelling units or sleeping units.
   4.    The building contains four or more dwelling units or sleeping units
above the level of exit discharge.
      Exceptions:
      1.    A fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two
stories in height where all dwelling units or sleeping units and contiguous
attic and crawl spaces are separated from each other and public or common areas
by not less than 1-hour fire partitions and each dwelling unit or sleeping unit
has an exit directly to a public way, egress court, or yard.
      2.    Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and the occupant notification appliances
will automatically activate throughout the notification zones upon a sprinkler
water flow.
      3.    A fire alarm system is not required in buildings that do not have
interior corridors serving dwelling units and are protected by an approved
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2, provided that dwelling units either have a means of egress door
opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to the exits or
are served by open-ended corridors designed in accordance with Section 1027.6,
Exception 3.
   907.2.9.4 Smoke detectors. Automatic smoke detection shall be provided in
each stairway and all exit corridors.
   [F] 907.2.13.1.2 Duct smoke detection. Duct smoke detectors complying with
Section 907.3.1 shall be located as follows:
   1.    In the main return air and exhaust air plenum of each air-conditioning
system having a capacity greater than 2,000 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (0.94
m3/s). Such detectors shall be located in a serviceable area downstream of the
last duct inlet.
   2.    At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more
stories from a return air duct or plenum of an air-conditioning system. In
Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, a smoke detector is allowed to be used in each
return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4 m3/s) and serving not
more than 10 air-inlet openings.
   3.    Duct smoke detectors installed more than 10 feet above a finished
floor, above a ceiling, or on a rooftop shall be installed with remote test/
indicators in an approved location below and in proximity to the unit served.
   [F] 907.5 Occupant notification. Occupant notification by fire alarms shall
be in accordance with Sections 907.5.1 through 907.5.2.3.3. Occupant
notification by smoke alarms in Group R-1 occupancies shall comply with Section
907.5.2.1.3.2.
   [F] 907.5.2.1.3 Audible signal frequency in Group R-1 sleeping rooms.
Audible signal frequency in Group R-1 occupancies shall be in accordance with
Sections 907.5.2.1.3.1 and 907.5.2.1.3.2.
      [F] 907.5.2.1.3.1 Fire alarm system signal. In sleeping rooms of Group R-
1 occupancies, the audible alarm activated by a fire alarm system shall be a
520-Hz low frequency signal complying with NFPA 72.
      [F] 907.5.2.1.3.2 Smoke alarm signal in sleeping rooms. In sleeping rooms
of Group R 1 occupancies that are required by Section 907.2.8 or 907.2.9 to
have a fire alarm system, the audible alarm signal activated by single- or
multiple-station smoke alarms in the dwelling unit or sleeping unit shall be a
520-Hz signal complying with NFPA 72. Where a sleeping room smoke alarm is
unable to produce a 520-Hz signal, the 520 Hz alarm signal shall be provided by
a listed notification appliance or a smoke detector with an integral 520-Hz
sounder.
   [F] 912.2.1 Visible location. Fire department connections shall be located
on the street side of buildings or facing approved fire apparatus access roads,
fully visible and recognizable from the street, fire apparatus access road or
nearest point of fire department vehicle access, or as otherwise approved by
the fire code official. A weather-rated horn/strobe connected to the fire
detection or sprinkler system shall be located not lower than 8 feet above the
fire department connection and within 10 feet horizontally of the connection.
The weather-rated horn/strobe must be visible from the fire lane or street.
Table 1004.5
Maximum Floor Area Allowances Per Occupant
Function of Space Occupant Load Factora
Function of Space                                        Occupant Load Factora
Accessory storage areas, mechanical equipment room       300 gross
Agricultural building                                    300 gross
Aircraft hangars                                         500 gross
Airport terminal                                          
   Baggage claim                                      20 gross
   Baggage handling                                   300 gross
   Waiting areas                                      15 gross
Assembly
   Gaming floors (keno, slots, etc.)                  11 gross
   Exhibit gallery and museum                         30 net
Assembly with fixed seats                                See Section 1004.6
   Assembly without fixed seats
   Concentrated (chairs only—not fixed)             7 net
   Standing space                                     5 net
   Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)                 15 net
Bowling centers, allow 5 persons for each lane including 7 net
15 feet of runway, and for additional areas
Business areas                                           150 gross
   Concentrated business use areas                    See Section 1004.8
Courtrooms—other than fixed seating areas              40 net
Day care                                                 35 net
Dormitories                                              50 gross
Educational
   Classroom area                                     25 net
   Shops and other vocational room areas              50 net
Exercise rooms                                           50 gross
Group H-5 fabrication and manufacturing areas            200 gross
Industrial areas                                         100 gross
Institutional areas
   Inpatient treatment areas                          240 gross
   Outpatient areas                                   100 gross
   Sleeping areas                                     120 gross
Kitchens, commercial                                     200 gross
Library
   Reading rooms                                      50 net
   Stack area                                         100 gross
Locker rooms                                             50 gross
Mall buildings—covered and open                        See Section 402.8.2
Mercantile                                               60 gross
Storage, stock, shipping areas                           300 gross
Parking garages                                          200 gross
Residential                                              200 gross
Skating rinks, swimming pools
   Rink and pool                                      50 gross
   Decks                                              15 gross
Stages and platforms                                     15 net
Warehouses                                               500 gross
 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2   
a.   Floor area in square feet per occupant
   1010.1.6 Thresholds. Thresholds at doorways shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19.1
mm) in height above the finished floor or landing for sliding doors serving
dwelling units or ½ inch (12.7 mm) above the finished floor or landing for
other doors. Raised thresholds and floor level changes greater than 1/4 inch
(6.4 mm) at doorways shall be beveled with a slope not greater than one unit
vertical in two units horizontal (50 percent slope).
      Exceptions:
      1.    In occupancy Group R-2 or R-3, threshold heights for sliding and
side hinged exterior doors shall be permitted to be up to 8 inches (203 mm) in
height if all of the following apply:
         1.1.   The door is not part of the required means of egress.
         1.2.    The door is not part of an accessible route as required by
Chapter 11.
         1.3.    The door is not part of an accessible unit, Type A unit or
Type B unit.
      2.   In Type B units, where Exception 5 to Section 1010.1.5 permits a 4-
inch (102 mm) elevation change at the door, the threshold height on the
exterior side of the door shall not exceed 4 3/4 inches (120 mm) in height
above the exterior deck, patio or balcony for sliding doors or 4 1/2 inches
(114 mm) above the exterior deck, patio or balcony for other doors.
   1011.5.2 Riser height and tread depth. Stair riser heights shall be 7 inches
(178 mm) maximum and 4 inches (102 mm) minimum. The riser height shall be
measured vertically between the nosings of adjacent treads or between the
stairway landing and the adjacent tread. Rectangular tread depths shall be 11
inches (279 mm) minimum measured horizontally between the vertical planes of
the foremost projection of adjacent treads and at a right angle to the tread’s
nosing. Winder treads shall have a minimumtread depth of 11 inches (279 mm)
between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads at
the intersections with the walkline and a minimum tread depth of 10 inches (254
mm) within the clear width of the stair.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Spiral stairways in accordance with Section 1011.10.
      2.   Stairways connecting stepped aisles to cross aisles or concourses
shall be permitted to use the riser/tread dimension in Section 1029.14.2.
      3.   In Group R-3 occupancies, within dwelling units in Group R-
2 occupancies, and in Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group R-
3 occupancy or accessory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies,
the maximum riser height shall be 8 inches (203 mm), the minimum tread depth
shall be 10 inches (254 mm); the minimum winder tread depth at the walkline
shall be 10 inches (254 mm), and the minimum winder tread depth shall be 6
inches (152 mm). A nosing projection not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) but not
more than 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) shall be provided on stairways with solid risers
where the tread depth is less than 11 inches (279 mm).
      4.    See Section 503.1 of the International Existing Building Code for
the replacement of existing stairways.
      5.    In Group I-3 facilities, stairways providing access to guard
towers, observation stations, and control rooms, not more than 250 square feet
(23 m2) in area, shall be permitted to have a maximum riser height of 8 inches
(203 mm) and a minimum tread depth of 9 inches (229 mm).
   1015.4 Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings that
allow passage of a sphere 5 inches (127 mm) in diameter from the walking
surface to the required guard height.
      Exceptions:
      1.    The triangular openings at the open sides of a stair, formed by the
riser, tread, and bottom rail shall not allow passage of a sphere 6 inches (152
mm) in diameter.
      2.    At elevated walking surfaces for access to and use of electrical,
mechanical, or plumbing systems or equipment, guards shall not have openings
that allow passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.
      3.   In areas that are not open to the public within occupancies in Group
B, I-3, F, H, M, or S, and for alternating tread devices and ships ladders,
guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 21 inches (533
mm) in diameter.
      4.   In assembly seating areas, guards required at the end of aisles in
accordance with Section 1029.17.4 shall not have openings that allow passage of
a sphere 5 inches (127 mm) in diameter up to a height of 26 inches (660 mm).
From a height of 26 inches (660 mm) to 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the adjacent
walking surfaces, guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere
8 inches (203 mm) in diameter.
      5.   Within individual dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2 and
R-3 occupancies, guards on the open sides of stairs shall not have openings
that allow passage of a sphere 5 inches (127 mm) in diameter.
   1020.5 Dead ends. Where more than one exit or exit access doorway is
required, the exit access shall be arranged such that dead-end corridors do not
exceed 20 feet (6,096 mm) in length.
      Exceptions:
      1.    In Group I-3, Condition 2, 3, or 4, occupancies, the dead end in a
corridor shall not exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm).
      2.    In occupancies in Groups B, E, F, M, R-1, R-2, S, and U, where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the length of the dead-end corridors shall
not exceed 50 feet (15,240 mm).
      3.   In occupancies in Group I-1 where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1, the length of the dead-end corridors shall not exceed 30 feet (9,144
mm).
      4.    A dead-end corridor shall not be limited in length where the length
of the dead-end corridor is less than 2.5 times the least width of the dead-end
corridor.
      5.   In Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies, the length of dead-end
corridors that do not serve patient rooms or patient treatment spaces shall not
exceed 30 feet (9,144 mm).
   1023.8 Barrier at level of exit discharge. An interior exit stairway and
ramp shall not continue below its level of exit discharge unless an approved
barrier or a directional exit sign is provided at the level of exit discharge
to prevent persons from unintentionally continuing into levels below.
Directional exit signs shall be provided as specified in Section 1013.
   1031.3.1 Minimum size. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have a
minimum net clear opening of 5.0 square feet (0.46 m2).
   1030.3 Maximum height from floor. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall
have the bottom of the clear opening not greater than 48 inches (1,219 mm)
measured from the floor.
   1031.5.2 Ladders or steps. Area wells with a vertical depth of more than 48
inches (1,219 mm) shall be equipped with an approved permanently affixed ladder
or steps. The ladder or steps shall not be obstructed by the emergency escape
and rescue opening when the window or door is in the open position. Ladders or
steps required by this section shall not be required to comply with Section
1011.
   1104.4 Multistory buildings and facilities. At least one accessible route
shall connect each accessible story, mezzanine and occupied roofs in multilevel
buildings and facilities.
   Exceptions:
   1.    An accessible route from an accessible level is not required in
facilities that are less than three stories in height or have less than 3,000
square feet (279 m2) per story. This exception shall not apply to:
      1.1.   Multiple tenant facilities of Group M occupancies containing five
or more tenant spaces used for the sales or rental of goods and where at least
one such tenant space is located on a floor level above or below the accessible
levels;
      1.2.    Stories or mezzanines containing offices of health care providers
(Group B or I);
      1.3.    Passenger transportation facilities and airports (Group A-3 or
B);
      1.4.    Government buildings; or
      1.5   Structures with four or more dwelling units.
   2.    Stories, mezzanines, or occupied roofs that do not contain accessible
elements or other spaces as determined by Section 1107 or 1108 are not required
to be served by an accessible route from an accessible level.
   3.    In air traffic control towers, an accessible route is not required to
serve the cab and the floor immediately below the cab.
   4.    Where a two-story building or facility has one story or mezzanine with
an occupant load of five or fewer persons that does not contain public use
space, that story or mezzanine shall not be required to be connected by an
accessible route to the story above or below.
   1106.10 Signage. Accessible parking spaces and access aisles are required to
be identified by signs. Signs shall be located at the head of accessible
parking stalls and access aisles. The bottom of the lowest signs shall be
located at least 60 inches above the pavement.
   As referenced below, standard and van accessible parking space signs shall
state, "RESERVED PARKING" and include the International Symbol of
Accessibility; supplemental signage must additionally state, "STATE PERMIT OR
LICENSE REQUIRED. $100 MINIMUM FINE AND CLASS 2 MISDEMEANOR FOR VIOLATORS." A
van accessible parking space must have additional signage stating, "VAN
ACCESSIBLE." A van accessible access aisle must be provided with signage
including the International Symbol of Accessibility which states, "WHEELCHAIR
ACCESS AISLE. ABSOLUTELY NO PARKING."
   1106.11 Access aisles and markings. Each access that is part of an
accessible route shall extend the full length of the parking space it serves.
The aisle must have diagonally striped markings spaced every 4 feet (1,219 mm).
Boundaries of the access aisle must be marked. The end may be a squared or
curved shape. Two parking spaces may share an access aisle.
   Access aisles shall be placed on a level surface with a slope not to exceed
1:48.
   Where an access aisle is located immediately adjacent to a sidewalk that
provides the closest accessible route, the sidewalk must be provided with a
curb ramp access to serve the access aisle.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6270.jpg]
 
   1108.6.2.2.1 Type A units. In Group R-2 occupancies containing more than 20
dwelling units or sleeping units, at least 2 percent but not less than one of
the units shall be a Type A unit. All Group R-2 units on a site shall be
considered to determine the total number of units and the required number of
Type A units. Type A units shall be dispersed among the various classes of
units.
      Exceptions:
      1.    The number of Type A units is permitted to be reduced in accordance
with Section 1108.7.
      2.    Existing structures on a site shall not contribute to the total
number of units on a site.
      3.   The following provisions of the 2017 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2017 referenced
in Section 1103 Type A Dwelling are applicable.
         3.1   A work surface in the kitchen referenced in Section 1103.12.3
Clear Floor Space of ICC/ANSI A117.1-2017 is not required.
         3.2   The reduced work height of the kitchen sink at 34 inches
referenced in Section 1103.12.4.2 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2017 is not required.
         3.3   Appliances referenced in Section 1103.12.5 Appliances ICC/ANSI
A117.1-2017 and Laundry Equipment requires only the clear floor space
referenced in Section 305 Clear Floor Space of ICC/ANSI A117.1-2017.
   1205.3.3 Court drainage. The bottom of every court shall be properly graded
and drained to a public sewer or other approved disposal system complying with
the plumbing code.
   [E] 1301.1.1 Criteria. Buildings shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code.
   [P] 1502.1 General. Design and installation of roof drainage systems shall
comply with this section, Section 1611 of this code, and shall be sized and
discharge in accordance with the Plumbing Code. Unless roofs are sloped to
drain over roof edges, roof drains or scuppers shall be installed at each low
point of the roof.
   Roofs shall be sloped a minimum of 1 unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2
percent slope) for drainage unless designed for water accumulation in
accordance with Section 1611.2 Ponding instability.
   Roof drainage water from a building shall not be allowed to flow over public
property.
   [P] 1502.2 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scuppers. Where roof
drains are required, secondary (emergency overflow) roof drains or scuppers
shall be provided where the roof perimeter construction extends above the roof
in such a manner that water will be entrapped if the primary drains allow
buildup for any reason. The installation and sizing of secondary emergency
overflow drains, leaders, and conductors shall comply with Section 1611 of this
code and the Plumbing Code.
   1601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the structural
design of buildings, structures, and portions thereof regulated by this code.
   It shall not be the responsibility of the building official to determine
engineering requirements of this code. Exclusive of conventional light-frame
wood construction provisions referenced in Section 2308, the method to resist
loads as referenced in this chapter is the responsibility of a structural
engineer or other qualified design professional.
   1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas,
the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and
supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of
special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of
Sioux Falls" dated September 17, 1979, as amended or revised with the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The
adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be part of this section. If there is a conflict between the
provisions of this code and the city's floodplain management ordinance, the
provisions of Chapter 156: Floodplain Management, shall prevail.
   1703.1 Approved agency. An approved agency or the design professional of
record shall provide all information as necessary for the building official to
determine that the agency meets the applicable requirements specified in
Sections 1703.1.1 through 1703.1.3.
   1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the
building official for construction as specified in Section 105, the owner or
the owner's authorized agent, other than the contractor, shall employ one or
more approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during
construction on the types of work specified in Section 1705 and identify the
approved agencies to the building official. These special inspections and tests
are in addition to the inspections by the building official that are identified
in Section 110.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Special inspections and tests are not required for construction of
a minor nature or as warranted by conditions in the jurisdiction as approved by
the building official.
      2.    Unless otherwise required by the building official, special
inspections and tests are not required for Group U occupancies that are
accessory to a residential occupancy including, but not limited to, those
listed in Section 312.1.
      3.    Special inspections and tests are not required for portions of
structures designed and constructed in accordance with the cold-formed steel
light-frame construction provisions of Section 2211.1.2 or the conventional
light-frame construction provisions of Section 2308.
      4.    The contractor is permitted to employ the approved agencies where
the contractor is also the owner.
      5.    The frequency and amount of special inspections shall be as
determined by the design professional of record. The continuous and periodic
inspections referenced in Tables 1705.2.3, 1705.3, 1705.5.3, 1705.6, 1705.7,
and 1705.8 are considered as guidelines.
   1705.3 Concrete construction. Special inspections and tests of concrete
construction shall be performed in accordance with this section and Table
1705.3.
      Exception: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
      1.    Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or
less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock.
      2.    Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three
stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock
where:
         2.1.    The footings and foundation walls support walls of light-frame
construction.
         2.2.    The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7.
         2.3.    The structural design of the footing is based on a specified
compressive strength, f’c, not more than 3,000 pounds per square inch (psi)
(20.6 MPa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the approved
construction documents or used in the footing construction.
      3.    Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground,
including prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the
concrete is less than 150 psi (1.0 MPa).
      4.    Concrete foundation walls constructed in accordance with Table
1807.1.6.2.
      5.   Concrete patios, driveways, and sidewalks on grade.
   [BF] 1705.18 Fire-resistant penetrations and joints. In high-rise buildings
or in buildings assigned to Risk Category III or IV, special inspections for
through-penetrations, membrane penetration fire-stops, fire-resistant joint
systems, and perimeter fire containment systems that are tested and listed in
accordance with Sections 714.4.1.2, 714.5.1.2, 715.3.1, and 715.4 shall be in
accordance with Section 1705.18.1 or 1705.18.2.
   1804.8 Grading permits required. No person shall excavate or grade without
first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. If a building permit is not
obtained, a separate grading permit must be obtained from the city engineer for
each site and may cover both excavations and fills.
      Exceptions:
      1.    A separate grading permit is not required from the city engineer
where a site plan for a new building, structure, or addition is submitted for
plan review where an excavation below finished grade for basements, footings,
and foundations of a building, retaining wall, or other structure is authorized
by a valid building permit.
      2.    A fill of less than 1 foot in depth and placed on natural terrain
with a slope flatter than one unit vertical to five units horizontal (20
percent slope), or less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth not intended to support
structures, which does not exceed 300 cubic yards (229 m3) on any one lot and
does not obstruct a drainage course.
      3.    Excavation, removal, or stockpiling of rock, sand, dirt, clay, or
other like material as may be required by the state, county, or city
authorities in connection with the construction or maintenance of roads and
highways. This shall not exempt work for street construction when such work is
performed by private developers. When the private developer has obtained a
permit to perform site grading, a second permit will not be required for street
grading.
      4.    When approved by the city engineer, grading in an isolated, self-
contained area if there is no danger to public or private property.
      5.    Cemetery graves.
      6.    Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
      7.    Excavations for wells, tunnels, or utilities.
      8.   Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, or stockpiling of rock,
sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay where established and provided for by law,
provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the
stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property.
      9.   Exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or
engineering geologists.
      10.   An excavation that (1) is less than 2 feet (610 mm) in depth; or
(2) does not create a cut slope of less than 5 feet (1,524 mm) in height and
steeper than 1 unit vertical in 1 1/2 units horizontal (66.7 percent slope).
   Exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed
to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
   1804.8.1 Grading permit requirements. Grading shall be performed in
accordance with a grading plan approved by the city engineer. Submitted plans
shall indicate existing elevations, proposed elevations, method of erosion
control, and shall include the legal description.
   1806.2 Presumptive load-bearing values. The load-bearing values used in
design for supporting soils near the surface shall not exceed the values
specified in Table 1806.2 unless data to substantiate the use of higher values
are submitted and approved. Where the building official has reason to doubt the
classification, strength, or compressibility of the soil, the requirements of
Section 1803.5.2 shall be satisfied.
   Presumptive load-bearing values shall apply to materials with similar
physical characteristics and dispositions. Where a presumed soil-bearing
capacity is in excess of 3,000 psf (471 kPa/m), data to substantiate the use of
the presumed higher value must be submitted from a soils engineer for approval
from the building official. Mud, organic silt, organic clays, peat, or
unprepared fill shall not be assumed to have a presumptive load-bearing
capacity unless data to substantiate the use of such a value are submitted.
      Exception: A presumptive load-bearing capacity shall be permitted to be
used where the building official deems the load-bearing capacity of mud,
organic silt, or unprepared fill is adequate for the support of lightweight or
temporary structures.
   1809.5 Frost protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost,
foundations and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be
protected from frost by one or more of the following methods:
   1.    Extending below the frost line of the locality.
   2.    Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32.
   3.    Erecting on solid rock.
      Exception: Free-standing buildings meeting all of the following
conditions shall not be required to be protected:
      1.    Assigned to Risk Category I.
      2.    Area of 1,500 square feet (139 m2) or less for light frame
construction or 400 square feet (37 m2) or less for other than light-frame
construction.
      3.    Eave height of 10 feet (3,048 mm) or less. Shallow foundations
shall not bear on frozen soil unless such frozen condition is of a permanent
character.
   [P] 2901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and the Plumbing Code shall
govern the design, construction, erection, and installation of plumbing
components, appliances, equipment, and systems used in buildings and structures
covered by this code. Toilet and bathing rooms shall be constructed in
accordance with Section 1209. Private sewage disposal systems shall conform to
the Plumbing Code. The International Fire Code, the International Property
Maintenance Code and the Plumbing Code shall govern the use and maintenance of
plumbing components, appliances, equipment, and systems. The International
Existing Building Code and the Plumbing Code shall govern the alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement, and addition of plumbing components,
appliances, equipment, and systems.
[P] Table 2902.1
Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixturesa
(See Sections 2902.1.1 and 2902.2)
                               WATER
                               CLOSETS
                               (URINALS SEE LAVATOR IES       DRINKI NG
                               SECTION                  BATH- FOUNTA
No . CLASSIFICATION DESCRIPTIO 2902.1.4)                TUBS/ INS (SEE  OTHER
                    N                                   SHOW  SECTIO N
                                                        ERS   2902.1.5)
                               Male Female  Male Female
                                 WATER CLOSETS
                                 (URINALS SEE        LAVATOR IES           DRINKI NG
                                 SECTION 2902.1.4)                   BATH- FOUNTA
No CLASSIFICATION DESCRIPTIO N                                       TUBS/ INS (SEE  OTHER
.                                                                    SHOW  SECTIO N
                                 Male      Female    Male     Female ERS   2902.1.5)


                  Theaters and
                  other
                  buildings for                                                      1
                  the performing 1 per 125 1 per 65  1 per 200       -     1 per 500 service
                  arts and                                                           sink
                  motion
                  picturesd
                  Nightclubs,
                  bars, taverns,                                                     1
                  dance halls    1 per 40  1 per 40  1 per 75        -     1 per 500 service
                  and buildings                                                      sink
                  for similar
                  purposesd
                  Restaurants,                                                       1
                  banquet halls  1 per 75  1 per 75  1 per 200       -     1 per 500 service
                  and food                                                           sink
                  courtsd
                                 1 per 100 1 per 50
                                 for the   for the   1 per 250 for
                                 first 400 first 400 the first 750
                  Casino gaming  and 1 per and 1 per and 1 per 500         1 per     1
                  areas          250 for   150 for   for the         -     1,000     service
                                 the remai the remai remainder                       sink
                                 n-der     n-der     exceeding 750
                                 excee     excee d-
                                 ding 400  ing 400
                  Auditoriums
                  without
                  permanent
                  seating, art
                  galleries,                                                         1
                  exhibition     1 per 125 1 per 65  1 per 200       -     1 per 500 service
1  Assembly       halls,                                                             sink
                  museums,
                  lecture halls,
                  libraries,
                  arcades and
                  gymnasiumsd
                  Passenger                                                          1
                  terminals and  1 per 500 1 per 500 1 per 750       -     1 per     service
                  transportation                                           1,000     sink
                  facilitiesd
                  Places of
                  worship and                                              1 per     1
                  other          1 per 150 1 per 75  1 per 200       -     1,000     service
                  religious                                                          sink
                  servicesd
                  Coliseums,
                  arenas,
                  skating rinks,
                  pools and                          1 per    1 per        1 per     1
                  tennis courts  1 per 120 1 per 60  200      150    -     1,000     service
                  for indoor                                                         sink
                  sporting
                  events and
                  activities
                  Stadiums,
                  amusement
                  parks,
                  bleachers and                      1 per    1 per        1 per     1
                  grandstands    1 per 120 1 per 60  200      150    -     1,000     service
                  for outdoor                                                        sink
                  sporting
                  events and
                  activitiesf
                  Buildings for
                  the
                  transaction of
                  business,      1 per 25  1 per 40
                  professional   for the   for the
                  services,      first 50  first 80
                  other services and 1 per and 1 per
2  Business       involving      50 for    80 for    -        1 per  1 service sinke
                  merchandise,   the       the                100
                  office         remainder remainder
                  buildings,     exceeding exceeding
                  banks, light   50        80
                  industrial,
                  ambulatory
                  care and
                  similar uses
3  Educati onal   Educational    1 per 50  1 per 50  -        1 per  1 service sink
                  facilities                                  100
                  Structures in
                  which
                  occupants are
                  engaged in
4  Factory and    work           1 per 100 1 per 100 -        1 per  1 service sink
   industria l    fabricating,                                400
                  assembly or
                  processing of
                  products or
                  materials
                  Custodial care 1 per 10  1 per 10  1 per 8  1 per  1 service sink
                  facilities                                  100
                  Medical care
                  recipients in  1 per     1 per     1 per 15 1 per  1 service sink
                  hospitals and  roomc     roomc              100
                  nursing homesb
                  Employees in                                1 per
                  hospitals and  1 per 25  1 per 35  -        100    -
                  nursing homesb
                  Visitors in                                 1 per
                  hospitals and  1 per 75  1 per 100 -        500    -
                  nursing homes
                  Prisonsb       1 per     1 per     1 per 15 1 per  1 service sink
5  Instituti onal                cell      cell               100
                  Reformatories,
                  detention                                   1 per
                  centers and    1 per 15  1 per 15  1 per 15 100    1 service sink
                  correctional
                  centersb
                  Employees in
                  reformatories,
                  detention      1 per 25  1 per 35  -        1 per  -
                  centers and                                 100
                  correctional
                  centersb
                  Adult day care                              1 per
                  and child day  1 per 15  1 per 15  1        100    1 service sink
                  care
                  Retail stores,
                  service
                  stations,                                   1 per
6  Mercant ile    shops, sales-  1 per 500 1 per 750 -        1,000  1 service sinke
                  rooms, markets
                  and shopping
                  centers
                  Hotels,
                  motels,        1 per     1 per     1 per
                  boarding       sleeping  sleeping  sleeping -      1 service sink
                  houses         unit      unit      unit
                  (transient)
                  Dormitories,
                  fraternities,
                  sororities and 1 per 10  1 per 10  1 per 8  1 per  1 service sink
                  boarding                                    100
                  houses (not
                  transient)
                                                                     1 kitche n sink per
                  Apartment      1 per     1 per     1 per           dwelli ng unit; 1 autom
7  Resident ial   house          dwelling  dwelling  dwelling -      atic clothes washer
                                 unit      unit      unit            connec tion per dwelli
                                                                     ng unit
                  One- and two-
                  family                                             1 kitche n sink per
                  dwellings and  1 per               1 per           dwelli ng unit; 1 autom
                  lodging houses dwelling  1 per 10  dwelling -      atic clothes washer
                  with five or   unit                unit            connec tion per dwelli
                  fewer                                              ng unit
                  guestrooms
                  Congregate
                  living                                      1 per
                  facilities     1 per 10  1 per 10  1 per 8  100    1 service sink
                  with 16 or
                  fewer persons
                  Structures for
                  the storage of
                  goods,
                  warehouses,                                 1 per
8  Storage        storehouses    1 per 100 1 per 100 -        1,000  1 service sink
                  and freight
                  depots, low
                  and moderate
                  hazard
 
      a.   The fixtures shown are based on one fixture being the minimum
required for the number of persons indicated or any fraction of the number of
persons indicated. The number of occupants shall be determined by this code.
      b.   Toilet facilities for employees shall be separate from facilities
for inmates or care recipients.
      c.   A single-occupant toilet room with one water closet and one lavatory
serving not more than two adjacent patient sleeping units shall be permitted,
provided that each patient sleeping unit has direct access to the toilet room
and provisions for privacy for the toilet room user are provided.
      d.   The occupant load for seasonal outdoor seating and entertainment
areas shall be included when determining the minimum number of facilities
required.
      e.   For business and mercantile classifications with an occupant load of
15 or fewer, a service sink shall not be required.
      f.   The required number and type of plumbing fixtures for outdoor
swimming pools shall be in accordance with Section 609 of the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
   2902.1.4 Substitution for water closets. In a toilet room or bathroom,
urinals shall not be substituted for more than 67 percent of the required water
closets.
   2902.1.5 Drinking fountains. Where water is served in restaurants or where
bottled water is served in other occupancies, drinking fountains shall not be
required. Drinking fountains shall not be installed in public restrooms.
   [P] 2902.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required,
separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling units and
sleeping units.
      2.   Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of
15 or fewer.
      3.   Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies
in which the maximum occupant load is 100 or fewer.
      4.   Separate facilities shall not be required in business occupancies in
which the maximum occupant load is 25 or fewer.
      5.   Separate facilities shall not be required to be designated by sex
where single-user toilets rooms are provided in accordance with Section
2902.1.2.
      6.   Separate facilities shall not be required where rooms having both
water closets and lavatory fixtures are designed for use by both sexes and
privacy for water closets are installed in accordance with
         Section 2902.2.2. Urinals shall be located in an area visually
separated from the remainder of the facility or each urinal that is provided
shall be located in a stall.
   [P] 2902.6 Small occupancies. Drinking fountains and service sinks shall not
be required for an occupant load of 15 or fewer.
   3111.2 Solar thermal systems. Solar thermal systems shall be designed and
installed in accordance with this section, the International Mechanical Code,
and the International Fire Code. Where light-transmitting plastic covers are
used, solar thermal collectors shall be designed in accordance with Section
2606.12.
   Section 3114 Public use restroom buildings in flood hazard areas. Not
adopted by the city.
   Section 3116 Prefabricated construction.
   3116.1 General.
   3116.1.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate materials and
establish methods of safe construction where any structure or portion thereof
is wholly or partially prefabricated.
   3116.1.2 Scope. Unless otherwise specifically stated in this section, all
prefabricated construction and materials used therein shall conform to all the
requirements of this code.
   3116.1.3 Definitions.
   Prefabricated assembly is a structural unit, the integral parts of which
have been built or assembled prior to incorporation in the building.
   Prefabricated structures are structures, the parts of which are fabricated
and assembled in a central assembly point, where on-site building, electrical,
plumbing, and mechanical rough-in inspections occur at the assembly location.
   3116.2 Tests of materials. Every approval of a material not specifically
mentioned in this code shall incorporate as a proviso the kind and number of
nationally recognized tests to be made.
   3116.3 Tests of assemblies. The building official may require special tests
to be made on assemblies to determine their durability and weather resistance.
   3116.4 Connections. Every device used to connect prefabricated assemblies
shall be designed as required by this code and shall be capable of developing
the strength of the members connected, except in the case of members forming
part of a structural frame as specified in Chapter 16. Connections shall be
capable of withstanding uplift forces as specified in this code and in Chapter
16.
   3116.5 Pipes and conduits. In structural design, due allowance shall be made
for any material to be removed for the installation of pipes, conduit, and
other equipment.
   3116.6 Permits, materials, plans, fees, certificate, and inspections.
   3116.6.1 Materials. Materials and the assembly thereof shall be inspected to
determine compliance with this code. Every material shall be graded, marked, or
labeled as required elsewhere in this code.
   3116.6.2 Plans. One complete set of plans and specifications shall be
submitted to the building inspection division of planning and development
services for approval prior to issuing a building permit for a prefabricated
structure. Plans shall be of sufficient detail and clarity to indicate
compliance with all applicable codes (electrical, plumbing, building,
mechanical, and zoning).
   3116.6.3 Permits and fees. Permit fees shall be as follows:
   1.    The fee for a building permit shall conform to Tables 1-A and 1-B, and
the plan review fee, if applicable, shall be in accordance with Table 1-C.
   2.    Electrical, plumbing, and mechanical permits and fees shall conform to
the respective permit requirements and fee schedules.
   3116.6.4 Certificate. A certificate of approval shall be furnished with
every prefabricated assembly and prefabricated structure, except where the
assembly is readily accessible to inspection at the site. The certificate of
approval shall certify that the assembly in question has been inspected and
meets all the requirements of this code. When mechanical equipment is installed
so that it cannot be inspected at the site, the certificate of approval shall
certify that such equipment complies with the laws applying thereto.
   3116.6.5 Certifying agency. To be acceptable under this code, every
certificate of approval shall be made by the approved agency.
   3116.6.6 Field erection. The building official shall inspect placement of
prefabricated assemblies at the building site to determine compliance with this
code. Installation and finishing work at the building site must be performed by
locally licensed contractors where required. Final inspections are to be made
after the installation and finishing work has been completed and the building
is ready for occupancy.
   3116.6.7 Continuous inspection. If continuous inspection is required for
certain materials where construction takes place on the site, it shall also be
required where the same materials are used in prefabricated construction.
      Exception: Continuous inspection will not be required during
prefabrication if the approved agency certifies to the construction and
furnishes evidence of compliance.
   3116.6.8 Moving permits. A moving permit shall be obtained for each
prefabricated structure being moved within the city in accordance with Section
3404 Moved Buildings. No person except a building mover licensed pursuant to
subsection 3404.2 of Section 150.017 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls
shall move a prefabricated structure or part thereof across, along, or over
public property.
   3303.1 Construction documents. No person shall demolish or wreck a building
or structure without first obtaining a razing permit. Permit fees shall be paid
in accordance with Item 5 of Table 1-C. Construction documents and a schedule
for demolition shall be submitted where required by the building official.
Where such information is required, work shall not be done until such
construction documents or schedule, or both, are approved. The applicant shall
secure insurance covering any possible liability that could incur during
demolition.
   3303.6 Utility connections. Service utility connections shall be
discontinued and capped in accordance with the approved rules and the
requirements of the applicable governing authority.
   Before a razing permit can be issued, the applicant must furnish approval
from the city engineering division that applicable permits have been secured to
ensure that all utilities will be properly disconnected and inspected as per
city engineer’s specifications. The applicant shall be responsible for
notifying other utilities of such anticipated demolition.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 1.6101; 1992 Code, § 11-20) (Ord. 2530, passed 3-11-1968;
Ord. 2769, passed 7-6-1971; Ord. 33-72, passed 5-30-1972; Ord. 25-73, passed 4-
16-1973; Ord. 33-73, passed 4-30-1973; Ord. 27-79, passed 4-16-1979; Ord. 61-
80, passed 7-7-1980; Ord. 27-82, passed 3-29-1982; Ord. 71-82, passed 6-14-
1982; Ord. 115-84, passed 8-6-1984; Ord. 116-84, passed 8-6-1984; Ord. 103-85,
passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 70-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 95-86, passed 11-24-1986;
Ord. 105-86, passed 12-8-1986; Ord. 106-86, passed 12-8-1986; Ord. 39-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 66-88, passed 7-25-1988; Ord. 110-88, passed 12-28-1988;
Ord. 131-89, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 11-92, passed 2-3-1992; Ord. 103-94,
passed 11-21-1994; Ord. 112-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 30-95, passed 2-21-
1995; Ord. 67-95, passed 5-15-1995; Ord. 74-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 93-95,
passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 115-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 93-97, passed 12-15-1997;
Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 111-98, passed 10-19-1998; Ord. 103-00,
passed 12-4-2000; Ord. 113-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003;
Ord. 22-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 28-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 105-08, passed
8-18-2008; Ord. 16-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 99-12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 50-
13, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 125-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 28-19, passed 3-19-
2019; Ord. 138-21, passed 11-16-2021; Ord. 96-22, passed 8-9-2022)
MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS CODE
§ 150.030 ADOPTED.
   (a)    The International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix
A, and the International Fuel Gas Code including Appendix A, B, and C, 2021
edition, as amended, are hereby adopted for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of heating,
ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, incinerators, or other miscellaneous heat
producing appliances in the city, and for providing for performance of
inspections and collection of fees therefor.
   (b)   The adoption of the 2021 International Mechanical Code and the 2021
International Fuel Gas Code will become effective January 1, 2022. The minimum
mechanical standards referenced in the International Mechanical Code and the
International Fuel Gas Code shall be applied to any permit issued after
December 31, 2021.
   (c)    The city shall publish this ordinance, without attachments, after its
passage. The attachments are on file and available for inspection at the office
of the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 11-31) (Ord. 5-79, passed 1-8-1979; Ord. 64-80, passed 7-7-1980;
Ord. 104-85, passed 12-2-1985; Ord. 109-88, passed 12-28-1988; Ord. 10-92,
passed 2-3-1992; Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 75-95, passed 6-5-1995;
Ord. 15-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-04, passed
3-1-2004; Ord. 31-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 19-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 103-
12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 128-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-
2019; Ord. 140-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.031 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL
MECHANICAL CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Mechanical
Code adopted in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or deleted as follows.
All other sections or subsections of the 2021 International Mechanical Code
shall remain the same.
   [A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of
the city of Sioux Falls, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
   [A] 103.1 Creation of agency. The mechanical division is hereby created and
the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The
function of the agency shall be the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 104.8 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals, or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered civilly or criminally liable personally, and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of
any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or structure for any
damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city, or its
officers and employees, be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under
this code.
   [A] 104.8.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act or omission performed by that officer
or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be afforded all the protection provided by the city’s insurance pool
and immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws
and be defended by the legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 108.2 Required inspections and testing. It shall be the duty of the
licensed mechanical contractor, or his designated mechanic doing the work
authorized by a permit, or the homeowner holding the homeowner's mechanical
permit to notify the mechanical inspector that such work is ready for
inspection. The building official may require that every request for inspection
be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired.
   The code official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit
holder's agent, shall make the following inspections and other such inspections
as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or
shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder's agent of violations that
must be corrected. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the
scheduling of such inspections.
   1.   Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before backfill is put in place.
Where excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks, and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean
backfill shall be on the job site.
   2.   Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting and other components to be
concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling
membranes.
   3.   Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the mechanical
system.
      Exception: Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with
Section 1210.10 shall be permitted to be backfilled prior to inspection.
   The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the
operation of any heating equipment or appliances installed to replace existing
heating equipment or appliances serving an occupied portion of a structure
provided that a request for inspection of such heating equipment or appliances
has been filed with the department not more than 48 hours after such
replacement work is placed into operation or substantially completed, and
before any portion of such equipment or appliances is concealed by any
permanent portion of the structure.
   [A] 109.2.1 Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated
in the following schedule:
   Through December 31, 2021, the following fees shall be charged for
mechanical and fuel gas permits and inspections:
Table No. 1-A. Mechanical Permit Fees
Table No. 1-A. Mechanical Permit Fees
Permit Issuance
Homeowner’s permit (plus the unit fee costs for the work to be inspected)          $20
Unit Fee Schedule (Inspections)
   1.   Minimum inspection fee.                                                $19
   2.   For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type  $12
furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance.
   3.   For the installation or relocation of each floor furnace, including ven$12
   4.   For the installation or relocation of each suspended heater, recessed w$12
heater, or floor-mounted unit heater.
   5.   For the installation, relocation, or replacement of each appliance vent$6
installed and not included in an appliance permit.
   6.   For the repair of, alteration of, or addition to each heating appliance,
refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling,         $12
absorption, or evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls
regulated by this code.
   7.   For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor or each$12
absorption system.
   8.   For each air-handling unit to and including 10,000 cubic feet per minut$12
(4,720 L/S), including ducts attached thereto.
   9.   For each air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm (4,720 L/S).                $15
   10.   For each evaporative cooler other than portable type.                 $10
   11.   For each ventilating fan connected to a single duct.                  $6
   12.   For each ventilation system which is not a portion of any heating or a$10
conditioning system authorized by a permit.
   13.   For the installation of each commercial hood which is served by mechan$15l
exhaust, including the ducts for such hood.
   14.   For the installation or relocation of each commercial, industrial, or $20
domestic-type incinerator.
   15.   For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by this code but not
classed in other appliance categories, or for which no other fee is listed in this   $12
code.
   16.   For each fire damper, smoke damper, or combination fire/smoke damper. $1
   17.   Variable air volume (VAV) terminals.                                  $1
Other Inspections and Fees
   1.   Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge, one hour)$70er
hour*.
   2.   Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 107 (minimum cha$70,
one hour), per hour*.
   3.   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge,$70e
hour), per hour*.
   4.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to $70
approved plans (minimum charge, one hour), per hour*
   5.   Appeals. Before the board takes any action, the party or parties requesting
such hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board, or his or her authorized
agent, the sum of $65 to cover the approximate cost of the procedure. Under no
condition shall the sum or any portion thereof be refunded for failure of the
request to be approved.
   6.   Examination Fee. All classes per examination.                          $75
   7.   A mileage fee based on the current rate per mile authorized by the Internal
Revenue Service shall be charged for any inspection occurring outside the city
limits.
   8.   When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by SDCL 36-18 or when
the building official requires submittal of plans, computations, or specifications
in accordance with Section 106.3, a plan review fee shall be charged. The plan
review fee shall be 25 percent of the mechanical portion of the building permit fee
as shown on Table 1-B, Commercial Building Permit Fees, of §
150.017 of the Code of Ordinances of the city of Sioux Falls.
   9.   Bond Claims. An administrative fee shall be charged to cover the       $150
administrative cost of filing a claim.
   10.   Delinquent Accounts. The administrative authority may refuse inspections or
may deny credit on accounts receivables that are delinquent.
   11.   Fee for late corrections. A $100 administrative fee may be charged for
failure to correct violations within the time specified on a contractor’s correction
report.
   12.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where mechanical work is
completed without a request for an inspection, an administrative fee of $250 may be
charged.
*   Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is greater. This cost shall include
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees
involved.
 
   Commencing January 1, 2022, the following fees shall be charged for permits
and inspections:
Table No. 1-A. Mechanical Permit Fees*
Total Project Valuation % of Project Electrical Valuation Fee
Table No. 1-A. Mechanical Permit Fees*
Total Project         % of Project Electrical Valuation Fee
Valuation
$0.01 to $50,000.00   10%          $0.01 to $5,000.00   $40
                                                        $40 for the first
                                                        $5,000, plus $6 for
$50,000.01 to         10%          $5,000.01 to         each additiona l
$250,000.00                        25,000.00            $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $25,000
                                                        $160 for the first
                                                        $25,000, plus $5.25
$250,000.01 to        10%          $25,000.01 to        for each additional
$500,000.00                        $50,000.00           $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $50,000
                                                        $291.25 for the first
                                                        $50,000, plus $4.50
$500,000.01 to        10%          $50,000.01 to        for each additional
$1,000,000.00                      $100,000.00          $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $100,000
                                                        $516.25 for the first
                                                        $100,000 plus $4.25
$1,000,000.01 to      10%          $100,000.01 to       for each additional
$2,500,000.00                      $250,000.00          $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $250,000
                                                        $1,153.75 for the
                                                        first $250,000, plus
$2,500,000.01 to      10%          $250,000.01 to       $4 for each additional
$5,000,000.00                      $500,000.00          $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $500,000
                                                        $2,153.75 for the
                                                        first $500,000, plus
$5,000,000.01 to                   $500,000.01 to       $3.50 for each
$10,000,000.00        10%          $1,000,000.00        additional $1,000 or
                                                        fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including
                                                        $1,000,000
                                                        $3,903.75 for the
                                                        first $1,000,000, plus
$10,000,000.01 and up 10%          $1,000,000.01 and up $3 for each additional
                                                        $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof
 
Other Inspections and Fees
Other Inspections and Fees
1.   Homeowner's permit.                                                       $25
2.   Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge, one hour), p$200**
hour.
3.   Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 108 of the         $200**
International Mechanical Code (minimum charge, one hour), per hour.
4.   When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by SDCL 36-18A or when
the building official requires submittal of plans, computations, or
specifications in accordance with Section 110, a plan review fee shall be          
charged. The plan review fee shall be 25 percent of the mechanical permit fee as
shown on Table No. 1-B, Commercial Building Permit Fees, of § 150.017 of the Code
of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
5.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, revisions to approv$100**
plans (minimum charge, one hour), per hour.
6.   Fee for late corrections. If corrections listed on an inspection report are
not completed within the specified time, the inspector shall issue a correction   $100
order and assess a $100 administrative fee. The inspector shall also assess a
reinspection fee.
7.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where mechanical or fuel
gas work is completed without a request for an inspection, an administrative fee  $250
of $250 may be charged.
8.   Board of appeals fees. Before any action is taken by the board, the party or
parties requesting the hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board or
his or her authorized agent, the sum of $100 to cover the approximate cost of the $100
procedure. Under no condition shall the sum or any portion thereof be refunded
for failure of the request to be approved.
9.   Examination fee; per examination                                          $75
10.   A mileage fee at the current rate per mile as established by the finance  
department shall be charged for any inspection occurring outside city limits.
11.   Bond claims. An administrative fee shall be charged to cover the         $250
administrative cost of filing a claim.
*The Total Project Valuation of the project will be used when a building permit is
issued.
**Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is greater. This cost shall include
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees
involved.
 
   The building official may refuse to issue permits or conduct inspections for
any delinquent account.
   [A] 109.6 Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund
policy. The refunding of fees shall be as follows:
   1.    The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid
or collected.
   2.    Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid where work has not
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
   3.    Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid where an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.
   The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
   [A] 115.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the code official shall request the legal counsel of
the jurisdiction to deem the violation as a strict liability offense and
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   [A] 115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation and be subject to administrative citations through the code
enforcement process.
   [A] 114.1 Mechanical board of appeals and examiners. There is hereby created
a mechanical board of appeals and examiners to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to
the application and interpretation of the International Mechanical Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, including Part V—Mechanical and Part VI—Fuel Gas
of the International Residential Code, to determine that the provisions of
these codes do not fully apply, to determine if an equally or better
construction is proposed as an alternative, to review all prospective changes
to the mechanical and fuel gas codes and to submit recommendations to the
responsible official and the city council, to review licensing and test
application determinations and to examine applicants for licensing, and to
investigate matters brought to the board. It shall consist of five members
qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
mechanical design, construction, and maintenance and the public health aspects
of mechanical systems referenced in the International Mechanical Code and the
International Fuel Gas Code. The building official or mechanical inspector
shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary of the board, but
shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. Members shall be appointed
by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and shall hold office
for a term of three years. The board shall adopt rules and procedures for
conducting its business. All decisions and findings shall be provided in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy provided to the building
services division.
   [A] 114.2 Limitations of authority. The mechanical board of appeals and
examiners shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code or
interpret the administration of this code.
   [A] 114.3 Qualifications. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 114.4 Administration. Not adopted by the city.
   201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the International Building Code, International Residential
Code, International Existing Building Code, NFPA 70, International Fire Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, or the Uniform Plumbing Code, such terms shall
have meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
   Section 202—General Definitions. Add the following definition:
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   301.2 Energy utilization. Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning systems
of all structures may be designed and installed for efficient utilization of
energy in accordance with the International Energy Conservation Code.
   301.11 Plumbing connections. Potable water supply and building drainage
system connections to equipment and appliances regulated by this code shall be
in accordance with the Plumbing Code.
   304.10 Clearances from grade. Equipment and appliances installed at grade
level shall be supported on a level concrete slab or other approved material
extending not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) above adjoining grade or shall be
suspended not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above adjoining grade. Such support
shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
   304.11 Guards. Guards shall be provided where various components that
require service and roof hatch openings are located within 10 feet (3,048 mm)
of a roof edge or open side of a walking surface and such edge or open side is
located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor, roof, or grade below. The
guard shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) beyond each end of
components that require service and each end of the roof hatch parallel to the
roof edge. The top of the guard shall be located not less than 42 inches (1,067
mm) above the elevated surface adjacent to the guard. The guard shall be
constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere
and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the
International Building Code.
   306.2 Appliances in rooms. Rooms containing appliances shall be provided
with a door and an unobstructed passageway to the service area of the appliance
measuring not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide and 80 inches (2,032 mm) high.
      Exception: Within a dwelling unit, appliances installed in a compartment,
alcove, basement, or similar space shall be accessed by an opening or door and
an unobstructed passageway measuring not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide and
large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance in the space, provided
that a level service space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and the
height of the appliance, but not less than 30 inches (762 mm), is present at
the front or service side of the appliance with the door open.
   306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where
equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure
or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16
feet (4,877 mm) above grade or floor level to access such equipment or
appliances, an interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Such
access shall not require climbing over obstructions greater than 30 inches (762
mm) in height or walking on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical
in 12 units horizontal (33 percent slope). Such access shall not require the
use of portable ladders. Where access involves climbing over parapet walls, the
height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall.
   Permanent ladders installed to provide the required access shall comply with
the following minimum design criteria:
   1.   The side railing shall extend above the parapet or roof edge not less
than 30 inches (762 mm).
   2.    Ladders shall have rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches (356 mm) on
center. The uppermost rung shall be not greater than 24 inches (610 mm) below
the upper edge of the roof hatch, roof, or parapet, as applicable.
   3.    Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than 6 inches (152 mm) deep.
   4.    There shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) between rails.
   5.    Rungs shall have a diameter not less than 0.75 inch (19 mm) and be
capable of withstanding a 300-pound (136.1 kg) load.
   6.    Ladders over 30 feet (9,144 mm) in height shall be provided with
offset sections and landings capable of withstanding 100 pounds per square foot
(488.2 kg/m2). Landing dimensions shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) and
not less than the width of the ladder served. A guard rail shall be provided on
all open sides of the landing.
   7.    Climbing clearance. The distance from the centerline of the rungs to
the nearest permanent object on the climbing side of the ladder shall be not
less than 30 inches (762 mm) measured perpendicular to the rungs. This distance
shall be maintained from the point of ladder access to the bottom of the roof
hatch. A minimum clear width of 15 inches (381 mm) shall be provided on both
sides of the ladder measured from the midpoint of and parallel with the rungs
except where cages or wells are installed.
   8.    Landing required. The ladder shall be provided with a clear and
unobstructed bottom landing area having a minimum dimension of 30 inches (762
mm) by 30 inches (762 mm) centered in front of the ladder.
   9.    Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved means.
   10.    Access to ladders shall be provided at all times.
   11.    Exterior access may be by means of a ladder which need not extend
closer than 8 feet (2,438 mm) to finished grade.
   12.    When a new hatch is being used to access equipment or appliances on a
roof or elevated structure, the handle or release must be on the same side of
the roof hatch as the ladder or within 18 inches of the ladder.
   Catwalks installed to provide the required access shall be not less than 24
inches (610 mm) wide and shall have railings as required for service platforms.
      Exception: This section shall not apply to Group R-3 occupancies.
   306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans, or other components
that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of greater than 3
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25 percent slope) and having an edge
more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a level platform shall
be provided on each side of the appliance or equipment to which access is
required for service, repair, or maintenance. The platform shall be not less
than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The
guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the platform,
shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533
mm) sphere, and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified
in the International Building Code. Access shall not require walking on roofs
having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33 percent
slope).
   Where access involves obstructions greater than 30 inches (762 mm) in
height, such obstructions shall be provided with ladders installed in
accordance with Section 306.5 or stairways installed in accordance with the
requirements specified in the International Building Code in the path of travel
to and from appliances, fans, or equipment requiring service.
   312.1 Load calculations. When deemed necessary by the mechanical inspector,
heating and cooling system design loads for the purpose of sizing systems,
appliances, and equipment shall be determined in accordance with the procedures
described in the ASHRAE/ACCA Standard 183. Alternatively, design loads shall be
determined by an approved equivalent computation procedure, using the design
parameters specified in Chapter 3 [CE] of the International Energy Conservation
Code.
   401.4 Intake opening location. Air intake openings shall comply with all of
the following:
   1.    Intake openings shall be located not less than 10 feet (3,048 mm) from
lot lines or buildings on the same lot.
   2.    Mechanical and gravity outdoor air intake openings shall be located
not less than 10 feet (3,048 mm) horizontally from any hazardous or noxious
contaminant source, such as vents, streets, alleys, parking lots, and loading
docks, except as specified in Item 3 or Section 501.3.1. Outdoor air intake
openings shall be permitted to be located less than 10 feet (3,048 mm)
horizontally from streets, alleys, parking lots, and loading docks provided
that the openings are located not less than 25 feet (7,620 mm) vertically above
such locations. Where openings front on a street or public way, the distance
shall be measured from the centerline of the street or public way.
   3.    Intake openings shall be located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) below
contaminant sources where such sources are located within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of
the opening. Separation is not required between intake air openings and living
space exhaust air openings of an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit
where an approved factory-built intake/exhaust combination fitting is used to
separate the air streams in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
   4.    Intake openings on structures in flood hazard areas shall be at or
above the elevation required by Section 1612 of the International Building Code
for utilities and attendant equipment.
   403.3.2 Group R-2, R-3, and R-4 occupancies, three stories and less. The
design of local exhaust systems and ventilation systems for outdoor air in
Group R-2, R-3, and R-4 occupancies three stories and less in height above
grade plane shall comply with Sections 403.3.2.1 through 403.3.2.5.
      Exceptions:
      1.   A bathroom exhaust fan shall operate continuously at a minimum rate
of 20 cfm. A 6 inch-round passive makeup air shall be provided. If opening
directly into the occupied space, such opening shall not decrease the comfort
conditions of the occupied space. Such opening may also be used to provide
combustion air for fuel-fired appliances if sized and designed for combustion
air purposes. If opening into the mechanical room, permanent openings shall be
provided between the mechanical room and occupied space to provide a path of
travel for the air. The exhaust fan shall be located in the bathroom farthest
away from the source of makeup air and shall be rated for 0.8 sones or less.
         2.   A 4-inch-round fresh air duct connected to the return side of the
air handler. The duct shall be insulated to a minimum R-6 and shall connect to
the return trunk duct within 8 feet of the air handler duct connection, not
above a finished ceiling.
Table 403.3.2.3
MINIMUM REQUIRED LOCAL EXHAUST RATES FOR GROUP R-2, R-3, AND R-4
OCCUPANCIES
 
AREA TO BE EXHAUSTED   EXHAUST RATES
Bathrooms—Toilet Room50 cfm intermittent or 20 cfm continuous
 
   501.3.1 Location of exhaust outlets. The termination point of exhaust
outlets and ducts discharging to the outdoors shall be located with the
following minimum distances:
   1.    For ducts conveying explosive or flammable vapors, fumes, or dusts: 30
feet (9,144 mm) from property lines; 10 feet (3,048 mm) from operable openings
into buildings; 6 feet (1,829 mm) from exterior walls and roofs; 30 feet (9,144
mm) from combustible walls and operable openings into buildings which are in
the direction of the exhaust discharge; 10 feet (3,048 mm) above adjoining
grade.
   2.    For other product-conveying outlets: 10 feet (3,048 mm) from the
property lines; 3 feet (914 mm) from exterior walls and roofs; 10 feet (3,048
mm) from operable openings into buildings; 10 feet (3,048 mm) above adjoining
grade.
   3.    For all environmental air exhaust: 3 feet (914 mm) from property
lines; 3 feet (914 mm) from operable openings into buildings for all
occupancies other than Group U; and 10 feet (3,048 mm) from mechanical air
intakes. Such exhaust shall not be considered hazardous or noxious. Separation
is not required between intake air openings and living space exhaust air
openings of an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit where an approved
factory-built intake/exhaust combination termination fitting is used to
separate the air streams in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Bathroom exhaust fans serving individual dwelling units or sleeping
units in Group R occupancies may be 3 feet from property lines, operable
openings, and mechanical air intakes.
      2.    Minimum clearances between the exhaust and intake openings of an
HRV/ERV system shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions.
      3.    Exhaust outlets serving structures in flood hazard areas shall be
installed at or above the elevation required by Section 1612 of the
International Building Code for utilities and attendant equipment.
      4.    For specific systems, see the following sections:
         4.1.   Clothes dryer exhaust, Section 504.4.
         4.2.   Kitchen hoods and other kitchen exhaust equipment, Sections
506.3.13, 506.4, and 506.5.
         4.3.   Dust stock and refuse conveying systems, Section 511.2.
         4.4.   Subslab soil exhaust systems, Section 512.4.
         4.5.   Smoke control systems, Section 513.10.3.
         4.6.   Refrigerant discharge, Section 1105.7.
         4.7.   Machinery room discharge, Section 1105.6.1.
   504.4 Exhaust installation. Dryer exhaust ducts for clothes dryers shall
terminate on the outside of the building not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from
any intake opening and shall be equipped with a backdraft damper. Screens shall
not be installed at the duct termination. Ducts shall not be connected or
installed with sheet metal screws or other fasteners that will obstruct the
exhaust flow. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall not be connected to a vent
connector, vent, or chimney. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall not extend into
or through ducts or plenums. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall be sealed in
accordance with Section 603.9.
   508.1.1 Makeup air temperature. The temperature of makeup air shall not be
more than 10ºF (-12ºC) below the temperature of the air in the conditioned
space.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Makeup air that is part of the air-conditioning system.
      2.    Makeup air that does not decrease the comfort conditions of the
occupied space.
   512.2 Materials. Subslab soil exhaust system duct material shall be air duct
material listed and labeled to the requirements of UL 181 for Class 0 air
ducts, or any of the following piping materials that comply with the plumbing
code as building sanitary drainage and vent pipe: cast iron; galvanized steel;
brass or copper pipe; copper tube of a weight not less than that of copper
drainage tube, Type DWV; and plastic piping.
   512.5 Identification. Not adopted by the city.
   602.2.1.1 Wiring. Combustible electrical wires and cables and optical fiber
cables exposed within a plenum shall be listed and labeled as having a peak
optical density not greater than 0.50, an average optical density not greater
than 0.15, and a flame spread distance of 5 feet (1,524 mm) when tested in
accordance with NFPA 262 or shall be installed in metal raceways or metal
sheathed cable. Combustible optical fiber and communication raceways exposed
within a plenum shall be listed and labeled as having a peak optical density
not greater than 0.5, an average optical density not greater than 0.15, and a
flame spread distance not greater than 5 feet (1,524 mm) when tested in
accordance with UL 2024. Only plenum-rated wires and cables shall be installed
in plenum-rated raceways.
      Exception: Alternate wiring systems located within a plenum serving an
information technology equipment room are allowed per NFPA 70.
   603.2 Duct sizing. Ducts installed within a single dwelling unit shall be
sized in accordance with ACCA Manual D, the appliance manufacturer's
installation instructions, or other approved methods. Ducts installed within
all other buildings may be sized in accordance with the ASHRAE Handbook of
Fundamentals or other equivalent computation procedure.
   603.6.1.1 Duct length. Flexible air ducts shall be limited to 14 feet (4.3
m) in length.
   603.6.2 Flexible air connectors. Not adopted by city.
   603.6.2.1 Connector length. Not adopted by city.
   603.6.2.2 Connector penetration limitations. Not adopted by city.
   603.6.3 Air temperature. The design temperature of air to be conveyed in
flexible air ducts shall be less than 250ºF (121ºC).
   603.6.4 Flexible air duct clearance. Flexible air ducts shall be installed
with a minimum clearance to an appliance as specified in the appliance
manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   603.8.2 Sealing. Ducts shall be sealed, secured, and tested prior to
concrete encasement or direct burial.
   603.9 Joints, seams, and connections. All longitudinal and transverse
joints, seams, and connections in metallic and nonmetallic ducts shall be
constructed as specified in SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards—Metal and
Flexible and NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards. All joints,
longitudinal and transverse seams, and connections in ductwork outside the
building thermal envelope, all return ducts located within 10 feet (3.05 m) of
any appliance or all return ducts within a mechanical room, and all supply main
trunk ducts and branch duct connections to the main trunk ducts shall be
securely fastened and sealed with welds, gaskets, mastics (adhesives), mastic-
plus-embedded-fabric systems, liquid sealants, or tapes. Tapes and mastics used
to seal fibrous glass ductwork shall be listed and labeled in accordance with
UL 181A and shall be marked "181 A-P" for pressure-sensitive tape, "181 A M"
for mastic or "181 A-H" for heat-sensitive tape. Tapes and mastics used to seal
metallic and flexible air ducts and flexible air connectors shall comply with
UL 181B and shall be marked "181 B-FX" for pressure-sensitive tape or "181 B-M"
for mastic. Duct connections to flanges of air distribution system equipment
shall be sealed and mechanically fastened. Mechanical fasteners for use with
flexible nonmetallic air ducts shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked
"181 B-C." Closure systems used to seal all ductwork shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      Exception: For ducts having a static pressure classification of less than
2 inches of water column (500 Pa), additional closure systems shall not be
required for continuously welded joints and seams and locking-type joints and
seams. This exception shall not apply to snap-lock and button-lock type joints
and seams located outside the conditioned spaces.
   [F] 606.4.1 Supervision. The duct smoke detectors shall be connected to a
fire alarm system where a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2 of the
International Fire Code. The actuation of a duct smoke detector shall activate
a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location. In
facilities that are required to be monitored by a supervising station, duct
smoke detectors shall report only as a supervisory signal, not as a fire alarm.
Duct smoke detectors installed more than 10 feet (3.1 m) above a finished
floor, above a ceiling, or on a rooftop shall be installed with remote test/
indicators in an approved location below and in proximity to the unit served.
      Exceptions:
      1.    The supervisory signal at a constantly attended location is not
required where the duct smoke detector activates the building's alarm-
indicating appliances.
      2.    In occupancies not required to be equipped with a fire alarm
system, actuation of a smoke detector shall activate a visible and audible
signal in an approved location. Duct smoke detector trouble conditions shall
activate a visible or audible signal in an approved location and shall be
identified as air duct detector trouble.
   [BF] 607.5.2 Fire barriers. Ducts and air transfer openings that penetrate
fire barriers shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in
accordance with their listing. Ducts and air transfer openings shall not
penetrate enclosures for interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways
except as permitted by Sections 1023.5 and 1024.6, respectively, of the
International Building Code.
      Exception: Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of fire barriers
where any of the following apply:
      1.   Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as
part of the fire-resistance-rated assembly.
      2.   Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke control system in
accordance with Section 513 and where the fire damper would interfere with the
operation of the smoke control system.
      3.   Such walls are penetrated by fully ducted HVAC systems, have a
required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, are in areas of other than
Group H and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the International
Building Code. For the purposes of this exception, a fully ducted HVAC system
shall be a duct system for the structure's HVAC system. Such a duct system
shall be constructed of sheet steel not less than 26 gage [0.0217 inch (0.55
mm)] thickness and shall be continuous from the air-handling appliance or
equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals. Flexible air ducts shall be
permitted in a fully ducted system, limited to the following installations:
         3.1   Nonmetallic flexible ducts that connect a duct to an air
handling unit or equipment located within a mechanical room in accordance with
Section 603.9.
         3.2   Nonmetallic flexible air ducts in accordance with Section
603.6.1 that connect an overhead metal duct to a ceiling diffuser where the
metal duct and ceiling diffuser are located within the same room.
   [BF] 607.5.3 Fire partitions.
   Ducts and air transfer openings that penetrate fire partitions shall be
protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.
      Exception: In occupancies other than Group H, fire dampers are not
required where any of the following apply:
      1.   Corridor walls in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the
International Building Code and the duct is protected as a through penetration
in accordance with Section 714 of the International Building Code.
      2.   The partitions are tenant partitions in covered and open mall
buildings where the walls are not required by provisions elsewhere in the
International Building Code to extend to the underside of the floor or roof
sheathing, slab, or deck above.
      3.   The duct system is constructed of approved materials in accordance
with Section 603 and the duct penetrating the wall complies with all of the
following requirements:
         3.1.   The duct shall not exceed 100 square inches (0.06 m2).
         3.2.   The duct shall be constructed of steel not less than 0.0217
inch (0.55 mm) in thickness.
         3.3.   The duct shall not have openings that communicate the corridor
with adjacent spaces or rooms.
         3.4.   The duct shall be installed above a ceiling.
         3.5.   The duct shall not terminate at a wall register in the fire-
resistance-rated wall.
         3.6.   A minimum 12-inch-long (305 mm) by 0.060-inch-thick (1.52 mm)
steel sleeve shall be centered in each duct opening. The sleeve shall be
secured to both sides of the wall and all four sides of the sleeve with minimum
1 1/2-inch by 1 1/2-inch by 0.060-inch (38 mm by 38 mm by 1.52 mm) steel
retaining angles. The retaining angles shall be secured to the sleeve and the
wall with No. 10 (M5) screws. The annular space between the steel sleeve and
the wall opening shall be filled with rock (mineral) wool batting on all sides.
      4.   Such walls are penetrated by ducted HVAC systems, have a required
fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, and are in areas of other than Group
H and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the International Building
Code. For the purposes of this exception, a ducted HVAC system shall be a duct
system for conveying supply, return, or exhaust air as part of the structure's
         HVAC system. Such a duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel
not less than 26 gage in thickness and shall be continuous from the air-
handling appliance or equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals. Flexible
air ducts shall be permitted in a fully ducted system, limited to the following
installations:
         4.1.   Nonmetallic flexible ducts that connect a duct to an air
handling unit or equipment located within a mechanical room in accordance with
Section 603.9.
         4.2.   Nonmetallic flexible air ducts in accordance with 603.6.1 that
connect an overhead metal duct to a ceiling diffuser where the metal duct and
ceiling diffuser are located within the same room.
(1992 Code, § 11-32) (Ord. 10-92, passed 2-3-1992; Ord. 42-93, passed 5-3-1993;
Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 75-95, passed
6-5-1995; Ord. 116-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 93-97, passed 12-15-1997; Ord.
15-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-
2004; Ord. 27-05, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 31-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 105-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 19-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 103-12, passed 12-18-2012;
Ord. 128-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 74-21,
passed 7-6-2021; Ord. 140-21, passed 11-16-2021; Ord. 91-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 150.032 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS
CODE.
   The following sections of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code shall be
amended, added, or deleted as follows. All other sections or subsections of the
2021 International Fuel Gas Code as published shall remain the same.
   [A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of
the city of Sioux Falls, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
   [A] 101.2 Scope. This code shall apply to the installation of fuel-gas
piping systems, fuel gas appliances, gaseous hydrogen systems, and related
accessories in accordance with Sections 101.2.1 through 101.2.5.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Detached one- and two-family dwellings and town houses not more
than three stories above grade plane in height with separate means of egress
and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in
height, shall comply with this code or the International Residential Code.
      2.   Fuel gas systems in existing buildings undergoing repair,
alterations or additions, and change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply
with the International Existing Building Code.
   [A] 103.1 Creation of agency. The mechanical division is hereby created and
the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The
function of the agency shall be the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 104.8 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals, or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered civilly or criminally liable personally, and is hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a
result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of
any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or structure for any
damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city, or its
officers and employees, be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under
this code.
   [A] 104.8.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act or omission performed by that officer
or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be afforded all the protection provided by the city’s insurance pool
and immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws
and be defended by the legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 109.2.1 Fee schedule. The fees for work shall be as indicated in Table
No. 1-A, Mechanical Permit Fees in this code.
   [A] 109.6 Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund
policy. The refunding of fees shall be as follows:
   1.    The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or
collected.
   2.    Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid where work has not
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
   3.    Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid where an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.
   The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
   [A] 112.2 Required inspections and testing. It shall be the duty of the
licensed mechanical contractor, or his designated mechanic, doing the work
authorized by a permit to notify the mechanical inspector that such work is
ready for inspection. The building official may require that every request for
inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired.
   The code official, on notification from the permit holder or the permit
holder’s agent, shall make the following inspections and other such inspections
as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or
notify the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent of violations that are
required to be corrected. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for
scheduling such inspections.
   1.   Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping is installed, and before backfill is put in place.
Where excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks, and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean
backfill shall be on the job site.
   2.    Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking, and bracing are in place and components to be concealed are complete
and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
   3.    Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the installation.
   The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the
operation of any heating appliance installed to replace an existing heating
appliance serving an occupied portion of a structure in the event a request for
inspection of such heating appliance has been filed with the department not
more than 48 hours after replacement work is placed into operation or
substantially completed, and before any portion of such appliance is concealed
by any permanent portion of the structure.
   [A] 115.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the code official shall request the legal counsel of
the jurisdiction to deem the violation as a strict liability offense and
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   [A] 115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or erect, install,
alter, or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and be
subject to administrative citations through the code enforcement process.
   [A] 113.1 Mechanical board of appeals and examiners. There is hereby created
a mechanical board of appeals and examiners to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to
the application and interpretation of the International Mechanical Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, including Part V—Mechanical and Part VI—Fuel Gas
of the International Residential Code, to determine that the provisions of
these codes do not fully apply, to determine if an equally or better
construction is proposed as an alternative, to review all prospective changes
to the mechanical and fuel gas codes and to submit recommendations to the
responsible official and the city council, to review licensing and test
application determinations and to examine applicants for licensing, and to
investigate matters brought to the board. It shall consist of five members
qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
mechanical design, construction, and maintenance and the public health aspects
of mechanical systems referenced in the International Mechanical Code and the
International Fuel Gas Code. The building official or mechanical inspector
shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary of the board, but
shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. Members shall be appointed
by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and shall hold office
for a term of three years. The board shall adopt rules and procedures for
conducting its business. All decisions and findings shall be provided in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy provided to the building
services division.
   [A] 113.2 Limitation of authority. The mechanical board of appeals and
examiners shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code or
interpret the administration of this code.
   Section 114 Board of Appeals. Not adopted by the city.
   201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the International Building Code, International Residential
Code, International Existing Building Code, NFPA 70, International Fire Code,
International Mechanical Code, or the Uniform Plumbing Code, such terms shall
have meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
   Section 202—General Definitions. Add the following definition:
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   301.6 Plumbing connections. Potable water supply and building drainage
system connections to appliances regulated by this code shall be in accordance
with the plumbing code.
   304.6 Outdoor combustion air. Outdoor combustion air shall be provided
through opening(s) to the outdoors in accordance with Section 304.6.1, 304.6.2,
or 304.6.3. The minimum dimension of air openings shall be not less than 3
inches (76 mm).
   304.6.3 Alternate combustion air sizing (IFGC). As an alternate, the net
free area of openings, ducts, or plenums supplying air to an area containing
gas- and oil-burning appliances shall be in accordance with CSA B149.1:20,
Natural Gas and Propane Installation Code, published by the Canadian Standards
Association (CSA).
   The combustion air duct is required to be upsized one diameter size when a
dryer is installed in the same room as the combustion air.
   305.1 General. Equipment and appliances shall be installed as required by
the terms of their approval in accordance with the conditions of listing, the
manufacturer's instructions, and this code. Manufacturers' installation
instructions shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection.
Where a code provision is less restrictive than the conditions of the listing
of the equipment or appliance or the manufacturer's installation instructions,
the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions
shall apply.
   After completion of the installation, all safety and operating controls and
venting shall be tested before placing the burner in service in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions. The following requirements need
to be recorded and affixed to the inside of the gas train access panel:
   1.   The rate of flow of the gas or fuel shall be adjusted to within plus or
minus 5 percent of the required Btu/hr rating at the manifold pressure
specified by the manufacturer. When the prevailing pressure is less than the
manifold pressure specified, the rates shall be adjusted at the prevailing
pressure.
   2.   The gas inlet pressure per the manufacturer's installation settings.
   3.   The temperature rise across the heat exchanger per the manufacturer's
installation settings.
   4.   The static pressure of the supply and return ducts per the
manufacturer's installation settings.
   Unlisted appliances approved in accordance with Section 301.3 shall be
limited to uses recommended by the manufacturer and shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the provisions of this code,
and the requirements determined by the code official.
   305.7 Clearances from grade. Equipment and appliances installed at grade
level shall be supported on a level concrete slab or other approved material
extending not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) above adjoining grade or shall be
suspended not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above adjoining grade. Such supports
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
   [M] 306.2 Appliances in rooms. Rooms containing appliances shall be provided
with a door and an unobstructed passageway to the service area of the appliance
measuring not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide and 80 inches (2,032 mm) high.
      Exception: Within a dwelling unit, appliances installed in a compartment,
alcove, basement, or similar space shall be provided with access by an opening
or door and an unobstructed passageway measuring not less than 24 inches (610
mm) wide and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance in the
space, provided that a level service space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm)
deep and the height of the appliance, but not less than 30 inches (762 mm), is
present at the front or service side of the appliance with the door open.
   [M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where
equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure
or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16
feet (4,877 mm) above grade or floor level to access such equipment or
appliances, an interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Such
access shall not require climbing over obstructions greater than 30 inches (762
mm) in height or walking on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical
in 12 units horizontal (33 percent slope). Such access shall not require the
use of portable ladders. Where access involves climbing over parapet walls, the
height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall.
   Permanent ladders installed to provide the required access shall comply with
the following minimum design criteria:
   1.    The side railing shall extend above the parapet or roof edge not less
than 30 inches (762 mm).
   2.    Ladders shall have rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches (356 mm) on
center. The upper-most rung shall be not more than 24 inches (610 mm) below the
upper edge of the roof hatch, roof, or parapet, as applicable.
   3.    Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than 6 inches (152 mm) deep.
   4.    There shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) between rails.
   5.    Rungs shall have a diameter not less than 0.75 inch (19 mm) and be
capable of withstanding a 300-pound (136.1 kg) load.
   6.    Ladders over 30 feet (9,144 mm) in height shall be provided with
offset sections and landings capable of withstanding 100 pounds per square foot
(488.2 kg/m2). Landing dimensions shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) and
not less than the width of the ladder served. A guard rail shall be provided on
all open sides of the landing.
   7.    Climbing clearance. The distance from the centerline of the rungs to
the nearest permanent object on the climbing side of the ladder shall be not
less than 30 inches (762 mm) measured perpendicular to the rungs. This distance
shall be maintained from the point of ladder access to the bottom of the roof
hatch. A minimum clear width of 15 inches (381 mm) shall be provided on both
sides of the ladder measured from the midpoint of and parallel with the rungs,
except where cages or wells are installed.
   8.   Landing required. The ladder shall be provided with a clear and
unobstructed bottom landing area having a minimum dimension of 30 inches by 30
inches (762 mm by 762 mm) centered in front of the ladder.
   9.    Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved means.
   10.    Access to ladders shall be provided at all times.
   11.    Exterior access may be by means of a ladder which need not extend
closer than 8 feet (2,438 mm) to finished grade.
   12.    When a new hatch is being used to access equipment or appliances on a
roof or elevated structure, the handle or release must be on the same side of
the roof hatch as the ladder or within 18 inches of the ladder.
   Catwalks installed to provide the required access shall be not less than 24
inches (610 mm) wide and shall have railings as required for service platforms.
      Exception: This section shall not apply to Group R-3 occupancies.
   [M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans, or other
components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of
greater than 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) and
having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a level
platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance or equipment to which
access is required for service, repair, or maintenance. The platform shall be
not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with
guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the
platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-
diameter (533 mm) sphere, and shall comply with the loading requirements for
guards specified in the International Building Code. Access shall not require
walking on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units
horizontal (33-percent slope). Where access involves obstructions greater than
30 inches (762 mm) in height, such obstructions shall be provided with ladders
installed in accordance with Section 306.5 or stairways installed in accordance
with the requirements specified in the International Building Code in the path
of travel to and from appliances, fans, or equipment requiring service.
   [M] 306.6 Guards. Guards shall be provided where various components that
require service and roof hatch openings are located within 10 feet (3,048 mm)
of a roof edge or open side of a walking surface and such edge or open side is
located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor, roof, or grade below. The
guard shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) beyond each end of
components that require service and each end of the roof hatch parallel to the
roof edge. The top of the guard shall be located not less than 42 inches (1,067
mm) above the elevated surface adjacent to the guard. The guard shall be
constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere
and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the
International Building Code.
   404.2 CSST. CSST piping systems shall be installed in accordance with the
terms of their approval, the conditions of listing, the manufacturer's
instructions and this code.
   The piping located on the exterior extending from the gas meter to the
inside of the structure shall be a metallic pipe in compliance with Section
403.3. The entrance into the structure shall be provided with the appropriate
transition flange where an alternate gas piping material is utilized on the
inside of the structure.
   404.3 Prohibited locations. Piping shall not be installed in or through a
ducted supply, return or exhaust, or a clothes chute, chimney or gas vent,
dumbwaiter, or elevator shaft.
   404.6 Piping through foundation walls. Underground piping, where installed
through the outer foundation or basement wall of a building, shall be encased
in a protective sleeve or protected by an approved device or method. The space
between the gas piping and the sleeve and between the sleeve and the wall shall
be sealed to prevent the entry of gas and water.
   404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a
minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) below grade. The minimum depth shall be
increased to 18 inches (457 mm) if external damage to the piping or tubing from
external forces is likely to result. Where a minimum of 12 inches of depth
cannot be provided, the pipe shall be installed in conduit or bridged
(shielded).
   409.1.2 Prohibited locations. Shutoff valves shall be prohibited in
concealed locations, furnace plenums, and accessible spaces between a fixed
ceiling and a dropped ceiling, unless serving a gas appliance installed in that
space.
(1992 Code, § 11-33) (Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-
2004; Ord. 31-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 19-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 103-12,
passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 128-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-
2019; Ord. 140-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.033 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. A person whose compensation for mechanical work is reported by the
employer on an Internal Revenue Service W-2 form, and is also otherwise
considered an employee under applicable laws.
   FIREPLACE CONTRACTOR. A person who has the necessary qualification,
training, experience, and technical knowledge to properly plan, layout and
install fireplaces.
   FIREPLACE WORK. Includes all masonry fireplaces, factory built fireplaces,
pellet or grain fuel burning appliances, fireplace stoves and room heaters,
decorative appliances for installation in fireplaces, vented gas fireplaces,
vented gas fireplace heaters and factory built barbeque appliances.
   INACTIVE MASTER MECHANIC. A person who is licensed by the city as a master
mechanic, but is not designated as a master mechanic for a mechanical
contractor and who may be issued upon request an inactive mechanical
contractors license.
   INACTIVE REFRIGERATION MECHANIC. A person who is licensed by the city as a
refrigeration mechanic, but is not designated as a refrigeration mechanic for a
refrigeration contractor and who may be issued upon request an inactive
refrigeration contractors license.
   MASTER MECHANIC. A person who has the necessary qualifications, training,
experience and technical knowledge to properly plan, layout and install
heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, refrigeration and fireplace systems or
equipment and who is licensed by the city.
   MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR. A person who undertakes or offers to undertake, to
plan for, layout or install or make additions, alterations or repairs in the
installation of heating, ventilating, air-conditioning or refrigeration systems
or equipment with or without compensation and who is licensed by the city. A
mechanical contractor’s license does not, of itself, qualify its holder to
perform or supervise mechanical work.
   MECHANICAL WORK. All installation, alteration, repair, replacement and
maintenance of heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, refrigeration, and
fireplace systems or equipment.
   OWNER. A natural person who physically performs mechanical work on the
premises the person owns and actually occupies as a resident or owns and will
occupy as a residence upon completion of the construction.
   PERSONAL SUPERVISION. That a master mechanic or refrigeration mechanic
oversees and directs the mechanical or refrigeration work performed by employee
(s) so that:
      (1)   The master mechanic or refrigeration mechanic is immediately
available to the employee(s); and
      (2)   The master mechanic or refrigeration mechanic is able to and does
determine that all mechanical or refrigeration work performed by the employee
(s) is performed in compliance with this chapter and any other ordinance
regulating mechanical or refrigeration installations.
   REFRIGERATION CONTRACTOR. A person who has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience and technical knowledge to properly plan, layout, and
install refrigeration systems or equipment and is licensed by the city.
   REFRIGERATION MECHANIC. A person who has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience, and technical knowledge to properly plan, layout, and
install refrigeration systems or equipment and who is licensed by the city.
   REFRIGERATION WORK. Include all cooling systems or equipment that will be
used for other than human comfort.
(1992 Code, § 11-34) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.034 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Mechanical contractor. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
other than an employee, partner or officer of a licensed mechanical contractor
shall undertake or offer to undertake mechanical work with or without
compensation unless the person obtains a mechanical contractor’s license from
the city. A mechanical contractor’s license does not of itself qualify its
holder to perform or supervise mechanical work.
   (b)   Refrigeration contractor. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
person other than an employee, partner or officer of a licensed refrigeration
contractor shall undertake or offer to undertake refrigeration work with or
without compensation unless the person obtains a refrigeration contractor’s
license from the city.
   (c)   Fireplace contractor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person other than an
employee, partner or officer of a licensed fireplace contractor shall undertake
or offer to undertake fireplace work with or without compensation unless the
person obtains a fireplace contractor’s license from the city.
      (2)   Exception: A licensed residential contractor that installs
fireplace equipment and obtains a building permit and required inspections from
the mechanical inspection division.
   (d)   Master mechanic. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall
supervise the planning, layout and installation of heating, ventilation and air
conditioning, refrigeration and fireplace systems, or equipment unless that
person obtains a master mechanic license from the city.
   (e)   Inactive master mechanic. Existing master mechanics, after paying the
appropriate fee, may be issued an inactive mechanical contractor’s license. At
that time as a person holding an inactive license desires to change to an
active contractor’s license, that person shall pay the appropriate for the
license.
   (f)   Refrigeration mechanic. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall supervise the planning, layout and installation of refrigeration systems,
or equipment unless that person obtains a refrigeration mechanic license from
the city.
(1992 Code, § 11-35) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 15-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 31-07,
passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.035 EMPLOYMENT OF MASTER MECHANIC.
   (a)   Licensed master mechanic. No mechanical contractor shall engage in the
business of mechanical work unless the mechanical contractor employs a licensed
master mechanic, who shall be responsible for the proper performance and
personal supervision of all mechanical work in accordance with this chapter or
any order issued under this chapter. All requests for inspections shall be the
responsibility of the designated responsible master mechanic of record.
   (b)   Licensed refrigeration mechanic. No refrigeration contractor shall
engage in the business of refrigeration work unless the refrigeration
contractor employs a licensed refrigeration mechanic, who shall be responsible
for the proper performance and personal supervision of all refrigeration work
in accordance with this chapter or any order issued under this chapter. All
requests for inspections shall be the responsibility of the designated
responsible refrigera tion mechanic of record.
   (c)   Experience required for testing. An applicant for a master mechanic
license shall show evidence of four years of experience as a sheet metal
mechanic, refrigeration technician, general manager, project manager or
engineer in the employ of a licensed mechanical contractor. During this four-
year period, the applicant must have spent at least 2,000 hours per year
working as a sheet metal mechanic, refrigeration technician, general manager or
an engineer.
      (1)   Trade school credit. Graduates of an accredited trade school having
at least a one-year program in sheet metal or refrigeration will be given one-
half year of experience credit for each year of relevant schooling up to a
maximum of one year of experience credit.
      (2)   College credit. Graduates of an accredited college or university
having a four-year program in engineering or construction management will be
given one-quarter for each year of relevant schooling up to a maximum of one
year of experience credit.
      (3)   Military credit. Credit for military sheet metal, refrigeration,
mechanical construction management, or engineering work will be given at the
rate of one year credit for each two years in the military up to a maximum of
two years credit.
   (d)   Out-of-city applicants. Applicants for a master mechanic license from
out-of-city may take the examination upon showing affidavits of the same
qualifications in the municipality or state from which the applicant resides
that are required for applicants from in-city.
   (e)   Application. Applications for testing shall be made on forms furnished
by the code official.
   (f)   Approval and investigation. If the code official finds the applicant
has the required experience, the individual may be tested. The code official
may investigate the individual’s experience and the applicant shall cooperate
fully with the investigation. Failure to provide information or records related
to applicant experience shall be grounds for denial of the application.
   (g)   Denial and appeal. The code official shall notify in writing any
applicant whose application for testing has been refused. The notice shall
clearly state the reason for refusal and a statement of the applicant’s right
to appeal. An applicant whose application for testing is refused may appeal the
decision to the mechanical board of appeals. The decision of the board or the
hearing examiner is subject to judicial review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 11-37) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 14-94, passed 2-22-
1994; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 31-07,
passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.036 TERMINATION OF MASTER MECHANIC OR REFRIGERATION MECHANIC.
   In the case of termination of the designated master mechanic or
refrigeration mechanic, a mechanical contractor or refrigeration contractor may
be issued a temporary license permitting the firm, partnership, or corporation
to continue mechanical work for 90 days provided that a bond required in §
150.038 has been filed. No new permits may be issued until a new master
mechanic has been licensed.
(1992 Code, § 11-38) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 15-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.037 LICENSE USE RESTRICTED.
   No licensed mechanical contractor, refrigeration, or fireplace contractor
shall allow his or her name to be used by any other person directly or
indirectly, either to obtain a permit for the installation of any heating,
ventilating, air-conditioning, refrigeration or fireplace equipment or to
install any system or equipment.
(1992 Code, § 11-39) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 150.038 BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   As a condition of the license, each mechanical, refrigeration or
fireplace contractor shall give and maintain a surety bond in the penal sum of
$10,000 in a form approved by the city. The bond shall be conditioned upon the
faithful and lawful performance of all mechanical work, refrigeration work or
fireplace work entered upon by the contractor within the city and for
compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. The bond shall be in lieu
of all other license bonds to any political subdivision or government agency.
The bond shall be written by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the
state.
   (b)   Claims upon the bond may be filed by any person damaged by reason of
the principal’s failure to perform his or her obligation under the bond.
   (c)   Suspension or revocation of the license of the principal shall not by
itself affect the liability of either the principal or the surety on the bond.
(1992 Code, § 11-40) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.039 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any vehicle used by a contractor while performing mechanical, refrigeration
or fireplace work for which a license is required shall have the contractor’s
business name and city license numbers as they appear on the license in
contrasting color with characters one and one-half inches high by one and one-
half inches wide affixed to each side of the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 11-41) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 150.040 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of mechanical, refrigeration
or fireplace contracting or a master mechanic shall first make an application
for a license therefor to the administrative authority on forms furnished.
(1992 Code, § 11-42) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 150.041 LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
biennially beginning on December 31, 1995. All renewal fees shall be paid prior
to the expiration of the license.
   (b)   Any person who shall fail to renew a license within 60 days after it
has lapsed shall pay in addition to the renewal fee a reinstatement fee equal
to 50% of the renewal fee.
   (c)   Licenses not renewed within one year of the date of expiration shall
not be renewed until the applicant has submitted and passed the examination and
paid all fees required for a new license.
(1992 Code, § 11-43) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 14-94, passed 2-22-
1994; Ord. 75-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 27-19,
passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.042 EXAMINATION.
   (a)   Before a master mechanic license or refrigeration mechanic license
shall be issued, the applicant shall be required to submit to and pass an
examination as to his or her qualifications and fitness to install heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning or refrigeration equipment as applicable. The
examination shall be given under the direction of the mechanical inspection
manager. Any applicant who fails to pass the examination shall not be eligible
to take another examination until at least 30 days have elapsed from the date
of the last examination.
   (b)   Applications for examinations shall be made at least one week prior to
the examination date. The examination must be completed within 120 days of the
application submittal date. Failure to complete the examination within 120 days
shall result in the forfeiture of the examination application fee and the
application will be deemed null and void.
   (c)   After passing the examination, applicants shall secure the license
within 90 days from the examination date.
(1992 Code, § 11-44) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 27-
19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.043 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   (a)   Owners may install heating, ventilating, air-conditioning equipment or
fireplaces in a single-family residence which they occupy as their own home or
will occupy as their own home. All equipment installed by the owner shall be
for themselves without compensation or pay from or to any other persons for the
labor or installation. The installation by owner shall comply with the
requirements of this Code. The owner shall be required to file plans, apply for
and secure a permit, pay fees, and call for all inspections in the manner
provided in this Code.
   (b)   After the work has been commenced, the owner shall make arrangements
for the mechanical inspector to inspect the installation. Failure to arrange
for an inspection shall cause the permit to expire by limitation and become
null and void and the work shall be presumed unsafe in accordance with §
108.7 of the International Mechanical Code.
   (c)   All homeowner permits shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days
from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the permit is commenced for a period
of 180 days, and all work which has not received a final inspection shall be
presumed unsafe in accordance with §
108.7 of the International Mechanical Code.
(1992 Code, § 11-45) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 116–96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 130-15,
passed 12-15-2015)
§ 150.044 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The chief building official may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license
if he or she finds:
   (a)   In his or her discretion that the order is in the public interest;
   (b)   Based upon substantial evidence presented, the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   Has violated any applicable provision of this ode, city ordinance,
rule, regulation or state law;
      (2)   Has engaged in any fraudulent, deceptive or dishonest act or
practice;
      (3)   Has filed an application for a license which is incomplete in any
material respect or contains statements which are false or misleading;
      (4)   Fails to file with the chief building official the necessary bonds
or certificate of insurance;
      (5)   Fails to provide copies of records in the person’s possession
related to a matter under investigation;
      (6)   Fails to pay inspection and permit fees in a timely manner as
determined by the chief building official;
      (7)   Fails to respond to a lawful order of the building official; and
      (8)   Fails to employ a master mechanic or refrigeration mechanic.
(1992 Code, § 11-46) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 116-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 27-
19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.045 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL OF LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO
RENEW.
   (a)   A party whose license is suspended, revoked, or refused renewal may
appeal that decision to the mechanical board of appeals and examiners.
   (b)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a written appeal with the
department within ten days of the decision. The appeal shall include a
statement of the action complained of, why the same should be modified or
rescinded, whether the appellant desires an open or closed hearing, and an
address where the appellant can be mailed notice of hearing. The department
shall immediately deliver a copy of the appeal to the city attorney who will
act as legal counsel.
(1992 Code, § 11-47) (Ord. 94-93, passed 12-6-1993; Ord. 116-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-2001)
§ 150.046 TIME OF HEARING AND NOTICE.
   A public hearing, or a closed hearing if the board determines it is
necessary, shall be held on all appeals within 15 working days after the filing
of the appeal, unless a later date is agreed upon by the appellant and the
board. The department shall cause written notice of the date, time and place of
the hearing to be served upon the appellant by personal service or certified
mail to the address set forth in the appeal at least five days before the
hearing date.
(1992 Code, § 11-48) (Ord. 116-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001)
§ 150.047 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The following rules shall govern the procedures for an administrative
hearing on matters concerning license suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew.
   (a)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according to
the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (b)   Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
   (c)   The chairperson of the board or the board recorder shall administer
oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
   (d)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of the evidence after objection in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
   (e)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence that lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
   (f)   The appellant, the major organization unit or agency, and any other
party to an appeal shall have these rights among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
      (4)   To rebut evidence.
   (g)   After each appeal hearing, the board or hearing examiner shall perform
the following:
      (1)   Make written findings of fact; and
      (2)   Based upon the written findings, sustain, remand for further
hearing or action, or rescind the complained action or decision. The board may
in its discretion waive the payment of any reinstatement or late penalty fee.
   (h)   A written report of the decision, including the findings of fact,
shall be furnished to the appellant and the chief building official within 15
working days from the date the appeal hearing is closed. The city and the
appellant shall bear their own respective costs of the appeal proceeding. The
decision of the board shall be final.
(1992 Code, § 11-49) (Ord. 116-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 27-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.048 APPEAL TO CIRCUIT COURT.
   The decision of the board or the hearing examiner is subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 11-50) (Ord. 116-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 115-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 31-07, passed 2-20-2007)
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
§ 150.060 ADOPTED.
   (a)   The International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, including
Resource A, Guidelines on Fire Ratings of Archaic Materials and Assemblies, as
published by the International Code Council Inc., and amendments and additions
thereto as provided in this article, are hereby adopted as the existing
building code by the city for regulating and governing the repair, alteration,
change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings, as herein provided and provides for the issuance of permits
and the collection of fees therefor.
   (b)   The adoption of the International Existing Building Code, 2021
edition, will become effective January 1, 2022. The minimum building standards
in the 2021 edition of the International Existing Building Code and amendments
thereto shall be applied to any building permit issued after December 31, 2021.
   (c)   The city shall publish this ordinance, without attachments, after its
passage. The attachments are on file and available for inspection at the office
of the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 11-51) (Ord. 29-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 17-10, passed 3-1-
2010; Ord. 102-12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 127-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 26-
19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 139-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.061 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL
EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the existing building code adopted
in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or deleted as follows. All other
sections or subsections of the 2021 International Existing Building Code shall
remain the same.
   [A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the existing building
code of the city of Sioux Falls, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
   [A] 103.1 Enforcement agency. Building services is hereby created, and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The function of
the agency shall be the implementation, administration, and enforcement of the
provisions of this code.
   [A] 103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 104.8 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals, or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered civilly or criminally liable personally and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or the city be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the inspection authorized by this code or any permits or
certificates issued under this code.
   [A] 104.8.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against
an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall
be afforded all the protection provided by the city's insurance pool and
immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws and
shall be defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not
be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction, and
equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such
alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design, or method of
construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this
code, and that the material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose
intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
   [A] 105.1 Required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to
repair, add to, alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first
make application to the code official and obtain the required permit. The code
official may exempt permits for minor work.
   [A] 105.1.1 Annual permit. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 105.1.2 Annual permit records. Not adopted by the city.
   108.7 Delinquent accounts. The city may refuse to issue permits or conduct
inspections for any person or business whose account is delinquent.
   [A] 109.3.1 Footing or foundation inspection. Footing and foundation
inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any
required reinforcing steel is in place. If an inspection is required for
concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection.
Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is
ready-mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job.
   [A] 110.2 Certificate issued. After the code official inspects the structure
and does not find violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that
are enforced by the department, the code official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy that shall contain the following:
   1.    The permit number.
   2.    The address of the structure.
   3.    A statement that the described portion of the structure has been
inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy
and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is
classified.
   4.    The name of the code official.
   5.    The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
   6.    The use and occupancy in accordance with the provisions of the
International Building Code.
   7.    The type of construction as defined in the International Building
Code.
   8.   The design occupant load in assembly occupancies only.
   9.   Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided, and whether an
automatic sprinkler system is required.
   10.    Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
   [A] 112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made by the building and fire code officials relative to the
application and interpretation of this code and the fire code, to review all
prospective changes to the respective codes and to submit recommendations to
the responsible official and the city council, to approve permits for house
moves, and to examine applicants for licensing and to investigate matters
brought to the board, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals.
Members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of
procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code
official.
   [A] 113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the code official is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the jurisdiction to deem the violation as a strict liability offense
and institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   Section 202—General Definitions. Add the following definition:
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense, in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding, is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   302.2 Additional codes. Alterations, repairs, additions and changes of
occupancy to, or relocation of, existing buildings and structures shall comply
with the provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and changes of
occupancy, or relocation, respectively, in this code and the International
Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, International Property
Maintenance Code, International Residential Code, and NFPA 70. Where provisions
of the other codes conflict with provisions of this code, the provisions of
this code shall take precedence.
   Section 303 Storm shelters. Not adopted by the city.
   406.1 Material. Existing electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repair
shall be allowed to be repaired or replaced with like material. Minor
additions, alterations, and repairs to existing electrical systems or equipment
may be installed in accordance with the law in effect at the time the original
installation was made, when approved by the electrical inspector.
   406.1.4 Health care facilities. Portions of electrical systems being
repaired in Group I-2, ambulatory care facilities and outpatient clinics, shall
comply with NFPA 99 requirements for repairs and Article 517 of NFPA 70.
   406.1.6 New electrical service entrances in existing single-family and
multiple-family dwellings. When adding a new service entrance with increased
amperage, the existing electrical system shall, at a minimum, comply with the
following:
   (1)   Kitchens. Each kitchen shall have a minimum of one 20-ampere circuit
serving a countertop receptacle and a grounded receptacle serving a
refrigerator.
   (2)   Overcurrent device location. Each occupant shall have access to his
branch circuit overcurrent devices without going outdoors or through another
occupancy.
   (3)   Habitable areas. All habitable areas, other than closets, kitchens,
basements, garages, hallways, laundry areas, utility areas, storage areas, and
bathrooms, shall have a minimum of two duplex receptacle outlets, or one duplex
receptacle outlet and one ceiling or wall-type lighting outlet.
   (4)   Minimum lighting outlets. At least one lighting fixture shall be
provided in every habitable room, bathroom, hallway, stairway, attached garage,
and detached garage with electrical power, in utility rooms and basements where
such spaces are used for storage or contain equipment requiring service, and to
illuminate outdoor entrances and exits. A switched receptacle is allowed in
lieu of a lighting fixture in habitable rooms only.
   (5)   Ground fault circuit interrupters. Ground fault circuit interrupter
protection shall be provided for all receptacles in bathrooms, above kitchen
counters, attached and detached garages provided with power, at readily
accessible receptacles within 6 feet of sinks, basements, and at outdoor
locations. The exceptions of the National Electrical Code 210.8(A) 3 and 5
shall apply.
   (6)   Laundries. Each laundry shall be provided with at least one separate
20-ampere circuit.
   (7)   Heat sources. The primary heat source shall be provided with a
separate circuit.
   (8)   Exposed wiring methods. All exposed wiring methods shall be installed
in accordance with the applicable National Electrical Code article.
   (9)   Bathrooms. Each bathroom shall have one receptacle outlet located
within 3 feet of the basin. Any bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground
fault circuit interrupter protection.
   (10)   Emergency disconnect. An emergency disconnect shall be provided as
required in Section 230.85 of the National Electric Code for one- and two
family dwelling units and townhomes.
   408.1 Materials. Plumbing materials and supplies shall not be used for
repairs that are prohibited in the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   702.7 Materials and methods.  New work shall comply with the materials and
methods requirements in the International Building Code, International
Residential Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 70, and the Uniform Plumbing
Code, as applicable, that specify material standards, detail of installation
and connection, joints, penetrations, and continuity of any element, component,
or system in the building.
   [M] 702.7.2 International Mechanical Code. The following sections of the
International Mechanical Code shall constitute the mechanical materials and
methods requirements for Level 1 alterations:
   1.   All of Chapter 3, entitled “General Regulations,” except Sections 303.7
and 306.
   2.   All of Chapter 8, entitled “Chimneys and Vents.”
   3.   All of Chapter 9, entitled “Specific Appliances.”
   [R] 702.6.3 International Residential Code. The following sections of Part
V—Mechanical of the International Residential Code shall constitute the
residential mechanical and fuel gas materials and methods requirements for
Level 1 alterations:
   1.   All of Chapter 13, entitled “General Mechanical System Requirements,”
except Section M1305.
   2.    All of Chapter 18, entitled “Chimneys and Vents.”
   3.   All of Section G2412 entitled "General" and G2413 entitled "Pipe
Sizing" except Sections 2412.8 and G2413.3.
      3.1.   Sections G2412 and G2413 shall apply where the work being
performed increases the load on the system such that the existing pipe does not
meet the size required by code. Existing systems that are modified shall not
require resizing as long as the load on the system is not increased and the
system length is not increased even if the altered system does not meet code
minimums.
   4.   All of Sections G2431 through G2453 governing the appliances and
equipment specifically identified therein.
   804.4.1.2.1 Fire escape access and details. Fire escapes shall comply with
all of the following requirements:
   1.    Occupants shall have unobstructed access to the fire escape without
having to pass through a room subject to locking.
   2.    Access to a new fire escape shall be through a door, except that
windows shall be permitted to provide access from single dwelling units or
sleeping units in Group R-1, R-2, and I-1 occupancies or to provide access from
spaces having a maximum occupant load of 10 in other occupancy classifications.
      2.1.    The window shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5 square
feet (0.46 m2).
      2.2.    The minimum net clear opening height shall be 24 inches (610 mm)
and net clear opening width shall be 20 inches (508 mm).
      2.3.    The bottom of the clear opening shall not be greater than 48
inches (1,219 mm) above the floor.
      2.4.    The operation of the window shall comply with the operational
constraints of the International Building Code.
   3.    Newly constructed fire escapes shall be permitted only where exterior
stairways cannot be utilized because of lot lines limiting the stairway size or
because of the sidewalks, alleys, or roads at grade level.
   4.    Openings within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of fire escape stairways shall be
protected by fire assemblies having minimum 3/4-hour fire resistance ratings.
      Exception: Opening protection shall not be required in buildings equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
   5.    In all buildings of Group E occupancy, up to and including the 12th
grade, buildings of Group I occupancy, rooming houses and childcare centers,
ladders of any type are prohibited on fire escapes used as a required means of
egress.
   1009.1 Increased demand. Where the occupancy of an existing building or part
of an existing building is changed such that the new occupancy is subject to
increased or different plumbing fixture requirements or to increased water
supply requirements in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, the new
occupancy shall comply with the intent of the respective Uniform Plumbing Code
provisions.
      Exception: Only where the occupant load of the story is increased by more
than 20 percent, plumbing fixtures for the story shall be provided in
quantities specified in the International Building Code based on the increased
occupant load.
   1009.2 Food-handling occupancies. If the new occupancy is a food-handling
establishment, all existing sanitary waste lines above the food or drink
preparation or storage areas shall be panned or otherwise protected to prevent
leaking pipes or condensation on pipes from contaminating food or drink. New
drainage lines shall not be installed above such areas and shall be protected
in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   1009.3 Interceptor required. If the new occupancy will produce grease or
oil-laden wastes, interceptors shall be provided as required in the Uniform
Plumbing Code.
   1009.5 Group I-2. If the occupancy group is changed to Group I-2, the
plumbing system shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Uniform
Plumbing Code.
      TABLE 1011.5
MEANS OF EGRESS HAZARD CATEGORIES
 
Relative Hazard    Occupancy Classifications
1 (Highest Hazard) H; I-2; I-3; I-4
2                  I-1; R-1; R-2; R-4, Condition 2
3                  A; E; M; R-4, Condition 1
4                  B; F-1; S-1; R-3
5 (Lowest Hazard)  F-2; S-2; U
 
   1011.5.6 Existing emergency escape and rescue openings. Where a change of
occupancy would require an emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance
with Section 1031 of the International Building Code, operable windows serving
as the emergency escape and rescue opening shall comply with the following:
   1.   An existing operable window shall provide a minimum net clear opening
of 4 square feet (0.38 m2) with a minimum net clear opening height of 22 inches
(559 mm) and a minimum net clear opening width of 20 inches (508 mm), provided
the operable window has a sill height of not more than 48 inches (1,219 mm)
above the floor.
   2.   A replacement window where such window complies with both of the
following:
      2.1.   The replacement window meets the size requirements in Item 1.
      2.2.   The replacement window is the manufacturer's largest standard size
window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The
replacement window shall be permitted to be of the same operating style as the
existing window or a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening
area than the existing window.
      TABLE 1011.6
HEIGHTS AND AREAS HAZARD CATEGORIES
 
Relative Hazard    Occupancy Classifications
1 (Highest Hazard) H; I-2; I-3; I-4
2                  A-1; A-2; A-3; A-4; I-1; R-1; R-2; R-4, Condition 2
3                  E; F-1; S-1; M
4 (Lowest Hazard)  B; F-2; S-2; A-5; R-3; R-4, Condition 1; U
 
   1011.6.2 Exterior wall rating for change of occupancy classification to an
equal or lesser hazard category. When a change of occupancy classification is
made to an equal or lesser hazard category as shown in Table 1011.6, existing
exterior walls, including openings, shall be accepted.
      Exception. Where a property line is platted creating a Group R-3,
multifamily dwelling (town house), the walls separating the dwelling units
shall be constructed to provide a continuous fire separation using construction
materials consistent with the existing wall or complying with the requirements
for a new structure. The fire-resistive elements are not required to be
continuous between concealed floor spaces, although there shall be provided a
draft-stop, located above and in line with the dwelling unit separation walls.
   1301.2.6 Plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided in
accordance with Section 1009 for a change of occupancy and Section 808 for
alterations. Plumbing fixtures for additions shall be in accordance with the
International Building Code.
   1401.2 Conformance. The building shall be safe for human occupancy as
determined by the International Fire Code and the International Property
Maintenance Code. Any repair, alteration, or change of occupancy undertaken
within the moved structure shall comply with the requirements of this code
applicable to the work being performed. Any field-fabricated elements shall
comply with the requirements of the International Building Code or the
International Residential Code as applicable.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Manufactured homes used as a dwelling and located in a licensed
manufactured home park.
      2.    Structures used as a temporary office or shelter on a construction
or development site when approved by the building official.
      3.   Structures used as a temporary business office for a period as
specified in Section [A] 108.1 of the International Building Code when approved
by the building official and provided it meets the applicable accessibility
requirements of this code.
      4.    Manufactured homes used as a sales office at a location where such
homes are offered for sale, provided it meets the applicable accessibility
requirements of this code.
   1401.3 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases mean:
   1.   Building mover. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or
association who engages in the business or work of moving a building across
public property within the city.
   2.    Building moving. The moving of any house, building, structure, or any
part or parts thereof, except structures or parts of structures less than 12
feet wide and 13.5 feet high when loaded, from one location to another when
moving requires traveling upon, across, along, or over any street, avenue,
highway, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground in the city.
This term does not apply to manufactured or modular structures or assemblies
that do not exceed 15 feet in height and 16.6 feet in width including all
nonstructural appendages, or a length of 80.6 feet including all nonstructural
appendages.
   3.   Agency. The planning and building services department, police
department, city forester, city light and power, and city engineering
department.
   1401.4 License required. No person except a building mover licensed by the
city shall move any building, house, or structure, or part thereof, across,
along, or over any public property.
   1401.5 License application. Any person desiring to engage in the business of
building moving must file an application for the building mover’s license in
the city engineering department.
   1401.6 Bonding. The applicant for a building mover’s license shall file with
the application a bond running to the city in the penal sum of $10,000.00 with
sufficient sureties and conditioned that the license will comply with all city
requirements to the satisfaction of the city engineering department and shall
encompass repairs due to any damage to any sidewalk, crosswalk, hydrant,
street, alley, or other property done or caused by himself, his servants, or
employees in connection with moving any building.
   The bond will guarantee payment for damages to property and payment to the
city for services provided by the city. The license will indemnify and save
harmless the city against any and all liability for damages, costs, or expenses
arising out of any negligence on his part or on the part of his servants or
employees in connection with the moving of any building or the use of any
public street or ground for that purpose.
   1401.7 Revocation. A building mover’s license may be revoked at any time if
the mover violates the provisions of this chapter or rules established by the
agency, or conducts his business in a careless or reckless manner, or refuses
to make prompt payment of any sums due the city from him under any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whose bond or insurance as required herein has
been canceled or otherwise terminated.
   1401.8 Transferability. No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be transferable.
   1401.9 Permits required. No person shall engage in building moving unless
and until he has obtained a building moving permit, which will not be issued to
anyone except a person licensed as the building mover. Such permit shall be
obtained not less than seven days prior to the move.
   1401.10 Prerequisites to a permit. No permit to move a building shall be
issued as hereunder provided until the following conditions have been
satisfied:
   1.    A permit for capping the sanitary sewer service and/or water service
shall be obtained pursuant to Section 50.020: Permit To Raze or Remove Building
Required and Section 50.021: Disconnection, of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux
Falls, SD.
   2.    A building permit is required to place a one- or two-family dwelling
in a residential zoning district on the property described on the application
if located in the city. Before a city building permit can be issued for a one-
or two-family dwelling to be moved in a residential zoning district, the
applicant shall post the property. A hearing before the building board of
appeals will be required prior to the issuance of the building permit upon
request from the public. A hearing will be initiated and scheduled at the
request of the public within the time period of posting the signs per Item 1
below. The request shall be in writing on forms provided by building services.
      Before any action can be taken by the board, the applicant shall:
      1.    Post the property where the dwelling is to be moved for a
continuous period of not less than five working days with signs furnished by
the building official. At least two signs shall be posted. The applicant shall
submit a written oath that the signs were properly posted.
      2.    Submit one certified copy of the restrictions and covenants of the
property where the dwelling is proposed to be moved. Those portions applicable
to the dwelling shall be highlighted. If the property contains no restrictions
or covenants, a statement to that fact shall be submitted.
      3.    Submit a proposed site plan containing the legal description where
the dwelling is proposed to be moved.
      4.    Submit the inspection report from the building inspector.
      5.    Submit original clear photographs of the front, rear, and side
elevations of the dwelling to be moved.
   3.    Any person filing an application for a moving permit shall file with
the city engineer a liability insurance policy issued by the insurance company
authorized to do business in this state and approved as to form by the city
attorney in the following amounts: $250,000.00 per person, $500,000.00 per
accident, $500,000.00 property damage.
   4.    When required by the building official, satisfactory evidence from a
licensed pest control company that all nuisance pests have been exterminated
from the structure.
   5.    Approval of the route and time of move by the city police, city light
and power, city traffic engineer, and city forester.
   6.    Approval from planning and building services concerning the moving of
any building or structure in the historic district.
   1401.11 Permit application. The application shall contain the date or dates
of the moving of the building, house, or structure; a detailed statement
setting forth the proposed route to be followed; the name of the person in
charge of the move; the location of the premises to which the structure or
building is to be moved; and an agreement that the applicant will immediately
report any damage done by the moving operation to any public property and will
indemnify and hold the city harmless from any claims or damages for injuries to
persons or property resulting from the moving of the building or structure.
   1401.12 Fees.
   1.    The fee for a permit for a house shall be $75.00.
   2.    The fee for a permit for all other structures shall be $50.00.
   3.    The following fees shall be paid for services provided by city
departments:
      3.1.    Street department/traffic device service worker or vehicle:
         3.1.1.   $20.00 per hour for each traffic service worker.
         3.1.2.   $15.00 per hour for each pickup.
         3.1.3.   $15.00 per hour for a one-half-ton utility pickup.
         3.1.4.   $25.00 per hour for each aerial.
      3.2.    Police department/police officer and vehicle:
         3.2.1.   $50.00 per hour for each police officer.
         3.2.2.   $75.00 per overtime hour for each police officer.
      3.3.    Light department/line worker and vehicle:
         3.3.1.   $30.00 per hour for each line worker.
         3.3.2.   $25.00 per hour for truck and tool.
   Expenses shall be calculated from the date and hour the move will commence
until the move is actually completed. Overtime expense will be computed at one
and one-half times the hourly rate.
   1401.13 Denial. If the applicant fails to agree or comply with the
conditions as set forth herein or if in the judgment of the building official
the building or structure is in such a state of disrepair that it would not be
safe to move the building, or if in the judgment of the traffic engineer or the
city forester the proposed move would result in an undue hazard to public
traffic or undue damage to streets, sidewalks, trees, or other public property,
the permit will be denied and reasons therefor endorsed upon the application.
   1401.14 Restrictions on moving through streets. All moving of the building
once started shall continue until completed, and no building shall be parked
along the route unless deemed an emergency and approved by the traffic
engineer. The traffic engineer may require police escorts, temporary removal of
traffic devices, or may restrict or specify the day and hours during which the
moving operation must be accomplished.
   1401.15 Posting. Two moving placards must be posted on a visible location on
opposite ends of the building being moved during the entire move, and the
person moving the building must carry a signed duplicate of the permit.
   1401.16 Escorts. Movers shall provide a front and rear escort for all
movements.
   1401.17 Flags. Red and orange flags, 12 inches by 12 inches, must be
fastened to the rear corners of the moving structure.
   1401.18 Notice to public service companies, cable TV operations, and the
city of Sioux Falls. Before moving any building, the building mover shall
notify Metro Communications (911) immediately prior to entering public
property. The mover shall make arrangements with the police department and
traffic engineers seven days prior to the move if a police escort is required.
The mover shall also give seven days' notice to all city departments, public
service operations, and cable TV operators whose wires, traffic control
devices, or other appliances which affect the moving of such building of the
time when the move is to take place and request and arrange for the passage of
such building. Such building mover shall pay to the city and said corporation
and operators the reasonable cost and expense of the work required to be done.
   1401.19 Tampering with private property. The mover during all moves shall
obey all laws pertaining to tampering with private property and vehicles on the
street. Tampering with any wires or facilities belonging to private or public
service companies is prohibited.
   1401.20 Reporting damage. The building mover shall immediately report any
damage done by the moving operation to any street, sidewalk, curb, utility
equipment, tree sign, or other public or private property to the city engineer.
(1992 Code, § 11-52) (Ord. 29-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 17-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 102-12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 127-15,
passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 26-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 139-21, passed 11-16-
2021)
BUILDING SECURITY
§ 150.075 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate dwelling units constructed
pursuant to the residential building code and the building code by establishing
minimum standards to make them resistant to unlawful entry.
(1992 Code, § 11-59) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.076 SCOPE.
   (a)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to openings into
dwelling units within apartment houses of Group R2 and Group R3 occupancies as
defined in the International Building Code and one- and two-family dwelling
units and town houses as defined in the International Residential Code and to
openings between attached garages and dwelling units. Except for vehicular
access, door openings in enclosed attached garages shall be in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   An opening in an exterior wall when all portions of the openings
are more than 12 feet vertically or 6 feet horizontally from an accessible
surface of any adjoining yard court, passageway, public way, walk, breezeway,
patio, planter, porch or similar area.
      (2)   An opening in an exterior wall when all portions of the openings
are more than 12 feet vertically or 6 feet horizontally from the surface of any
adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair, tread, platform, or similar structure
or when any portion of the surface is itself more than 12 feet above an
accessible surface.
      (3)   Any opening in a roof when all portions of the roof are more than
12 feet above an accessible surface.
      (4)   Openings when the smaller dimension is 6 inches or less, provided
that the closest edge of the opening is at least 36 inches from the locking
device of the door or window assembly.
(1992 Code, § 11-60) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 31-19, passed 3-19-
2019)
§ 150.077 OBSTRUCTING EXITS.
   (a)   Security methods shall not create a hazard to life by obstructing any
means of egress or any opening that is classified as an emergency-exiting
element. Security provisions shall not supersede the safety requirements
relative to latching or locking devices on exit doors that would be contrary to
the provisions of the residential building code or the building code nor shall
the provisions of this subchapter be construed to waive any other provisions of
the residential building code or the building code.
   (b)   Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices may be installed in an
emergency escape or rescue windows or doors required by the residential
building code or the building code, provided:
      (1)   The devices are equipped with approved release mechanisms which are
openable from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or
effort; and
      (2)   The building is equipped with smoke detectors installed in
accordance with the residential building code or the building code.
(1992 Code, § 11-61) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.078 ENTRY VISION.
   (a)   All main and front entry doors to dwelling units shall be arranged so
that the occupant has a view of the area immediately outside the door without
opening the door.
   (b)   The view may be provided by a door viewer having a field of view of
not less than 180 degrees through windows or through view ports.
   (c)   A visual monitoring system that displays on a monitor that is
accessible to the occupant at all times.
(1992 Code, § 11-62) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 31-19, passed 3-19-
2019)
§ 150.079 DOORS.
   Doors shall be provided with hardware so that an individual cannot gain
entry from the exterior by pushing or pulling, or by manipulating an exposed
lock mechanism. Doors required for security in dwelling units shall comply with
this section.
   (a)   Strike plate installation. In wood frame construction, an open space
between trimmers and wood doorjambs shall be solid shimmed by a single piece
extending not less than 12 inches above and below the strike plate. Strike
plates shall be attached to wood with not less than four No. 8 by three-inch
screws, which shall have a minimum of three- fourths-inch penetration into the
nearest stud. Strike plates when attached to metal shall be attached with not
less than four No. 8 machine screws.
   (b)   Hinges. When hinges are exposed to the exterior, at least one of the
three required hinges shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge pins or a
mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by
removing the hinge pins. Not less than three four and one-half-inch steel butt
hinges shall be symmetrically fastened to both the door and frame with not less
than four No. 9 by three- fourths-inch wood screws or to metal with not less
than four No. 8 machine screws. In wood construction, an open space between
trimmers and wood doorjambs shall be solid shimmed extending not less than six
inches above and below the plate.
   (c)   Locking hardware. Single-swinging doors and the active leaf of doors
in pairs, shall be equipped with an approved exterior key-operated deadbolt.
The deadbolt shall have a minimum one-inch throw and must be actuated by a key
from the exterior and a knob or thumb turn on the interior. When projected, the
deadbolt shall become locked against return by end pressure. Sliding doors must
be provided with a locking mechanism activated from the interior.
(1992 Code, § 11-63) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.080 WINDOWS.
   Window assemblies defined as units composed as a group of parts that closes
an opening in a wall to control light, air and other elements shall be provided
with a latching device activated from the interior, which is intended to resist
opening a movable sash from the exterior.
(1992 Code, § 11-64) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 150.081 ALTERNATE MATERIALS OR METHODS.
   The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to prevent the use of any
material, device, hardware or method not specifically prescribed when the
alternate provides equivalent security and is approved by the building
official.
(1992 Code, § 11-65) (Ord. 23-03, passed 3-3-2003)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.095 ADOPTED.
   (a)    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 edition, published
by the International Code Council as amended, is hereby adopted as the property
maintenance code to provide standards to safeguard life or limb, health,
property, and public welfare by regulating, governing, and controlling the use,
occupancy, conditions, and maintenance of all property, buildings, and
structures within this jurisdiction and to provide for a just, equitable, and
practicable method whereby buildings or structures, which from any cause
endanger the life, limb, morals, property, safety, or welfare of the general
public or their occupants, may be repaired, vacated, or demolished.
   (b)    The adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2021
edition, will become effective January 1, 2023. The minimum requirements and
standards of the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code will become
effective after January 1, 2023.
   (c)    The city shall publish this ordinance, without attachments, after its
passage. The attachments are on file and available for inspection at the office
of the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 11-75) (Ord. 14-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 116-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 26-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 32-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 20-10,
passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 104-12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 129-15, passed 12-15-
2015; Ord. 140-22, passed 12-6-2022)
§ 150.096 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the property maintenance code
adopted in this article shall be amended, added, or not adopted by the city as
follows. All other sections or subsections of the 2021 International Property
Maintenance Code shall remain the same.
   [A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
   [A] 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to
a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International
Existing Building Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code, International Residential Code, Uniform Plumbing
Code, and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify,
or set aside any provisions of Chapter 156, Floodplain Management, and Chapter
160, Zoning of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   [A] 103.1 Creation of agency. The neighborhood revitalization division is
hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code
official. The function of the agency shall be the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 104.1 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
established in Tables 1-A, 1-B, and 1-C of Section 150.017 of the Code of
Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   In addition, an administrative fee of $250 may be assessed for the
preparation of bids and contracts to correct or abate a violation.
   [A] 104.2 Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund
policy. The refunding of fees shall be as follows:
   1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or
collected.
   2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid where work has not been
done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
   3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid where an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.
   The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
   [A] 105.7 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals, or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered civilly or criminally liable personally, and is hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a
result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or the city be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the inspection authorized by this code or any permits or
certificates issued under this code.
   [A] 105.7.1 Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against
any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee
in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall
be afforded all the protection by the city’s insurance pool and any immunities
and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws and be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not
be liable for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 107.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, to review all prospective changes to the property
maintenance code and to submit recommendations to the responsible official and
the city council there shall be, and is hereby created, a property maintenance
board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor with the
consent of the city council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board
shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the
code official.
   [A] 108.1 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall consist of five
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the
jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex-officio member but shall not
vote on any matter before the board.
   111.10 Extension of time agreement. If the code official determines that an
extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently
dangerous to life or property, the code official may grant an extension of
time, not to exceed 180 days, in which to complete the work listed in the
Notice and Order. Any extension shall not extend the time to appeal the Notice
and Order. Any extension shall be agreed to in writing in a document containing
the following:
   1.    A reasonable and acceptable schedule, setting forth specific dates to
complete corrective action for each violation listed in the Notice and Order.
   2.    A signature of the responsible party.
   [A] 113.1 General. The code official shall order the owner or owner’s
authorized agent of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in
the code official’s or owner’s authorized agent judgment after review is so
deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, insanitary, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and
such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove
such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs,
to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair
or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than 18
months, the code official shall order the owner or owner’s authorized agent to
demolish and remove such structure. The structure must remain secured during
the 18-month time period.
SECTION 114
ASSESSMENTS
   114.1 Special assessment. The code official shall cause an account to be
kept against each lot or parcel of the cost to the city for the correction and
control of any vegetation nuisance during the growing season of each year, for
the cost of sidewalk snow removal, for the cost of demolition and removal where
the owner fails to comply with a demolition order, for the abatement of an
unsafe condition which the owner fails to comply, and for the costs of
emergency repairs. The costs shall be certified to the city finance director on
or before August 1 of each year.
   114.2 Estimate of assessment. The finance director shall prepare an estimate
of the assessment against each lot or parcel for the correction and control of
any vegetation nuisance for the preceding growing season, sidewalk snow
removal, demolition, abatement of unsafe conditions, and emergency repairs,
including therein the expense of levying such special assessment against each
lot or parcel. Such estimates shall be submitted to the city council.
   114.3 Assessment hearing. Upon the filing of the assessment roll with the
finance director, the city council shall fix a time and place of hearing upon
the assessment, not less than 20 days from the date of filing thereof. The
finance director shall thereupon publish a notice of the time and place of
hearing in the official newspaper one week prior to the date set for the
hearing. The notice shall in general terms describe the improvement for which
the special assessment is levied, the date of filing of the assessment roll,
the time and place of the hearing thereon, and that the roll will be open for
public inspection at the office of the city finance director and shall refer to
the special assessment roll for further particulars.
   In addition to the publication of the notice of hearing, the finance
director shall mail a copy of the notice by first class mail, addressed to the
owner of any property to be assessed for the improvements, at the address as
shown by the records of the finance director. The mailings shall be at least
one week prior to the date set for the hearing.
   The owner of any lot or parcel of land against which a special assessment is
to be so levied, or its occupant or person in charge, may appear before the
council at such meeting to protest such assessment and to give reasons why such
assessment should not be levied.
   Upon the day so named, the council shall meet, and if they find the estimate
correct and the actions of the code official resulting in the estimate to be in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, they shall approve the
assessment by resolution and file such assessment roll with the finance
director; or, if not correct, they shall correct or modify the estimate,
approve the assessment as corrected or modified, and file such assessment roll
with the finance director; or, if not in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, shall disapprove such assessment.
   From the date of the approval and filing of such assessment roll with the
finance director, the assessment shall be and become a special lien against the
various pieces of property described in the assessment roll and shall be
collected in a like manner as special assessments for public improvements.
   201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the International Building Code, International Existing
Building Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, International Residential
Code, Chapter 156, Floodplain Management, Chapter 160, Zoning, or NFPA 70, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
      Exception: When used within this code, the terms unsafe and dangerous
shall have only the meanings ascribed to them in this code and shall not have
the meanings ascribed to them by the International Existing Building Code.
   302.4 Vegetation. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from all actively growing plants declared to be statewide noxious weeds by the
state weed and pest control commission, all actively growing weeds declared by
the county to be locally noxious, and all other non-woody plants growing in the
city to a greater height than 8 inches. All such plants are dangerous and
unhealthful, are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and are prohibited.
Vegetation shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and weeds, other than
trees or shrubs. The 8-inch restriction on non-woody plants does not apply to
cultivated flowers and fruit and vegetable gardens, vegetation being grown as a
crop, livestock pastures, wildflower display gardens, rights-of-way of rural
section roads, vegetation designated by the director of Sioux Falls parks and
recreation as a natural area or native planting area, or unimproved
developments, except for a 25-foot mowed buffer adjacent to the right-of-way
and except for a 12-foot buffer from an occupied property.
   302.4.1 Duty to correct. The occupant, person in charge, or owner of any lot
or parcel of land in the city shall keep such lot, to include any abutting city
right-of-way except as provided herein, free of such nuisance vegetation by
cutting, spraying, or removal, as may be appropriate.
   The code official has the authority to require compliance with this article
on all property. The code official shall cause public notice to be given
requiring all lots or parcels of land in the city to be kept free from all
vegetation declared by Sub-section 302.4 to be a nuisance.
   Upon failure of the owner or owner’s authorized agent having charge of a
property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice, the owner or
owner’s authorized agent shall be subject to administrative citations in
accordance with Title III, Chapter 40, Administrative Code Enforcement, of the
Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   The notice shall provide that all vegetation determined to be a nuisance and
left uncorrected shall be cut, sprayed, or removed by the city, and the cost
thereof shall be billed to the property owner. If the bill is left unpaid, the
cost will be assessed against that property to include the cost of levying such
special assessment.
   The notice shall be by general public notice, published in the official
newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks, and shall be deemed sufficient
to allow those actions authorized by this Chapter, including Sub-section
302.4.2 and Sub-section 114.
   302.4.2 Correction by city. If the occupant, person in charge, or owner of
any lot or parcel of land fails to correct any such vegetation nuisance as
required within two days of the last publication of the general notice, as set
forth in Sub-section 302.4.1, the code official shall cause such vegetation to
be cut, sprayed, or removed, and for such purpose the person allowed to do the
work shall be allowed to enter upon any lot or parcel of land.
   No person shall intentionally interfere or attempt to interfere with the
cutting, spraying, or removal of such vegetation.
   302.8 Motor vehicles. Abandoned and inoperative vehicles shall be regulated
by Title IX, Chapter 93: Nuisances, of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls,
SD.
   302.9 Defacement of property. Placement of graffiti shall be regulated by
Title XIII, Chapter 132: Offenses Against Property, of the Code of Ordinances
of Sioux Falls, SD.
   303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas containing
water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a
fence or barrier not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) in height above the
finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool.
Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Self-
closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will
positively close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches (152
mm) from the gatepost. An existing pool enclosure shall not be removed,
replaced, or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety
barrier.
      Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F
1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
   304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to September 30, every
door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged, or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every
screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition.
      Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such
as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
   307.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having four or
more risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open
portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking
surface that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below
shall have guards. Handrails shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in
height or more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) in height measured vertically above
the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking
surfaces. Guards shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height above the
floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building
code.
      2.   Handrails are not required when the landing at the top of the stair
is not required to have a guardrail.
   308.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers, pursuant to Title V, Chapter 57: Garbage and Recycling, of the Code
of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   308.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish in accordance with
Title V, Chapter 57: Garbage and Recycling, of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux
Falls, SD.
   308.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned, or stored on premises without first removing
the doors in accordance with Title XIII, Section 130.005: Keeping Discarded
Iceboxes, Refrigerators or Airtight Containers Declared Nuisance, of the Code
of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD.
   308.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers in accordance with
Title V, Chapter 57: Garbage and Recycling, of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux
Falls, SD.
   308.3.1 Garbage facilities. Every dwelling shall be supplied with an
approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container in accordance with
Title V, Chapter 57: Garbage and Recycling, of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux
Falls, SD.
   308.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials
until removed from the premises for disposal in accordance with Title V,
Chapter 57: Garbage and Recycling, of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls,
SD.
   402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have not less than one
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the
floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a
window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm)
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area for the room.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing
areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the
interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior
glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
      2.    The glazed areas need not be provided in rooms where artificial
light is provided capable of producing an average illumination of six foot-
candles (6.46 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm)
above the floor level.
   404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain not less than 120 square
feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet
(6.5 m2). Bedrooms 100 square feet (9.33 m2) or less are allowed two occupants
and every bedroom occupied by more than two persons shall contain not less than
50 additional square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
   505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet, or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. Kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs, and showers shall be supplied with
hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the plumbing code.
   [P] 505.5.1 Abandonment of systems. Where a nonpotable water reuse system or
a rainwater collection and distribution system is not maintained or the owner
ceases use of the system, the system shall be abandoned in accordance with
Section 1502.5 of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall
portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide
required heating.
      Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F
(-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases, or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from September 1 to April 30 to maintain a minimum
temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
      Exceptions:
      1.    When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in the Plumbing Code.
      2.    In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to April 30 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Processing, storage, and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
      2.    Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(1992 Code, § 11-76) (Ord. 14-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 116-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 26-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 32-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 105-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 20-10, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 37-12, passed 6-12- 2012;
Ord. 104-12, passed 12-18-2012; Ord. 129-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 22-16,
passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 140-22, passed 12-6-2022)
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONTRACTORS
§ 150.125 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISOR. The individual who has passed the construction
supervisor’s examination and has been designated as the person responsible for
the personal supervision of a contractor’s residential building contracting or
residential roofing and repair contracting.
   EMPLOYEE. A person whose compensation for construction work is reported by
the employer on an Internal Revenue Service W-2 Form and is also otherwise
considered an employee under applicable law.
   INACTIVE CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISOR. The individual who has passed the
construction supervisor’s examination and is licensed by the city but has not
been designated as the construction supervisor for a residential building
contractor or residential roofing and repair contracting.
   PERSONAL SUPERVISION. That the construction supervisor oversees and directs
the residential building contracting or residential roofing and repair
contracting and that:
      (1)   He or she is available to his or her laborers and city inspectors;
and
      (2)   He or she is able to and does determine that all work performed is
in compliance with this chapter and all city ordinances, rules, regulations and
state law.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONTRACTING. The enlargement, alteration, repair,
improvement, conversion or new construction of any one- or two-family dwelling,
townhouses or any accessory building or structure associated with a one- or
two-family dwelling or townhouses for which a building permit is required.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONTRACTOR. A person who for compensation undertakes or
offers to undertake residential building contracting.
   RESIDENTIAL ROOFING AND REPAIR CONTRACTING. The act of replacing or
installing the roof covering, replacing windows and/or doors into the same
opening with no structural changes and replacing or installing siding in any
one- or two-family dwelling or townhouse for which a building permit is
required.
   RESIDENTIAL ROOFING AND REPAIR CONTRACTOR. A person who for compensation
undertakes or offers to undertake residential roofing and repair contracting.
   TOWNHOUSES. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or
more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with
open space on at least two sides.
(1992 Code, § 11-81) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.126 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall undertake, or
offer to undertake residential building contracting or residential roofing and
repair contracting until the person obtains a residential building contractors
license or a residential roofing and repair contractors license.
   (b)   The following are exempt from the requirements of this section:
      (1)   Employees or bona fide subcontractors of a person licensed in
accordance with this chapter when they are under the direction and control of
that person;
      (2)   Any person engaged in other construction trades for which licenses
are required by the city when that person is performing work commensurate with
the respective license;
      (3)   A dwelling owner for work to be done on his or her property which
he or she occupies as his or her own single family dwelling or will occupy as
his or her own single family dwelling and when the property owner is acting as
his or her own contractor; and
      (4)   A landlord or his or her agent for work to be done on his or her
property when the landlord is acting as his or her own building contractor.
(1992 Code, § 11-82) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-
21-2023)
§ 150.127 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to engage in the business of residential building
contracting or residential roofing and repair contracting shall first make an
application for a license therefor to the chief building official on forms
furnished.
   (b)   In addition to the information required in
chapter 110 of this Code, the chief building official may require proof of
identification and compliance with other applicable ordinances and laws of this
city and the state.
(1992 Code, § 11-83) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 35-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.128 INACTIVE CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISOR’S LICENSE.
   Persons may apply for and take the construction supervisor’s examination and
upon paying the appropriate license fee may be issued an inactive construction
supervisor’s license.
(1992 Code, § 11-84) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 80-95, passed 6-5-
1995; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 150.129 BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   As a condition of his or her license, each residential building
contractor or residential roofing and repair contractor shall maintain and
deliver to the chief building official a compliance bond in the penal sum of
$20,000 in a form approved by the city with the contractor as principal on the
bond and the city as obligee for its benefit and that of consumers dealing with
the contractor.
   (b)   The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and lawful completion
of all work entered into by the contractor within the city for compliance with
all the provisions of this chapter, and for payment to the city of associated
permit fees, investigation fees, citations, landfill charges, and water and
street department service charges. The bond shall be in addition to all other
license bonds to any political subdivision or government agency. The bond shall
be written by a corporate surety authorized to transact business in the state.
   (c)   Claims upon the bond shall be filed by the city by reason of the
principal’s failure to perform his or her obligation under the bond. The
aggregate liability of the surety, regardless of the number of claims made
against the bond or the number of years the bond remains in force, shall not
exceed $20,000. Any revision of the bond amount shall not be cumulative.
   (d)   Suspension or revocation of the license of the principal shall not by
itself affect the liability of either the principal or the surety on the bond
except that the liability of the surety shall not extend to acts or omissions
of the principal occurring after the effective date of his or her license
suspension or revocation.
(1992 Code, § 11-85) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 82-14, passed 11-4-2014; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 35-19,
passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.130 GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   As a condition of his or her license, each residential building contractor
or residential roofing and repair contractor shall deliver to the chief
building official and maintain proof of a general liability insurance policy
with single limits of at least $300,000.
(1992 Code, § 11-86) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 35-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23,
passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.131 CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISOR’S EXAMINATION.
   (a)   No license shall be issued until after the designated construction
supervisor has passed an examination as to his or her qualifications and
fitness to perform residential building contracting or residential roofing and
repair contracting. The examination shall be given under the direction of the
building inspection manager. No applicant may take another examination within
30 days of having failed an examination.
   (b)   Applications for examination shall be made not less than one week
prior to the examination date which shall be as determined by the chief
building official. The examination must be completed within 120 days of the
application submittal date. Failure to complete the examination within 120 days
shall result in the forfeiture of the examination application fee and the
application will be deemed null and void. After passing the examination,
applicants shall secure the license within 90 days from the exam date.
   (c)   Applicants shall pay the examination fee for each exam given.
(1992 Code, § 11-87) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 35-
19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.132 DESIGNATION OF CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISOR.
   As a condition of his or her license each residential building contractor or
residential roofing and repair contractor must designate himself or herself or
one employee as the designated construction supervisor who shall be responsible
for the personal supervision of the contractor's residential building
contracting or residential roofing and repair contracting.
(1992 Code, § 11-88) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.133 TERMINATION OF DESIGNATED CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISOR.
   It shall be the duty of the residential building contractor or residential
roofing and repair contractor to immediately notify the chief building official
in writing upon the designation of a new construction supervisor or the
termination or death of the designated construction supervisor. Upon the
termination or death of the designated construction supervisor, the residential
building contractor or residential roofing and repair contractor may request in
writing from the chief building official a continuance of the license, for the
purpose of completing existing permitted projects only, for a period not to
exceed 90 days.
(1992 Code, § 11-89) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 35-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23,
passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.134 LICENSE USE RESTRICTED.
   No licensed residential building contractor or residential roofing and
repair contractor shall allow his or her name to be used by any other person
directly or indirectly, either to obtain a building permit or to perform
residential building contracting or residential roofing and repair contracting.
(1992 Code, § 11-90) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.135 LICENSE TERM RENEWAL.
   (a)   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on March 1 of every third year beginning on March 1, 1998. All renewal fees
shall be paid prior to the license being renewed.
   (b)   Any person who fails to renew a license issued under the provisions of
this chapter within 60 days after it has expired shall pay in addition to the
renewal fee a reinstatement fee equal to 50% of the renewal fee.
   (c)   Residential building contractor licenses or residential roofing and
repair contractor licenses not renewed within one year from the date of
expiration shall not be renewed until the designated construction supervisor
has submitted to and passed the construction supervisor's examination and has
paid the examination and license fees required of a new residential building
contractor or residential roofing and repair contractor and has met all other
conditions required to hold a residential building contractor's license or
residential roofing and repair contractor's license.
   (d)   Inactive construction supervisors’ licenses not renewed within one
year of expiration shall not be renewed until the inactive construction
supervisor has submitted to and passed an examination and has paid the
examination and license fees required for a new license.
(1992 Code, § 11-91) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 35-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.136 CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No residential building contractor's license or residential roofing
and repair contractor's license shall be renewed until the designated
construction supervisor has completed a minimum of one hour of attendance at a
course which is approved by the building official or has submitted to and
passed the construction supervisor's examination and has paid the examination
and license fees required for a new residential building contractor or
residential roofing and repair contractor. The one hour of continuing education
shall coincide with license term as indicated in §
150.135(a).
   (b)   No inactive construction supervisor examined and licensed after March
1, 1998, shall have his or her license renewed until he or she has completed a
minimum of one hour attendance at a course which is approved by the building
official or has retaken and passed the construction supervisor’s examination
and paid the examination and license fee required for a new license. The one
hour of continuing education shall coincide with license term as indicated in §
150.135(a).
(1992 Code, § 11-92) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-
1998; Ord. 94-22, passed 8-9-2022; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.137 SUSPENSION, REVOCATIONS, AND CENSURE OF LICENSE.
   The chief building official may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a
license if he or she finds:
   (a)   In his or her discretion that the order is in the public interest; and
   (b)   Based upon substantial evidence presented, the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   Has filed an application for a license which is incomplete in any
material respect or contains statements which are false or misleading;
      (2)   Has engaged in any fraudulent, deceptive, or dishonest act or
practice;
      (3)   Has violated any applicable provision of this Code, city ordinance,
rule, regulation, or state law;
      (4)   Fails to file with the chief building official the necessary bonds
or certificate of insurance;
      (5)   Fails to provide copies of records in the person's possessions
related to a matter under investigation;
      (6)   Fails to pay inspection and permit fees or citations in a timely
manner as determined by the chief building official;
      (7)   Fails to respond to a lawful order or directive of the building
official; or
      (8)   Fails to employ a construction supervisor.
(1992 Code, § 11-93) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 115-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 12-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 35-19,
passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 110-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.138 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL OF LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO
RENEW.
   A party whose license is suspended, revoked or refused renewal may appeal
that decision to the building board of appeals and examiners. Appeals shall be
commenced by filing a written appeal with the department within ten days of the
decision. The appeal shall include a statement of the action complained of, why
the same should be modified or rescinded, whether the appellant desires an open
or closed hearing, and an address where the appellant can be mailed notice of
hearings. The department shall immediately deliver a copy of the appeal to the
city attorney who will act as legal counsel.
(1992 Code, § 11-94) (Ord. 115-94, passed 12-19-1994; Ord. 115-96, passed 10-7-
1996)
§ 150.139 TIME OF HEARING AND NOTICE.
   A public hearing, or a closed hearing if the board determines it is
necessary, shall be held on all appeals within 15 working days after filing of
the appeal, unless a later date is agreed upon by the appellant and the board.
The department shall cause written notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing to be served upon the appellant by personal service or certified mail
to the address set forth in the appeal at least five days before the hearing
date.
(1992 Code, § 11-95) (Ord. 115-96, passed 10-7-1996)
§ 150.140 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The following rules shall govern the procedures for an administrative
hearing on matters concerning licensee suspension, revocation, or refusal to
renew.
   (a)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according to
the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (b)   Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
   (c)   The chairperson of the board or the board recorder shall administer
oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
   (d)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of the evidence after objection in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
   (e)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence that lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
   (f)   The appellant, the major organization unit or agency, and any other
party to an appeal shall have these rights among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      (3)   To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
      (4)   To rebut evidence.
   (g)   After each appeal hearing, the board or hearing examiner shall perform
the following:
      (1)   Make written findings of fact; and
      (2)   Based upon the written findings, sustain, remand for further
hearing or action, or rescind the complained action or decision. The board may,
in its discretion, waive the payment of any reinstatement or late penalty fee.
   (h)   (1)   A written report of the decision, including the findings of
fact, shall be furnished to the appellant and the chief building official
within 15 working days from the date the appeal hearing is closed.
      (2)   The city and the appellant shall bear their own respective costs of
the appeal proceeding. The decision of the board shall be final.
(1992 Code, § 11-96) (Ord. 115-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 35-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 150.141 APPEAL TO CIRCUIT COURT.
   The decision of the board or the hearing examiner is subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 11-97) (Ord. 115-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 30-07, passed 2-20-
2007)
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 150.155 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing a program for identification and registration of vacant
buildings, determining the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings and
structures, and providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
(1992 Code, § 11-100) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 150.156 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS STRUCTURE. A structure that is potentially hazardous to persons or
property, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A structure that is in danger of partial or complete collapse;
      (2)   A structure with any exterior parts that are loose or in danger of
falling; or
      (3)   A structure with any parts, such as floors, porches, railings,
stairs, ramps, balconies or roofs, that are accessible and that are either
collapsed, in danger of collapsing or unable to support the weight of normally
imposed loads.
   OWNER. Those shown to be the owner or owners on the records of the Minnehaha
County and Lincoln County directors of equalization, those identified as the
owner or owners on a vacant building registration form, holder of an unrecorded
contract for deed, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, a mortgagor or vendor
in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, other
person, firm or corporation in control of the freehold of the premises or
lessor state therein. Any person shall have a joint and several obligation for
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS. A building secured by means other than
those used in the design of the building.
   UNOCCUPIED. A building which is not being used for a legal occupancy.
   UNSECURED. A building or portion of a building that is open to entry by
unauthorized persons without the use of tools.
   VACANT BUILDING.
      (1)   A building or portion of a building that is:
         A.   Unoccupied and unsecured;
         B.   Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means;
         C.   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
         D.   Unoccupied and condemned;
         E.   Unoccupied and has city code violations; or
         F.   Condemned and illegally occupied.
      (2)   VACANT BUILDING does not mean any building being constructed
pursuant to a valid permit issued pursuant to the city building code and
residential code for one- and two-family dwellings.
(1992 Code, § 11-101) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 150.157 VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The owner shall register with the city not later than 30 days after
any building in the city becomes a vacant building, as defined in this
subchapter.
   (b)   The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. The
forms shall include a plan for the continued care and upkeep of the property
acceptable to the city and a timetable for returning the building to
appropriate occupancy or use and/or for demolition of the building and other
information deemed necessary by the city.
   (c)   All applicable laws and codes shall be complied with by the owner. The
owner shall notify the city of any changes in information supplied as part of
the vacant building registration within 30 days of the change. If the plan or
timetable for the vacant building is revised in any way, the revisions must
meet the approval of the city.
   (d)   The owner and any subsequent owners shall keep the building secured
and safe and the building and grounds properly maintained until the
rehabilitation or demolition has been completed. The building shall not be used
for storage.
   (e)   Any new owner(s) shall register or re-register the vacant building
with the city within 30 days of any transfer of an ownership interest in a
vacant building. The new owner(s) shall comply with the approved plan and
timetable submitted by the previous owner until any proposed changes are
submitted and meet the approval of the city.
(1992 Code, § 11-102) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 150.158 VACANT BUILDING FEES.
   (a)   The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual fee of $1,000 for
the first year the building becomes a vacant building. If the property is
located in a historic district identified by the city of Sioux Falls, the owner
shall pay an annual fee of $2,000 for the first year the building becomes a
vacant building. Thereafter, if any property remains unoccupied, the subsequent
annual fee shall increase by $1,000 increments each year.
   (b)   The first annual fee shall be paid not later than 30 days after the
building becomes a vacant building. Any subsequent annual fee shall be due upon
renewal of the vacant building registration. If the fee is not paid within 30
days of being due, the owner shall be in violation of this subchapter.
   (c)   The fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any building
permits, with the exception of a demolition permit.
(1992 Code, § 11-103) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 137-21, passed 11-
9-2021; Ord. 53-23, passed 7-5-2023)
§ 150.159 EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   A building that has suffered fire damage shall be exempt from the
registration requirement for 90 days after the date of the fire if the property
owner submits a request for exemption in writing to the city.
   (b)   This request shall include the following information supplied by the
owner:
      (1)   A description of the premises;
      (2)   The names and addresses of the owner or owners; and
      (3)   A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an
expedient manner.
(1992 Code, § 11-104) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 150.160 INSPECTIONS.
   The city may inspect any premises in the city for the purpose of enforcing
and assuring compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. Procedures for
inspections shall be as permitted by § 104 of the Property Maintenance Code.
(1992 Code, § 11-105) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-
18-2008)
§ 150.161 ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the city authorized by this Code.
(1992 Code, § 11-107) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003)
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 150.175 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the city by requiring permit and registration of rental
housing units.
(1992 Code, § 11-110) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 150.176 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. Any building or structure including the real
property upon which it is located, which is rented, offered for rent as living
quarters, or used as a short-term rental unit. It does not mean homes that
qualify as on-campus housing, hospital units, nursing home units, or hotels or
motels with daily rental units, all of  which shall be exempt from any
requirements of this subchapter.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT. Any home, cabin, or similar building that is rented,
leased, or furnished in its entirety to the public on a daily or weekly basis
for more than 14 days in a calendar year and is not occupied by an owner or
manager during the time of rental. This term does not include a bed and
breakfast establishment as defined in city ordinance § 160.005.
(1992 Code, § 11-111) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 74-17, passed 8-8-
2017; Ord. 109-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.177 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No residential rental property owner shall allow to be occupied,
advertise for occupancy, solicit occupants of, or let to another person for
occupancy any residential rental unit within the city that has not been
permitted as residential rental unit by the city. All owners of a residential
rental unit shall have filed a permit application for the physical address of
each building with the city. Failure to make truthful disclosures of the
information required under division (b)(5) below, or if the information
disclosed reveals three or more health, nuisance, or other code violations
resulting in citations and fines payable to the city within the previous three
calendar years, shall be cause for the city to elect to deny the permit. An
application for a residential rental permit shall be available to access in
person and on the city's webpage. A technological problem or failure that
temporarily prevents the use of an online application shall not violate this
section. A residential rental property owner and/or the designated contact
person shall notify the city in writing within 30 calendar days after any
change to the information provided on the application.
   (b)   The application and supporting forms shall require the following
information:
      (1)   Name, mailing address, and phone number of the property owner;
      (2)   If the property owner does not reside within fifty (50) miles from
Sioux Falls city limits, the name, phone number, email, and mailing address of
a contact person(s), who shall reside within fifty (50) miles from Sioux Falls
city limits, and be authorized to make or order repairs or services for the
property, if in violation of city ordinances or state law;
      (3)   The street address of the residential rental unit;
      (4)   The number and type of units; i.e., dwelling units or sleeping
rooms; and
      (5)   Whether the owner or responsible party as defined by §
40.002 of this Code, have, within the previous three calendar years, been in
violation and failed to make timely corrections of health, nuisance or other
code violations, excluding any notices or violations issued pursuant to §
96.100 or §§
94.041,
94.043, and
94.044 of this Code, to any property or properties in any municipality,
including the city.
      (6)   The name, mailing address, email, and phone number of the
individual licensed as a broker, broker associate, property manager, or
residential rental agent with the South Dakota Real Estate Commission who
manages the residential rental unit. (if applicable).
   (c)   In the event that any of the information required by this section
changes, the applicant or permittee shall, within 30 days, notify in writing
the director of planning and development services of the change.
   (d)   The fee for the permit shall be $50 beginning on July 1, 2024. The fee
shall be waived for any new construction property that receives a permit prior
to tenant occupancy.
   (e)   The applicant must attend a minimum of two hours of course curriculum,
which has been approved by the director of planning and development services,
prior to the residential rental permit approval. The applicant shall be exempt
from this provision if the applicant's property will be managed by any
individual licensed as a broker, broker associate, property manager, or
residential rental agent with the South Dakota Real Estate Commission.
   (f)   Any applicant who is permitting a short-term rental unit under this
subchapter shall provide proof of a state sales tax license unless the
applicant provides documentation, acceptable to the director of planning and
development services, that proves sales tax will be remitted on behalf of the
applicant by a third party. The applicant shall also provide proof of a state
health department lodging license pursuant to SDCL 34-18 and any other state
license required by law.
   (g)   Any property owner who allows to be occupied, advertises for
occupancy, solicits occupants of, or lets to another person for occupancy any
residential rental unit within the city that has not been permitted per this
section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.999. This provision
shall be effective on July 1, 2024.
(1992 Code, § 11-112) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 58-07, passed 4-16-
2007; Ord. 49-11, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. 74-17, passed 8-8-2017; Ord. 109-23,
passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.178 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (a)   Each permit may be revoked upon the city’s issuance of any notice of a
fourth health, nuisance or other violation when the permit holder has been
subject to three health, nuisance or other code violations resulting in
citations and fines payable to the city within the previous three calendar
years, excluding any notices or violations issued pursuant to §
96.100 or §§
94.041,
94.043 and
94.044 of this Code, as to any property in the city.
   (b)   No action revoking a permit pursuant to this subchapter for a
residential rental unit shall be undertaken by the city without notice and a
reasonable opportunity for the owner to bring the unit into compliance with
applicable city ordinances. The director of planning and development services
shall have the authority to revoke any permit for a particular residential
rental unit if it is determined that the property is in serious and continued
substantial noncompliance with any applicable city ordinance.
   (c)   Appeals from a decision revoking a permit for a residential rental
unit shall be pursuant to the appeals process of the International Property
Maintenance Code and §§
30.040 through
30.046 of this Code. No action revoking a permit for a residential rental unit
shall be deemed effective until all appeals have been exhausted, including any
appeal to circuit court, or the time for filing any appeal shall have passed
without an appeal being filed.
   (d)   Once revoked, the property owner shall make an application for a
residential rental permit if the property owner proposes to use the property as
a residential rental unit. A permit shall not be issued until completion of the
following:
      (1)   Abatement of any health, nuisance or other code violation at the
property;
      (2)   Satisfactory city inspection and approval of the dwelling unit’s
habitability; and
      (3)   Payment of all outstanding code enforcement citations issued by the
city to the owner or responsible party for the subject property.
(1992 Code, § 11-113) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 49-11, passed 7-5-
2011; Ord. 109-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.179 CORRECTION OF DEFECTS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Whenever the director of planning and development services determines
that a short-term rental unit has failed to meet the requirements of any
applicable city ordinance, the city shall proceed with enforcement as provided
within the applicable ordinance. The city may suspend a residential rental
permit issued for a short-term rental unit that has been subject to two health,
nuisance or other code violations resulting in citations and fines payable to
the city within the previous one year, excluding any notices or violations
issued pursuant to §
96.100 or §§
94.041,
94.043 and
94.044 of this Code, as to any property in the city. The suspension shall be
rescinded once the permittee has provided a corrective action plan that is
satisfactory to the director of planning and development services. In addition
to all other remedies, the city may seek to enjoin any unit from being operated
as a residential rental unit that is not properly permitted by the city.
   (b)   The city shall provide each permittee access to information that
details any code violation(s), correction(s) and any other information deemed
appropriate by the director of planning and development services.
(1992 Code, § 11-114) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 58-07, passed 4-16-
2007; Ord. 49-11, passed 7-5-2011; Ord. 74-17, passed 8-8-2017; Ord. 109-23,
passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.180 PROPERTY TRANSFERS.
   To transfer a permit for a residential rental unit from one owner, owner’s
contact person(s), or management company to another, the applicant shall give
written notice, including the name and address of the transferee, to the city
of the transfer within 30 days after the transfer. There shall be no fee
associated with the transfer of a permit if the applicant complies with this
section.
(1992 Code, § 11-115) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 49-11, passed 7-5-
2011; Ord. 74-17, passed 8-8-2017; Ord. 109-23, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 150.181 NO WAIVER OF CODE COMPLIANCE.
   No permit issued for a residential rental unit shall be deemed to cure,
waive or grant a right of continued operation for property that is determined
to be in violation of any applicable ordinances of the city.
(1992 Code, § 11-116) (Ord. 111-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 49-11, passed 7-5-
2011)
§ 150.182 SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT GUEST NOTICE/INFORMATION.
   (a)   All short-term rental units shall provide their guests with a document
that includes the following information:
      (1)   An emergency phone number for the property owner or his/her contact
person.
      (2)   Emergency and non-emergency phone numbers for the City of Sioux
Falls.
      (3)   The short-term rental unit's physical address.
      (4)   A statement that: "Guests are expected to be courteous to all
neighbors and to respect property boundaries."
      (5)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the director of
planning and development services.
   (b)   This information shall also be posted in a conspicuous location within
the short-term rental unit.
(Ord. 109-23, passed 11-21-2023)
ELECTRICITY
§ 150.201 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)    The National Electrical Code, 2023 edition (NFPA 70-2023), published
by the National Fire Protection Association, and amendments and additions
thereto, is hereby adopted by the city to regulate the design and construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance for all electrical
systems and installations in the city of Sioux Falls.
   (b)   The adoption of the National Electrical Code, 2023 edition, will
become effective November 12, 2024. The minimum electrical standards in the
2023 edition of the National Electrical Code and amendments, additions, and
deletions thereto shall be applied to any building permit issued on November
12, 2024, and thereafter.
   (c)   A printed copy of the code shall be filed with the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 15-1) (Ord. 62-80, passed 7-7-1980; Ord. 28-82, passed 3-29-1982;
Ord. 104-83, passed 12-12-1983; Ord. 104-86, passed 12-8-1986; Ord. 21-90,
passed 3-26-1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 117-96, passed 10-7-1996;
Ord. 117-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 122-05,
passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 107-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 82-11, passed 10-17-2011;
Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 62-17, passed 7-18-2017; Ord. 68-20, passed
9-1-2020; Ord. 58-25, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 150.201.1   AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2023 NATIONAL
ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The following articles and subsections of the National Electrical Code, 2023
edition, shall be amended, added, or not adopted by the city as follows. All
other sections or subsections of the National Electrical Code, 2023 edition, as
published shall remain the same.
   ARTICLE 100 Definitions. Part 1. Definitions. Equipment. A general term,
including fittings, devices, appliances, luminaires, apparatus, and the like
used as a part of, or in connection with, an electrical installation.
   ARTICLE 100. Definitions. Part 1. Definitions. Kitchen. An area with a sink
and permanent provisions for food preparation and cooking. A fixed or portable
single microwave does not constitute a permanent cooking facility.
   ARTICLE 100 Definitions. Strict Liability Offense. An offense in which the
prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a
part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act
which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally
required to do.
   110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this
Code shall be acceptable only if approved.
   The local electrical inspector shall enforce all rules and specifications in
this article as necessary to determine conformity of electrical materials,
devices, or appliances with approved methods of construction in order to
protect life and property. The label of a nationally recognized electrical
testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization concerned with
product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection during production of
equipment or materials, whose label indicates compliance with nationally
recognized standards or tests to determine suitable usage in a specified
manner, is prima facie evidence that the electrical materials, devices, or
appliances are conforming and listed for installation under the provisions of
this article.
      Exception: Machinery that is reviewed and approved per the machinery
policy as adopted by the South Dakota electrical commission.
      Informational Note: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and
110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See
definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed.
   110.3 Examination, Identification, Installation, Use, and Listing (Product
Certification) of Equipment.
   (A)   Examination. In judging equipment, considerations such as the
following shall be evaluated:
      (1)    Suitability for installation and use in conformity with this Code.
         Informational Note No. 1: Equipment may be new, reconditioned,
refurbished, or remanufactured.
         Informational Note No. 2: Suitability of equipment use may be
identified by a description marked on or provided with a product to identify
the suitability of the product for a specific purpose, environment, or
application. Special conditions of use or other limitations and other pertinent
information may be marked on the equipment, included in the product
instructions, or included in the appropriate listing and labeling information.
Suitability of equipment may be evidenced by listing or labeling.
      (2)    Mechanical strength and durability, including, for parts designed
to enclose and protect other equipment, the adequacy of the protection thus
provided.
      (3)    Wire bending and connection space.
      (4)    Electrical insulation.
      (5)    Heating effects under normal conditions of use and also under
abnormal conditions likely to arise in service.
      (6)    Arcing effects.
      (7)    Classification by type, size, voltage, current capacity, and
specific use.
      (8)   Cybersecurity for network-connected life safety equipment to
address its ability to withstand unauthorized updates and malicious attacks
while continuing to perform its intended safety functionality.
         Informational Note No. 3: See the ANSI/ISA 62443 series of standards
for industrial automation and control systems, the UL 2900 series of standards
for software cybersecurity for network-connectable products, and UL 5500,
Standard for Remote Software Updates, which are standards that provide
frameworks to mitigate current and future security cybersecurity
vulnerabilities and address software integrity in systems of electrical
equipment.
      (9)   Other factors that contribute to the practical safeguarding of
persons using or likely to come in contact with the equipment.
      The state electrical commission may grant special approval of materials,
devices, or appliances if no standard has been prepared or adopted to which
they should conform. Special approval applies only to the particular sample
approved and not to the line as manufactured, stored, sold, installed, or
attached and may be granted only for those materials, devices, or appliances
which, in the opinion of the state electrical commission, are safe for the use
intended. The details of decisions made by the commission shall be recorded and
entered into the files of the electrical inspection division. The city does not
assume any liability for damage or injury to persons or property because of the
use of those materials, devices, or appliances.
   110.26 Spaces About Electrical Equipment. (1) Depth of Working Space. The
depth of the working space in the direction of live parts shall not be less
than that specified in Table 110.26(A)(1) unless the requirements of 110.26(A)
(1)(a), (A)(1)(b), or (A)(1)(c) are met. Distances shall be measured from the
exposed live parts or from the enclosure or opening if the live parts are
enclosed.
   In new structures other than dwelling units, additional working space for
switchboards, panelboards, switchgear, and motor control centers operating at
600 volts, nominal or less to ground, shall extend up 2 feet above the required
working space from the front face of the switchboard, panelboards, switchgear,
and motor control centers. This applies only to equipment not part of the
electrical installation. Building construction materials shall be allowed in
the 2-foot area.
 
Table 110.26(A)(1) Working Spaces
Nominal Voltage to Ground Minimum Clear Distance
                          Condition 1 Condition 2 Condition 3
0–150                   914 mm      914 mm      914 mm
                          (3 ft)      (3 ft)      (3 ft)
151–600                 914 mm      1.0668 m    1.22 m
                          (3 ft)      (3 ft 6 in) (4 ft)
600–1000                914 mm      1.22 m      1.524 m
                          (3 ft)      (4 ft)      (5 ft)
 
   Note: Where the conditions are as follows:
      Condition 1—Exposed live parts on one side of the working space and no
live or grounded parts on the other side of the working space, or exposed live
parts on both sides of the working space that are effectively guarded by
insulating materials.
      Condition 2—Exposed live parts on one side of the working space and
grounded parts on the other side of the working space. Concrete, brick, or tile
walls shall be considered as grounded.
      Condition 3—Exposed live parts on both sides of the working space.
   (a)    Dead-Front Assemblies. Working space shall not be required in the
back or sides of assemblies, such as dead-front switchboards, switchgear, or
motor control centers, where all connections and all renewable or adjustable
parts, such as fuses or switches, are accessible from locations other than the
back or sides. Where rear access is required to work on nonelectrical parts on
the back of enclosed equipment, a minimum horizontal working space of 762 mm
(30 in) shall be provided.
   (b)    Low Voltage. By special permission, smaller working spaces shall be
permitted where all exposed live parts operate at not greater than 30 volts
rms, 42 volts peak, or 60 volts dc.
   (c)   Existing Buildings. In existing buildings where electrical equipment
is being replaced, Condition 2 working clearance shall be permitted between
dead-front switchboards, switchgear, panelboards, or motor control centers
located across the aisle from each other where conditions of maintenance and
supervision ensure that written procedures have been adopted to prohibit
equipment on both sides of the aisle from being open at the same time and
qualified persons who are authorized will service the installation.
   110.27 Guarding of Live Parts. (D) Electric Fences. Electric fencing is not
allowed to be installed in the city except as approved by the electrical board
of appeals and examiners.
   210.8(A) Dwelling Units. All 125-volt through 250-volt receptacles installed
in the following locations and supplied by single-phase branch circuits rated
150 volts or less to ground shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection for personnel.
   (1)   Bathrooms.
   (2)   Garages and also accessory buildings that have a floor located at or
below grade level not intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage areas,
work areas, and areas of similar use.
   (3)   Outdoors.
   (4)   Crawl spaces—at or below grade level.
   (5)   Basements.
   (6)   Kitchens.
   (7)   Areas with sinks and permanent provisions for food preparation,
beverage preparation, or cooking.
   (8)   Sinks—where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 ft) from the top
inside edge of the bowl of the sink.
   (9)   Boathouses.
   (10)   Bathtubs or shower stalls—where receptacles are installed within 1.8
m (6 ft) of the outside edge of the bathtub or shower stall.
   (11)   Laundry areas—where receptacles are installed within 3.0 m (10 ft) of
the laundry box or water supply laundry hookups.
   (12)   Indoor damp and wet locations.
      Exception No. 1: Receptacles that are not readily accessible and are
supplied by a branch circuit dedicated to electric snow melting, deicing, or
pipeline and vessel heating equipment shall be permitted to be installed in
accordance with 426.28 or 427.22, as applicable.
      Exception No. 2: A receptacle supplying only a permanently installed
premises security system shall be permitted to omit ground-fault circuit-
interrupter protection.
      Exception No. 3: Listed weight-supporting ceiling receptacles (WSCR)
utilized in combination with compatible weight-supporting attachment fittings
(WSAF) installed for the purpose of supporting a ceiling luminaire or ceiling-
suspended fan shall be permitted to omit ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection. If a general-purpose convenience receptacle is integral to the
ceiling luminaire or ceiling-suspended fan, GFCI protection shall be provided.
      Exception No. 4: Factory-installed receptacles that are not readily
accessible and are mounted internally to bathroom exhaust fan assemblies shall
not require GFCI protection unless required by the installation instructions or
listing.
         Informational Note: See 760.41(B) and 760.121(B) for power supply
requirements for fire alarm systems.
      Exception No. 5: Properly labeled recreational vehicle (RV) receptacles
other than 125-volt, single-phase, fifteen- and twenty-ampere receptacles are
exempt from ground-fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) requirements in section
210.8(A).
      Exception No 6: Any outlet in a dwelling unit supplying a specific
appliance in Section 210.8(D)(8) through (12) is exempt from GFCI requirements.
   210.8(F) Outdoor Outlets. Not adopted by the State or the City.
   210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. (C) (1) Wall Spaces. Receptacle
outlets shall be installed so that no point along the wall line is more than
600 mm (24 in) measured horizontally from a receptacle outlet in that space.
The location of the receptacles shall be in accordance with 210.52(C)(3). Wall
counter space receptacle outlet requirements shall apply to island and
peninsula counter spaces provided with backsplash and permanent vertical wall
components.
      Exception No. 1: Receptacle outlets shall not be required directly behind
a range, counter-mounted cooking unit, or sink in the
      installation described in Figure 210.52(C)(1).
      Exception No. 2: Where a required receptacle outlet cannot be installed
in the wall areas shown in Figure 210.52(C)(1), the receptacle outlet shall be
permitted to be installed as close as practicable to the countertop area to be
served. The total number of receptacle outlets serving the countertop shall not
be less than the number needed to satisfy 210.52(C)(1). These outlets shall be
located in accordance with 210.52(C)(3).
Figures 210.52(C)(1) Determination of Area Behind a Range, Counter-Mounted
Cooking Unit, or Sink.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8361.jpg]
 
   210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. (J.) Water softening equipment. In
one- and two-family dwellings and town houses, a receptacle outlet shall be
installed within 3 feet of the water softener loop or 3 feet of the water
heater if no loop exists for water softening equipment.
   210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. (K.) Sump pit. In one- and two-
family dwellings and town houses, a GFI-protected receptacle outlet shall be
installed within 3 feet of the sump pit on an individual circuit.
   210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. (L) Gas Ranges. In one- and two-
family dwellings and town houses, a receptacle outlet shall be installed within
3 feet of the gas range on an individual circuit.
   230.28 Service Masts as Supports.
   (A)   Strength. The service or feeder mast shall be of adequate strength or
be supported by braces or guy wires to withstand safely the strain imposed by
the service drop or overhead service conductors. Hubs intended for use with a
conduit that serves as a service mast shall be identified for use with service
entrance equipment.
   To gain height, a perpendicular mast shall be installed for the support of
service drops to low buildings. This mast must be installed according to the
following requirements:
      (1)   If conduit is used, it must be not less than 2-inch trade-size
galvanized, rigid conduit, or intermediate metal conduit.
      (2)    If a wood mast is used, it must be not smaller in cross section
than 4 inches by 6 inches.
      (3)   If the mast extends more than 48 inches above its last support, the
mast must be at least 96 inches long, attached to the structure at a minimum of
two locations, and guyed with 1/4-inch minimum guy strand or equivalent, or
braced with guy fittings and approved according to Article 90.4 of the National
Electrical Code. The measurement is taken from the bottom of the weather head
to the top of the first support.
      (4)   If the mast extends more than 72 inches above its last support, the
mast must be at least 120 inches long, attached to the structure at a minimum
of three locations, and guyed with fittings in two directions to provide
support.
      (5)   Only the power company’s service drop conductors shall be attached
to a service mast. Phone loops, cable TV conduits, grounding clamps, and the
like shall not be attached to the service mast. Conduit couplings shall not be
installed above the roof line.
   230.91 Location. The service overcurrent device shall be an integral part of
the service disconnecting means or shall be located immediately adjacent
thereto. Where fuses are used as the service overcurrent device, the
disconnecting means shall be located ahead of the supply side of the fuses.
   The raceway containing conductors to the service entrance disconnect
enclosure may not extend more than 5 feet inside the structure, except with the
written permission of the state electrical or local electrical inspector. The
raceway or cable assembly may not extend more than 5 feet once inside the
structure to the main disconnect. Metering enclosures and junction boxes are
not included when determining these lengths. Additional lengths in the
structure may be installed only with the prior written permission of the
electrical inspector or approval of the electrical board of appeals and
examiners.
   250.24 Grounding of Service-Supplied Alternating-Current Systems. (A) System
Grounding Connections. (1) General. The grounding electrode conductor
connection shall be made at any accessible point from the load end of the
overhead service conductors, service drop, underground service conductors, or
service lateral to the terminal or bus to which the grounded service conductor
is connected at the service disconnecting means. All grounding electrode
conductors of the system grounding connection must terminate on the neutral bus
inside the service equipment unless they are inspected before the service is
energized by the power supplier.
      Informational Note: See Article 100 for definitions of Service
Conductors, Overhead; Service Conductors, Underground; Service Drop; and
Service Lateral.
   250.53 Grounding Electrode System Installation. (D) Metal Underground Water
Pipe. (1) Continuity. Continuity of the grounding path or the bonding
connection to interior piping shall not rely on water meters or filtering
devices and similar equipment.
   A bonding jumper size in accordance with Table 250.66 shall be installed
between the hot and cold water lines at the water heater and cold hard and soft
lines even if the softener is not in place.
   300.5 Underground Installations. (D) Protection from Damage. Direct-buried
conductors and cables shall be protected from damage in accordance with 300.5
(D)(1) through (D)(5).
   (1)    Emerging from Grade. Direct-buried conductors and cables emerging
from grade and specified in columns 1 and 4 of Table 300.5(A) shall be
protected by enclosures or raceways extending from the minimum cover distance
below grade required by 300.5(A) to a point at least 2.5 m (8 ft) above
finished grade. In no case shall the protection be required to exceed 450 mm
(18 in) below finished grade.
   (2)   Conductors Entering Buildings. Conductors entering a building shall be
protected to the point of entrance.
   (3)    Service Conductors. Underground service conductors that are not
encased in concrete and that are buried 450 mm (18 in) or more below grade
shall have their location identified by a warning ribbon that is placed in the
trench at least 300 mm (12 in) above the underground installation.
   (4)    Enclosure or Raceway Damage. Where the enclosure or raceway is
subject to physical damage, the conductors shall be installed in electrical
metallic tubing, rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, RTRC-XW,
Schedule 80 PVC conduit, or equivalent.
   (5)    Underground Conductors to Comply with Installation Requirements. All
underground conductor installations, in addition to complying with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code, laws of the state of South
Dakota, and the state electrical commission, shall comply with the requirement
that direct burial underground service conductors or feeders shall be installed
in a raceway from the building to a point beyond any concrete or asphalt slabs,
stoops, footings, or driveways, which may interfere with future conductor
replacement.
   300.13 Mechanical and Electrical Continuity— Conductors. (B) Device Removal.
The continuity of a conductor shall not depend on device connections such as
lampholders, receptacles, and so forth, where the removal of such devices would
interrupt the continuity.
   310.10 Uses Permitted. (C) Wet Locations. Insulated conductors and cables
used in wet locations shall comply with one of the following:
   (1)    Be moisture-impervious metal-sheathed.
   (2)    Be types MTW, RHW, RHW-2, TW, THW, THW-2, THHW, THWN, THWN-2, XHHW,
XHHW-2, XHWN, XHWN-2, or ZW.
   (3)    Be of a type listed for use in wet locations.
   For the installation of cables and equipment that are not approved for a wet
location, the structure must meet the following:
   (1)   Must maintain a minimum of 20 degrees Fahrenheit temperature in
building.
   (2)   Must have a weatherproofed roof.
   (3)   Must be totally enclosed.
   Exception. Areas located outside of an area measured from the top and sides
of an opening at a 1 to 1 ratio.
   334.30 Securing and Supporting. Nonmetallic-sheathed cable shall be
supported and secured by nonconductive insulated staples, cable ties listed and
identified for securement and support, or straps, hangers, or similar fittings
designed and installed so as not to damage the cable, at intervals not
exceeding 1.4 m (4 ½ ft) and within 300 mm (12 in) of every cable entry into
enclosures such as outlet boxes, junction boxes, cabinets, or fittings. The
cable length between the cable entry and the closest cable support shall not
exceed 450 mm (18 in). Flat cables shall not be stapled on edge.
   Sections of cable protected from physical damage by raceway shall not be
required to be secured within the raceway.
   358.12 Uses Not Permitted. EMT shall not be used under the following
conditions:
   (1)    Where subject to severe physical damage.
   (2)    For the support of luminaires or other equipment except conduit
bodies no larger than the largest trade size of the tubing.
   (3)    Electrical metallic tubing may not be used in concrete below grade or
in concrete slab or masonry in direct contact with earth nor embedded in earth
or fill. The use of a vapor barrier has no effect on the requirements of this
section.
   408.36 Overcurrent Protection. In addition to the requirement of 408.30, a
panelboard shall be protected by an overcurrent protective device having a
rating not greater than that of the panelboard. This overcurrent protective
device shall be located within or at any point on the supply side of the
panelboard. Installation of 120-volt plug-in circuit breakers in three-phase,
four-wire panelboard on a delta system is prohibited.
   Exception No. 1: Individual protection shall not be required for a
panelboard protected by two main circuit breakers or two sets of fuses in other
than service equipment, having a combined rating not greater than that of the
panelboard. A panelboard constructed or wired under this exception shall not
contain more than 42 overcurrent devices. For the purposes of determining the
maximum of 42 overcurrent devices, a 2-pole or a 3-pole circuit breaker shall
be considered as two or three overcurrent devices, respectively.
   Exception No. 2: For existing panelboards, individual protection shall not
be required for a panelboard used as service equipment for an individual
residential occupancy.
   422.12 Central Heating Equipment. Central heating equipment other than fixed
electric space- heating equipment shall be supplied by an individual branch
circuit and a disconnect shall be provided in sight and within 6 feet of the
unit.
   Exception No. 1: Auxiliary equipment, such as a pump, valve, humidifier, or
electrostatic air cleaner directly associated with the heating equipment, shall
be permitted to be connected to the same branch circuit.
   Exception No. 2: Permanently connected air- conditioning equipment shall be
permitted to be connected to the same branch circuit.
   517.13 Equipment Grounding Conductor for Receptacles and Fixed Electrical
Equipment in Patient Care Spaces. (B) Insulated Equipment
   Grounding Conductors and Insulated Equipment Bonding Jumpers. (1) General.
All receptacles installed in a patient care area shall be listed “Hospital
Grade” and shall be so identified and the identification shall be visible after
installation. An insulated copper equipment grounding conductor that is clearly
identified along its entire length by green insulation and installed with the
branch circuit conductors within the wiring method in accordance with 517.13(A)
shall be connected to the following:
   (1)    Grounding terminals of all receptacles other than isolated ground
receptacles.
   (2)    Metal outlet boxes, metal device boxes, or metal enclosures.
   (3)    All non-current-carrying conductive surfaces of fixed electrical
equipment likely to become energized that are subject to personal contact,
operating at over 100 volts.
      Exception No. 1: For other than isolated ground receptacles, an insulated
equipment bonding jumper that directly connects to the equipment grounding
conductor shall be permitted to connect the box and receptacle(s) to the
equipment grounding conductor. Isolated ground receptacles shall be connected
in accordance with 517.16.
      Exception No. 2: Metal faceplates shall be connected to an effective
ground-fault current path by means of a metal mounting screw(s) securing the
faceplate to a metal yoke or strap of a receptacle or to a metal outlet box.
      Exception No. 3: Luminaires more than 2.3 m (7 ½ ft) above the floor and
switches located outside of the patient care vicinity shall be permitted to be
connected to an equipment grounding return path complying with 517.13(A) or
(B).
(Ord. 62-17, passed 7-18-2017; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020; Ord. 58-25, passed
10-7-2025)
§ 150.202 TITLE.
   This chapter, hereinafter also referred to as this code, shall be known as
the “Sioux Falls electrical code,” and may so be cited.
(1992 Code, § 15-2) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.203 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life,
limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling persons
qualified to perform electrical work and the design, construction,
installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of
electrical systems, apparatus, wiring or equipment for electrical light, heat,
power, fire alarms and associate controls, within the jurisdictional limits of
the city.
(1992 Code, § 15-3) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.204 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this code shall apply to the installation, alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any
electrical system, apparatus, wiring or equipment for electrical light, heat,
power, fire alarms, data, security, and associate controls, within the
jurisdictional limits of the city.
(1992 Code, § 15-4) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014; Ord. 58-25, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 150.205 NEW ELECTRICAL WORK.
   All new electrical work shall be installed in conformance with this code and
all relevant ordinances, laws, rules and regulations of this city and the
state.
(1992 Code, § 15-5) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.206 APPLICATION TO EXISTING ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS.
   (a)   Additions, alterations, or repairs.
      (1)   Additions, alterations, or repairs to any building, structure, or
premises may be made to any electrical system or equipment without requiring
the existing electrical system to comply with all the requirements of this
code, provided the addition, alteration, or repair conforms to that required
for a new electrical system or equipment. Additions, alterations,
installations, or repairs shall not cause an existing system to become unsafe,
create unhealthy or overloaded conditions, or shall not adversely affect the
performance of the building as determined by the authority having jurisdiction.
Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or branch circuit shall
not result in an installation that violates the provisions of the code in
effect at the time the additions are made.
      (2)   Provisions of the International Existing Building Code may apply to
electrical modifications of buildings undergoing additions, alterations,
repairs, and changes of occupancy.
   (b)   When increasing the total ampacity to the property existing single-
family and multiple-family dwellings.
      (1)   When adding increased amperage to the property, the existing
electrical system shall, at a minimum, comply with the following.
         A.   Kitchens. Each kitchen shall have a minimum of one 20-ampere
circuit serving a countertop receptacle and a grounded receptacle serving a
refrigerator.
         B.   Overcurrent device location. In multifamily dwellings, each
occupant shall have access to his or her branch circuit overcurrent devices
without going outdoors or through another occupancy.
         C.   Habitable areas. All habitable areas, other than closets,
kitchens, basements, garages, hallways, laundry areas, utility areas, storage
areas, and bathrooms, shall have minimum of two duplex receptacle outlets or
one duplex receptacle outlet and one ceiling or wall-type lighting outlet.
         D.   Minimum lighting outlets. At least one lighting fixture shall be
provided in every habitable room, bathroom, hallway, stairway, attached garage,
and detached garage with electrical power, in utility rooms, and basements
where the spaces are used for storage or contain equipment requiring service,
and to illuminate outdoor entrances and exits. A switched receptacle is allowed
in lieu of a lighting fixture in habitable rooms only.
         E.   Ground fault circuit interrupters. Ground fault circuit
interrupter protection shall be provided for all receptacles in bathrooms,
laundries, kitchens, attached and detached garages provided with power, at
readily accessible receptacles within 6 feet of sinks, basements, and at
outdoor locations. The exceptions of the National Electrical Code §§ 210.8(A)3
and 5 shall apply.
         F.   Laundries. Each laundry shall be provided with at least one
individual branch 20-ampere circuit. Circuit is required to be AFCI/GFCI
protected.
         G.   Heat sources. The primary heat source shall be provided with an
individual branch circuit and disconnect.
         H.   Exposed wiring methods. All exposed wiring methods shall be
installed in accordance with the applicable National Electrical Code articles
of Chapter 3.
         I.   Bathrooms. Each bathroom shall have one receptacle outlet located
within 3 feet of the basin. Any bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground
fault circuit interrupter protection.
         J.   Emergency disconnect. An emergency disconnect shall be provided
as required in Section 230.85 of the National Electric Code for one- and two-
family dwelling units and townhomes.
      (2)   Minor additions, alterations, and repairs to existing electrical
systems or equipment may be installed in accordance with the law in effect at
the time the original installation was made, when approved by the electrical
inspector.
   (c)   Existing installations. Electrical systems or equipment lawfully in
existence at the time of the adoption of this code may have their use,
maintenance, or repair continued if the use, maintenance, or repair is in
accordance with the original design and location and no hazard to life, health,
or property has been created by the electrical system.
   (d)   Changes in building occupancy. Electrical systems or equipment that
are a part of any building or structure undergoing a change in occupancy, use,
or character of use as defined in the building code shall comply with all
requirements of this code which may be applicable to the new occupancy, use, or
character of use. Provisions of the International Existing Building Code may
apply to buildings undergoing a change of occupancy.
   (e)   Maintenance. All electrical systems, equipment materials, and
appurtenances, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained
in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a
safe and hazard-free condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by
this code shall be maintained in conformance with the code edition under which
installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for
maintenance of electrical systems and equipment. To determine compliance with
this division (e), the building official may cause an electrical system or
equipment to be reinspected.
   (f)   Moved buildings. Single, modular, or multi-family residential units
moved from one location to another must have at least a 100-ampere service at
the new location and must meet the ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection
and arc-fault circuit interrupter protection requirements of the National
Electrical Code.
(1992 Code, § 15-6) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 24-03, passed 3-3-2003;
Ord. 122-05, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 107-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 82-11,
passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 62-17, passed 7-18-2017;
Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020; Ord. 58-25, passed 10-7-2025)
§ 150.207 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all the provisions of this code. For these purposes, the building official
shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
      (2)   The building official shall have the power to adopt and enforce
rules and regulations to the administrative provisions of this code. The rules
and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
code.
      (3)   In accordance with the prescribed procedures and with the approval
of the city council, the building official may appoint a number of licensed
electrical inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to
time. The building official may deputize licensed electrical inspectors or
employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the code
enforcement agency. Licensed electrical inspectors shall have the power to
render interpretations of the National Electrical Code. The interpretations
shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code and other
pertinent state laws or rules.
   (b)   Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a structure or on a premises a condition
that is contrary to or in violation of this code that makes the structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official is authorized
to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform
the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises be
occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If
such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or
control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused,
the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to
secure entry.
   (c)   Stop orders. Where the building official finds any work regulated by
this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this
code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a
stop work order.
   (d)   Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies. The building
official shall have the authority to disconnect electrical utility service, or
energy supplies to a building, structure, premises, or equipment regulated by
this code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard
to life or property. The building official shall, whenever possible, notify the
serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or premises
of the decision to disconnect prior to taking action, and shall notify the
serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure, or premises in
writing of the disconnection immediately thereafter.
   (e)   Authority to condemn electrical systems, apparatus, wiring, or
equipment.
      (1)   When the electrical inspector ascertains that any electrical
systems, apparatus, wiring, or equipment, or portion thereof, regulated by this
code has become hazardous to life, health, or property, the electrical
inspector shall order in writing that the equipment either be removed or
restored to a safe condition, as appropriate. The written notice shall contain
a fixed time limit for compliance with the order. Persons shall not use or
maintain defective equipment after receiving a notice.
      (2)   When electrical systems, apparatus, wiring, or equipment or an
installation is to be disconnected, written notice of the disconnection and
causes therefor shall be given within 24 hours to the serving utility, the
owner and occupant of the building, structure, or premises. When any equipment
is maintained in violation of this code, and in violation of a notice issued
pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official shall
institute an appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the
violation.
   (f)   Connection after order to disconnect. Persons shall not make
connections from a source of electrical energy to any building or portion
thereof or equipment regulated by this code which has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the electrical inspector or the use of which has
been ordered to be discontinued by the electrical inspector until the
electrical inspector authorizes the reconnection and use of the equipment.
   (g)   Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of the
owner or owner’s representative, provided that the code official shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this code and does not lessen health, life, and fire safety requirements.
The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in
the files of the electrical inspection department.
   (h)   Alternative materials, design, and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any alternative has been
approved. An alternative material, design, or method of construction shall be
approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory
and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the
material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than
the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
(1992 Code, § 15-7) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 82-11, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1- 2020)
§ 150.208 LIABILITY.
   (a)   The building official, member of the board of appeals, or employee
charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in
good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this
code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be civilly or
criminally rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as the result of any
act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties.
   (b)   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any equipment
regulated herein for any damages to persons or properties caused by defects,
nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as
assuming any liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or
any permits or certificates issued under this code.
   (c)   Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against an
officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be
afforded all the protection provided by the city’s insurance pool and any
immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal law and
defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall
not be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this code.
(1992 Code, § 15-8) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 82-11, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20,
passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.209 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS.
   The building official may request and shall receive the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as is required in
the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or
ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 15-9) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 150.210 UNSAFE ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS, APPARATUS, WIRING OR EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   General. Unsafe electrical systems, apparatus, wiring or equipment
regulated by this code, which is unsafe or which constitutes a fire or health
hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life is, for the purpose of this
section, unsafe. Use of unsafe electrical systems, apparatus, wiring or
equipment regulated by this code constituting a hazard to safety, health or
public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, improper operating
condition, improper location, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard,
disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe
use. Unsafe equipment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
   (b)   Uncompleted or uninspected installations. When electrical work has
commenced and the owner, occupant or contractor has neglected or refused to
make arrangements for the electrical inspector to make a final inspection of
the installation at a mutually agreeable time, the installation may be presumed
unsafe, and the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided
by law to secure entry and abate any violations.
(1992 Code, § 15-10) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.211 ELECTRICAL BOARD OF APPEALS AND EXAMINERS.
   There shall be and is hereby created an electrical board of appeals and
examiners consisting of five members that are qualified by experience and
training, and able to pass on matters pertaining to electrical systems. The
building official or electrical inspector shall be an ex officio member and
shall act as secretary of the board, but shall have no vote upon any matter
before the board. The board shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the city council, and shall hold office for a term of three years.
The board shall have the power to examine applicants for licensing, and
determine the suitability of alternate materials, methods of installation, and
provide for reasonable interpretations of this code and licensing
determinations of the chief building official. The board of appeals and
examiners shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the
administrative provisions of this code, nor shall the board be empowered to
waive requirements of this code. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicated copy to the building
official.
(1992 Code, § 15-11) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 113-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 50-13,
passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 110-19, passed 11-12-
2019)
Cross-reference:
   City organizations, see
ch. 32
§ 150.212 VIOLATIONS AND PROSECUTION THEREOF.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to install,
replace, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, connect or
demolish, equip, use or maintain electrical systems or equipment, or cause to
permit the same to be done in violation of this code.
   (b)   If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building
official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to deem
the violation as a strict liability offense and institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or
to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building
or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
(1992 Code, § 15-12) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 82-11, passed 10-17-
2011; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 150.213 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person to install, alter, repair, replace, or connect any electrical system
or equipment regulated by this chapter or cause the work to be done without
first obtaining a separate electrical permit for each building or structure.
      (2)   Exception: Factory representatives may repair or maintain fire
alarm systems which they have been trained and certified to work on.
      (3)   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has
been commenced without first obtaining the permit, or when an inspection as
required in §
150.219 is failed to be requested, a special investigation shall be made before
a permit may be issued for the work. An investigation fee, in addition to the
permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently
issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by §
150.218 but not more than $100. The payment of the investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.
   (b)   An electrical permit shall be required for the following:
      (1)   Installation of five or more outlets, switches, receptacles,
fixtures, or two new electrical circuits 30 amps or less, or one new electrical
circuit greater than 30 amps;
      (2)   Connection of a sign to a new or existing circuit;
      (3)   Installation of receptacle for, or connection to, any appliance or
equipment totaling more than 5 kilowatts;
      (4)   Installation of service entrance or addition to service entrance
equipment. Any change in service conductors or service entrance equipment shall
require a permit;
      (5)   Connection to a fixed motor or equipment with total rating of 2
horsepower or more;
      (6)   Connection to a capacitor bank;
      (7)   Connection to a transformer rated more than 5 kilovolt-amps;
      (8)   Installation of all Class I fire alarm systems;
      (9)    Connection to a spa, hot tub, hydromassage bathtubs, swimming,
wading, therapeutic or decorative pools, or any equipment listed in Article 680
of the National Electrical Code;
      (10)   Installation of a circuit or connection of any equipment to a
hazardous location defined by Article 500 of the National Electrical Code; and
      (11)   Connections to branch circuits for commercial air conditioners and
furnaces.
(1992 Code, § 15-13) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-
1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 117-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 24-03,
passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Editor’s notes:
   A request for inspection is required for connections to an air conditioner
and a branch circuit for a furnace. A permit is required only upon making
corrections found during the initial mechanical inspection for connections to
an air conditioner and branch circuits for a furnace.
§ 150.214 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)    For the purpose of clarification, an inspection is synonymous
whenever the word permit occurs.
   (b)   To obtain a permit, the licensed contractor shall first request an
inspection as required in §
150.219, inspection requests, or in the case of a homeowner shall file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the building official
for that purpose. Every application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which the application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land in which the proposed work is done by legal
description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations, and
specifications;
      (5)   Be signed by the applicant or the authorized agent of the applicant
for the issuance of a homeowner's permit; and
      (6)   Give other data and information as may be required by the building
official.
(1992 Code, § 15-14) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.215 PLAN REVIEW FEES.
   (a)   When the building official determines that the wiring is of a
technical nature that plans and data are required to demonstrate that the work
will be in conformance with applicable regulations, a plan review fee may be
charged at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. The plan
review fee shall be on an hourly rate as set forth in §
150.218.
   (b)   The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from
the permit fees specified in §
150.218 and are in addition to permit fees.
   (c)   When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan
review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged.
(1992 Code, § 15-15) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.216 HOMEOWNER PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   (a)   After the work has commenced, the owner shall make arrangements for
the electrical inspector to inspect the installation. Failure to arrange for an
inspection shall cause the permit to expire by limitation and become null and
void and the work shall be presumed unsafe pursuant to §
150.210.
   (b)   All homeowner permits shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days
from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the permit is commenced for a period
of 180 days, and all work which has not received a final inspection shall be
presumed unsafe pursuant to §
150.210.
   (c)   The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy for
homeowner electrical permits.
(1992 Code, § 15-16) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 117-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 117-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 75-14,
passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 150.217 PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error or on
the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of other ordinance
or regulation.
(1992 Code, § 15-17) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 150.218 FEES.
   (a)   Through December 31, 2021, the following fees shall be charged for
electrical permits and inspections except for existing circuits reconnected to
new service:
      (1)   Inspection fees for new residential installations.
         A.   The cost for inspections of all new single-family and new two-
family residential electrical services, including associated wiring, apparatus,
and equipment, is based on the service ampere capacity as follows:
 
0 through 200 amperes   $100
201 through 400 amperes $200
401 amperes and over    $250
Plus circuits as provided in division (a)(3), inspection fees for circuit
installation or alterations
 
         B.   The fees in this division (a) include one service inspection, one
rough-in inspection, and one final inspection. Additional inspections will be
charged the minimum inspection fee. Three inspections will be made for the
applicable fee in this division (a).
      (2)   Inspection fees for service connections on other installations.
         A.   The cost of inspections for service connections on other
installations, such as replacement service installations for existing homes,
all commercial installations, and all service installations not covered in this
chapter, is based on service equipment ampere capacity as follows:
 
0 through 200 amperes     $45
201 through 400 amperes   $60
401 through 800 amperes   $85
801 through 1,600 amperes $140
1,601 amperes and over    $250
 
         B.   These fees are in addition to the fees required by division (a)
(3) below. When remodeling single-family and two-family residences, these fees
shall not exceed the flat rate fee for comparable new single-family residential
electrical service.
      (3)   Inspection fees for circuit installation or alterations.
         A.   Inspection fees for circuit installations or alterations,
including all commercial installations, new work in existing homes, and all
other installations not covered by this chapter, shall be charged for each
single circuit in a cabinet or panel, not counting spares and spaces, as
follows:
 
0 through 30 amperes                            $6
31 through 60 amperes                           $12
61 through 100 amperes                          $15
Each additional 100 amperes or fraction thereof $10
 
         B.   Circuits in new homes are included in fees under division (a)(1)
above.
      (4)   Inspection fees for remodeling work. Inspection fees for remodeling
work, including remodeling work in existing homes, where the service and branch
circuits are not changed, are based upon the following schedule:
 
First 40 openings or connections      $1
Each additional opening or connection $0.50
First 40 lighting fixtures            $1
Each additional lighting fixture      $0.50
Each motor or special equipment       $6
 
      (5)   Inspection fees for apartment buildings.
         A.   Inspection fees for the wiring of each apartment, including the
feeder, in apartment buildings with three or more units are $35 per unit.
         B.   When each apartment is served individually, the service is
included in the flat rate fee. All other service entrances are subject to
division (a)(2) above and all other circuits and feeders are subject to
division (a)(3) above.
      (6)   Inspection fees for outdoor signs or area lighting. The inspection
fee for outdoor signs or area lighting is calculated as follows:
 
              $45 for each outdoor sign, feeder or branch circuits; or pursuant
Outdoor signs to division (a)(2), (a)(3) above or (a)(12) below, whichever is
              greater
Area lighting $25 for each lighting standard (pole or tower); or pursuant to
              division (a)(2) or (a)(3) above, whichever is less
 
      (7)   Inspection fees for mobile home service and feeders.
         A.   The inspection fee for mobile home service for each lot or
location, whether on or off a mobile home court, is as follows:
 
First unit, service only           $50
Each additional unit, service only $25
 
         B.   One electrical permit may apply to an entire court under one
contract. If a feeder is installed, it is not part of the service and the
inspection fee is computed from division (a)(3) above.
      (8)   Inspection fees for recreational vehicle service.
         A.   The inspection fee for recreational vehicle service is based on
each recreational park site pedestal as follows:
 
First pedestal            $40
Remaining pedestals, each $25
 
         B.   The service to the recreational vehicle park itself is not
considered part of the pedestals covered by this section, and the fee is
computed under division (a)(2) above.
      (9)   Inspection fees for swimming pools. Inspection fees for swimming
pools are as follows:
 
Residential pools $125
All other pools   Pursuant to division (a)(14)
 
      (10)   Homeowner’s permit fee.
 
Homeowner’s permit fe$25
State wiring permit    $5
 
      (11)   Minimum inspection fee.
 
Minimum inspection fee for any permit requiring inspection except for $20
energy load saver switch equipment
 
      (12)   Energy saver switch equipment.
 
One- and two-family dwellings, per saver switch  $10
Multiple-family dwellings
   First saver switch                         $15
   Per saver switch for remaining saver switch$6
 
      (13)   Transient and migratory events. Inspection of transient or
migratory events, including, but not limited to, carnivals and circuses shall
be as follows:
 
General inspection fee $95
State wiring permit    $5
 
      (14)   Other inspections and fees. Other inspections and fees shall be as
follows:
Inspections outside of normal business hours       $70*
(minimum charge, one hour), per hour
Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of §  $70*
150.219 (minimum charge, one hour), per hour
Inspections for which no fee is specifically       $70*
indicated (minimum charge, one hour), per hour
Additional plan review required by changes,
additions, revisions to approved plans (minimum    $70*
charge, one hour), per hour
                                                   If corrections listed on an
                                                   inspection report are not
                                                   completed within the
                                                   specified time, the
Fee for late corrections                           inspector shall issue a
                                                   correction order and assess
                                                   a $100 administrative fee.
                                                   The inspector shall also
                                                   assess a reinspection fee.
                                                   Where electrical work is
                                                   completed without a request
Fee for failure to request a required inspection   for an inspection, an
                                                   administrative fee of $250
                                                   may be charged.
                                                   Before any action is taken
                                                   by the board, the party or
                                                   parties requesting the
                                                   hearing shall deposit with
                                                   the secretary of the board
                                                   or his or her authorized
Appeals                                            agent, the sum of $65 to
                                                   cover the approximate cost
                                                   of the procedure. Under no
                                                   condition shall the sum or
                                                   any portion thereof be
                                                   refunded for failure of the
                                                   request to be approved.
Examination fee; all classes, per examination      $75
                                                   Current rate as established
                                                   by the finance department
Mileage fee                                        shall be charged for any
                                                   inspection occurring outside
                                                   the city limits.
                                                   The building official may
Delinquent accounts                                refuse to issue permits or
                                                   conduct inspections for any
                                                   delinquent account.
Bond claims; an administrative fee shall be
charged to cover the administrative cost of filing $150
a claim
*Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is the greatest. This cost
shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe
benefits of the employees involved.
 
   (b)   Commencing January 1, 2022, the following fees shall be charged for
permits and inspections:
Electrical Permit Fees*
Total Project Valuation % of Project Electrical Valuation Fee
Electrical Permit Fees*
Total Project         % of Project Electrical Valuation Fee
Valuation
$0.01 to $50,000.00   10%          $0.01 to $5,000.00   $40
                                                        $40 for the first
                                                        $5,000, plus $6 for
$50,000.01 to         10%          $5,000.01 to         each additional $1,000
$250,000.00                        25,000.00            or fraction thereof,
                                                        to and including
                                                        $25,000
                                                        $160 for the first
                                                        $25,000, plus $5.25
$250,000.01 to        10%          $25,000.01 to        for each additional
$500,000.00                        $50,000.00           $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $50,000
                                                        $291.25 for the first
                                                        $50,000, plus $4.50
$500,000.01 to        10%          $50,000.01 to        for each additional
$1,000,000.00                      $100,000.00          $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $100,000
                                                        $516.25 for the first
                                                        $100,000 plus $4.25
$1,000,000.01 to      10%          $100,000.01 to       for each additional
$2,500,000.00                      $250,000.00          $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $250,000
                                                        $1,153.75 for the
                                                        first $250,000, plus
$2,500,000.01 to      10%          $250,000.01 to       $4 for each additional
$5,000,000.00                      $500,000.00          $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $500,000
                                                        $2,153.75 for the
                                                        first $500,000, plus
$5,000,000.01 to                   $500,000.01 to       $3.50 for each
$10,000,000.00        10%          $1,000,000.00        additional $1,000 or
                                                        fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including $1,000,0
                                                        00
                                                        $3,903.75 for the
                                                        first $1,000,000, plus
$10,000,000.01 and up 10%          $1,000,000.01 and up $3 for each additiona
                                                        l $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof.
 
Other Inspections and Fees
Other Inspections and Fees
1.   State wiring permit.                                                      $5
2.   Homeowner's permit.                                                       $25
3.   Inspection of transient or migratory events, including, but not limited to$95
carnivals and circuses.
4.   Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge, one hour), p$200**
hour.
5.   Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of §                         $200**
150.219 (minimum charge, one hour), per hour.
6.   When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by SDCL 36-18A or when
the building official requires submittal of plans, computations, or
specifications in accordance with Section
150.215, a plan review fee shall be charged. The plan review fee shall be 25% of   
the electrical portion of the building permit fee as shown on Table No. 1-B,
Commercial Building Permit Fees, of §
150.017 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
7.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, revisions to approv$100**
plans (minimum charge, one hour), per hour.
8.   Fee for late corrections. If corrections listed on an inspection report are
not completed within the specified time, the inspector shall issue a correction   $100
order and assess a $100 administrative fee. The inspector shall also assess a
reinspection fee.
9.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where electrical work is
completed without a request for an inspection, an administrative fee of $250 may  $250
be charged.
10.   Board of appeals fees. Before any action is taken by the board, the party
or parties requesting the hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board
or his or her authorized agent, the sum of $100 to cover the approximate cost of  $100
the procedure. Under no condition shall the sum or any portion thereof be
refunded for failure of the request to be approved.
11.   Examination fee; all classes, per examination.                           $75
12.   Mileage fee at the current rate as established by the finance department  
shall be charged for any inspection occurring outside the city limits.
13.   Bond claims; an administrative fee shall be charged to cover the         $250
administrative cost of filing a claim.
*The Total Project Valuation of the project will be used when a building permit is
issued.
*Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is greater. This cost shall include
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees
involved.
 
   The building official may refuse to issue permits or conduct inspections for
any delinquent account.
(1992 Code, § 15-18) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 10-89, passed 1-23-
1989; Ord. 67-90, passed 7-23-1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 15-94,
passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 104-94, passed 11-21-1994; Ord. 117-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 24-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 27-05, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 122-05,
passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 82-11, passed 10-17-2011;
Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020; Ord. 76- 21, passed
7-6-2021; Ord. 92-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 150.219 INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   General. Electrical systems, apparatus, wiring equipment, and signs
for which a permit is required by this code shall be subject to inspection by
the electrical inspector and the electrical systems, apparatus, wiring
equipment, and signs shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes until approved by the electrical inspector. It shall be the duty of
the licensed contractor defined herein or designated electrician to cause the
electrical system to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes.
Neither the electrical inspector nor the city shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to permit
inspection. The following required inspections shall be made:
      (1)   Service. When the service entrance equipment has been permanently
and securely attached to the finished building structure.
      (2)   Rough-in. After all electrical raceways, underground conduit, or
wiring have been installed, and before any interior walls, floors, ceilings, or
trenches are covered with insulation, sheetrock, lath, paneling, earth,
concrete, asphalt, or other materials, the Class B electrician, the fire alarm
contractor, the electrical contractor, or his or her authorized representative
shall notify the electrical inspector for a rough-in inspection of the wiring
to determine whether all requirements relative to rough-in wiring have been
installed to comply with this chapter.
      (3)   Final. After all raceways or wiring have been installed and all
interior walls are covered with insulation, sheetrock, lath, paneling, or other
approved materials, the fire alarm contractor, the Class B electrician, the
electrical contractor, or his or her authorized representative shall notify the
electrical inspector for a final inspection of the wiring to determine whether
all requirements relative to a final wiring have been installed to comply with
the code for permanent power connection. Electrical systems regulated by this
code shall not be connected to the source of electrical energy until approved
by the electrical inspector.
      (4)   Grid work and related apparatus of a swimming pool. All grid work
and related apparatus of a swimming pool must be inspected prior to pouring the
cement or other covering of the pool.
   (b)   Inspection requests.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the licensed contractor as defined herein
or designated electrician doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the
electrical inspector that the work is ready for inspection. The building
official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one
working day before the inspection is desired. The request may be in writing,
electronically, or by telephone at the option of the building official.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections required
by this code to provide access to and means for inspection of the work.
   (c)   Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections required by
this code, the building official may make or require other inspections of
electrical work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code.
   (d)   Reinspections.
      (1)   A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or
reinspection when the portion of work for which inspection is requested is not
complete or when required corrections have not been made.
      (2)   This provision is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection
fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the
requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
inspections before the job is ready for inspection or reinspection.
      (3)   Reinspection fees may be assessed when the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector for failure to provide access on the date
for which inspection is requested.
(1992 Code, § 15-19) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-
1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002; Ord. 122-05,
passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.220 CONNECTION APPROVAL.
   No person shall make a connection from a source of electrical energy to any
electrical service entrance or equipment until the connection has been
inspected and approved by the electrical inspector.
(1992 Code, § 15-20) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.221 TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS.
   The electrical inspector may authorize temporary connection of electrical
systems or equipment to the source of energy for the purpose of testing the
equipment or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(1992 Code, § 15-21) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.222 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPRENTICE ELECTRICIAN. A person who is learning the electrical trade under
the supervision of an electrical contractor, Class B contractor, or journeyman
electrician and is licensed with the city and registered with the state
electrical commission.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code or the building official’s duly designated
representative.
   CLASS B CONTRACTOR. A person who has the necessary qualifications, training,
experience, and technical knowledge to plan, layout, and supervise the proper
installation and repair of electrical wiring, fire alarm systems, apparatus,
and equipment for electric light, heat, and power in residential and farm
occupancies, and who undertakes or offers to undertake, to plan, layout,
supervise, or install, or make additions, alterations, and repairs to the work
and who is licensed by the city and the state electrical commission.
   CLASS I MAINTENANCE LICENSE. A public or private entity which obtains a
CLASS I MAINTENANCE LICENSE from the city to perform electrical work on land
and facilities owned or leased by the entity and who employs a full-time
contractor who shall be responsible for the personal supervision of all
electrical work.
   CLASS II MAINTENANCE LICENSE. A public or private entity which obtains a
CLASS II MAINTENANCE LICENSE from the city to perform maintenance electrical
work on land and facilities owned or leased by the entity and who employs a
full-time journeyman electrician who shall be responsible for the personal
supervision of all maintenance electrical work.
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. A person who has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience, and technical knowledge to plan, layout, and supervise
the proper installation and repair of electrical wiring, fire alarm systems,
apparatus, and equipment for electric light, heat, and power, and who
undertakes or offers to undertake, to plan, layout, supervise, or install or
make additions, alterations, and repairs to the work and who is licensed by the
city and the state electrical commission.
   ELECTRICAL WORK. All installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or
maintenance of electrical wiring, apparatus, or equipment for electric light,
heat, or power, fire alarms, and associate controls.
   EMPLOYEE. A person whose compensation for electrical work is reported by the
employer on an Internal Revenue Service W-2 form, and is also otherwise
considered an employee under applicable law.
   INACTIVE CLASS B CONTRACTOR. A person who holds an active or inactive Class
B electrician’s license issued by the state electrical commission. No person
holding an inactive Class B contractor’s license may perform work requiring a
Class B contractor’s license. This person may activate a Class B contractor’s
license by paying the appropriate fee and providing proof that he or she holds
an active Class B electrician’s license from the state electrical commission.
   INACTIVE ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. A person who holds an active or inactive
electrical contractor’s license issued by the state electrical commission. No
person holding an INACTIVE ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE may  perform work
requiring an electrical contractor’s license. This person may activate an
electrical contractor’s license by paying the appropriate fee and providing
proof that he or she holds an active electrical contractor’s license from the
state electrical commission.
   JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN. A person who has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience, and technical knowledge to do electrical installations in
accordance with the standard rules and regulations governing the installations
and who is licensed by the city and the state electrical commission.
   MAINTENANCE ELECTRICAL WORK. Is limited to electrical maintenance work,
which is repair or replacement of existing wiring devices and electrical
utilization equipment using material with the same capacity and characteristics
as the material replaced. MAINTENANCE ELECTRICAL WORK does not include addition
to or alteration of feeders, services, fixtures, or motors which affects the
loading of the feeder, circuit, or system, and repair, replacement, or
extension of existing circuits; changing motor sizes, adding fixtures, or a
complete change-out of lighting, motors, receptacles, or electrical equipment,
repair or replacement of any electrical equipment, or components associated
with Hazardous Locations Article 500-516, Health Care Facilities Article 517,
Exit and Emergency Systems Article 700, Legally Required Standby Systems
Article 701 and Fire Alarm Systems Article 760 of the National Electrical Code,
and any other act which changes electrical characteristics of the existing
system.
   OWNER. A natural person who physically performs electrical work on the
premises the person owns and actually occupies as a resident or owns and will
occupy as a residence upon completion of the construction.
   PERSONAL SUPERVISION. An electrical contractor, Class B contractor, sign
wiring contractor, fire alarm contractor, and journeyman electrician oversees
and directs the work for which they are licensed and that:
      (1)   He or she is immediately available to his or her electricians or
installers; and
      (2)   He or she is able to, and does determine that all work performed is
in compliance with this chapter.
   POINT OF SERVICE ATTACHMENT. The point where the power supplier’s conductors
connect to the consumer’s conductors. The point of attachment may not be
located beyond the load side terminals of the meter or current transformer for
service installations of 600 volts or less or at the distribution transformer
secondary terminals for service installations with over 600 volts metering.
   RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY. A lot containing one dwelling unit and accessory
buildings.
   SIGN WIRING CONTRACTOR. Any person licensed by the city having the necessary
qualifications to execute the work of manufacturing, maintaining, repairing,
and installing sockets and luminous gaseous tubes energized by transformers or
ballasts, in and on signs and outline lighting on buildings, or as decorative
lighting inside buildings, but not including connections to the source of a
primary electrical power supply.
(1992 Code, § 15-22) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 112-88, passed 11-28-
1988; Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 73-00,
passed 8-14-2000; Ord. 79-02, passed 10-15-2002; Ord. 107-08, passed 8-18-2008;
Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL 36-16-2
§ 150.223 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Electrical contractor. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
other than an employee, partner, or officer of a licensed electrical contractor
as defined in §
150.222 shall undertake or offer to undertake electrical work with or without
compensation unless the person obtains an electrical contractor's license from
the city.
   (b)   Class B contractor. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
other than an employee, partner, or officer of a licensed Class B contractor as
defined in §
150.222 shall undertake or offer to undertake Class B work with or without
compensation unless the person obtains a Class B contractor's license from the
city.
   (c)   Sign wiring contractor. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
other than an employee, partner, or officer of a licensed sign wiring
contractor as defined in §
150.222 shall undertake or offer to undertake sign wiring work with or without
compensation unless the person obtains a sign wiring contractor's license from
the city.
   (d)   Journeyman electrician. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall perform electrical work unless the person is:
      (1)   Licensed by the city and the sate electrical commission as a
journeyman electrician;
      (2)   The electrical work is for a licensed electrical contractor or
Class B contractor and the person is an employee, partner, or officer of the
licensed electrical contractor and the work is performed under the personal
supervision of the electrical contractor or Class B contractor; and
      (3)   The electrical work is for the holder of a Class I or Class II
maintenance license and the person is a full-time employee, partner, or officer
of the license holder.
   (e)   Apprentice electrician. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall perform electrical work unless the person is:
      (1)   Licensed by the city and the state electrical commission as an
apprentice electrician; and
      (2)   The electrical work is for a licensed electrical contractor or
Class B contractor and the person is an employee, partner, or officer of a
licensed electrical contractor or Class B contractor and the work is performed
in the presence of the electrical contractor and/or journeyman electrician or
Class B contractor also employed by the person’s employer.
   (f)   Class I maintenance license. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
employee shall perform electrical work on an employer’s premises unless:
      (1)   The employer holds a Class I maintenance license issued by the
city;
      (2)   The employee is licensed by the city and the state electrical
commission as an electrician; and
      (3)   The employer employs full-time an electrical contractor to provide
personal supervision.
   (g)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Employees of utilities engaged in the manufacture and distribution
of electrical energy, when engaged in work directly pertaining to the
manufacture and distribution of electrical energy. This exemption shall
terminate at the first point of service attachment, except for the installing
or testing of electric meters and measuring devices and the maintenance of
their service;
      (2)   Employees of telephone, telegraph, radio, and television
communication services and pipelines or persons or companies when engaged in
work pertaining directly to the services, provided the work is designed,
serviced, or installed by a person qualified in the work being done;
      (3)   Electrical work and equipment in mines, ships, railways, rolling
stock or automotive equipment, and in packing plants supervised and regulated
by the department of agriculture;
      (4)   Replacement of lamps and connection of portable electrical devices
to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed;
      (5)   Radio and appliance service repair departments;
      (6)   Maintenance on oil burners and space heaters where installation of
same has been effected by a Class B or journeyman electrician in accordance
with this chapter;
      (7)   Architects, designers, and engineers engaged in the planning and
laying out of electrical work; and
      (8)   Employees of electrical utilities engaged in the installation and
maintenance of utility street lighting, traffic signal devices, or electric
utility- owned security lights.
   (h)   Class II maintenance license. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
employee shall perform maintenance electrical work on an employer's premises
unless:
      (1)   The employer holds a Class II maintenance license;
      (2)   The employer employs a full-time journeyman electrician to provide
personal supervision; and
      (3)   The employee is licensed by the city and the state electrical
commission as an electrician.
(1992 Code, § 15-23) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 104-86, passed 12-8-
1986; Ord. 11-90, passed 2-20-1990; Ord. 87-90, passed 9-19-1990; Ord. 116-90,
passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 7-91, passed 1-14-1991; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 117-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 73-00, passed 8-14-2000; Ord. 107-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
§ 150.224 APPRENTICE RATIO.
   There shall be a ratio of not more than three apprentices to each electrical
contractor, journeyman electrician or class B contractor on any job site.
(1992 Code, § 15-24) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.225 LICENSE USE RESTRICTED.
   No licensed contractor shall allow his or her name or license to be used by
any other person directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit for the
installation or construction of any electrical system, equipment or sign, or to
install any system, equipment or sign.
(1992 Code, § 15-25) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-
1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 150.226 BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   As a condition of his or her license, each sign wiring contractor
shall give and maintain a surety bond in the penal sum of $10,000 in a form
approved by the city.
   (b)   The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and lawful performance
of all work entered upon by the contractor within the city and for compliance
with all the provisions of this chapter. The bond shall be in lieu of all other
license bonds to any political subdivision or government agency. The bond shall
be written by a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state.
(1992 Code, § 15-26) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-
1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20,
passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.227 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any vehicle used by a contractor while performing electrical work for which
a license is required shall have the contractor’s business name and city and
state license numbers as they appear on the license in contrasting color with
characters one and one-half inches high by one and one-half inches wide affixed
to each side of the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 15-27) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 67-87, passed 8-3-1987;
Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed
10-14-2014)
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles, see
ch. 73 and §§
93.025 through
93.035
§ 150.228 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting,
sign wiring contractor, journeyman electrician, or apprentice electrician shall
first make an application for a license therefor to the building official on
forms furnished.
(1992 Code, § 15-28) (Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.229 LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   All city licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire biennially in even years, 60 days after the renewal date established by
the State Electrical Commission. All city renewal fees shall be paid prior to
the expiration of the license.
   (b)   Any person who shall fail to renew a license within 60 days after it
has lapsed shall pay in addition to the license fee a reinstatement fee equal
to 50% of the renewal fee.
   (c)   Licenses not renewed within one year of the date of expiration shall
not be renewed until the applicant has submitted and passed the examination and
paid all fees required for a new license.
(1992 Code, § 15-29) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 15-94, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 104-94, passed 11-21-1994; Ord. 107-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 150.230 EXAMINATIONS.
   (a)   Before an electrical contractor, Class B contractor, or sign wiring
contractor license shall be issued, the applicant shall be required to submit
to and pass an examination as to his or her qualifications and fitness to
install electrical wiring. The applicant shall have a current South Dakota
electrical license of the same type before making application for city
electrical examination. The examination shall be given under the direction of
the electrical inspection manager. Any applicant who fails to pass the
examination shall not be eligible to take another examination until at least 30
days shall have elapsed from the date of the last examination.
   (b)   Applications for examination shall be made at least one week prior to
the examination date which shall be as determined by the building official. The
examination must be completed within 90 days of the application submittal date.
Failure to complete the examination within 90 days shall result in the
forfeiture of the examination application fee and the application will be
deemed null and void. After passing the examination, applicants shall secure
the license within 90 days from the exam date.
   (c)   Applicants shall pay the examination fee for each exam given.
(1992 Code, § 15-30) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 112-88, passed 11-28-
1988; Ord. 116-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993; Ord. 105-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-
2015; Ord. 62-17, passed 7-18-2017; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.231 [RESERVED.]
§ 150.232 BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   Commencing January 1, 2012, as a condition of his or her license, each
licensed electrical, class B, sign wiring and fire alarm contractor shall
maintain and deliver to the chief building services official a continuous bond
in the penal sum of $10,000 in a form approved by the city with the contractor
as principal on the bond and the city as obligee for its benefit and that of
consumers dealing with the contractor.
   (b)   The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful and lawful completion
of all work entered into by the contractor within the city and for compliance
with all the provisions of this chapter. The bond shall be in addition to all
other license bonds to any political subdivision or government agency. The bond
shall be written by a corporate surety authorized to transact business in the
state.
   (c)   Claims upon the bond shall be filed by the city by reason of the
principal’s failure to perform his or her obligation under the bond. The
aggregate liability of the surety, regardless of the number of claims made
against the bond or the number of years the bond remains in force, shall not
exceed $10,000. Any revision of the bond amount shall not be cumulative.
   (d)   Suspension or revocation of the license of the principal shall not by
itself affect the liability of either the principal or the surety on the bond,
except that the liability of the surety shall not extend to acts or omissions
of the principal occurring after the effective date of his or her license
suspension or revocation.
(1992 Code, § 15-32) (Ord. 82-11, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.233 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   (a)   A permit for wiring a person’s residence may only be issued under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The applicant has not applied for a permit under the owner’s
exemption in the last three years unless it is for the same address;
      (2)   The applicant occupies or intends to occupy the residence as his or
her personal dwelling unit;
      (3)   The applicant does not rent or lease any part of the residence; and
      (4)   The applicant or applicant’s spouse are the only person performing
the wiring.
   (b)   All equipment installed by the owners shall be for themselves without
compensation or pay from or to any other person for the labor or installation.
The installations by owners shall comply with the requirements of this code.
The owner shall be required to file plans, apply for and secure a permit, pay
fees, and call for all inspections in a manner provided in this code.
(1992 Code, § 15-34) (Ord. 68-86, passed 7-7-1986; Ord. 65-93, passed 8-9-1993;
Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 68-20,
passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.234 TERMINATION OR DEATH OF ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR.
   An electrical contractor’s license shall terminate upon termination or death
of said contractor. It shall be the duty of the electrical contractor to
immediately notify the chief building official in writing upon the termination
of the electrical contractor. Upon termination or death of the electrical
contractor, the electrical contractor may request in writing from the chief
building official a continuance of the license for the purpose of completing
existing permitted projects only for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.235 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The chief building official may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a
license if he or she finds:
   (a)   In his or her discretion that the order is in the public interest; and
   (b)   Based upon substantial evidence presented, the applicant or licensee:
      (1)   Has violated any applicable provision of this code, city ordinance,
rule, regulation, or state law;
      (2)   Has engaged in any fraudulent, deceptive, or dishonest act or
practice;
      (3)   Has filed an application for a license which is incomplete in any
material respect or contains statements which are false or misleading;
      (4)   Fails to file with the chief building official the necessary bonds
or certificate of insurance;
      (5)   Fails to provide copies of records in the person’s possession
related to a matter under investigation;
      (6)   Fails to pay inspection and permit fees in a timely manner as
determined by the chief building official; and/or
      (7)   Fails to respond to a directive or lawful order of the building
official.
(1992 Code, § 15-36) (Ord. 113-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 117-01, passed 12-10-
2001; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20,
passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.236 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL OF LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO
RENEW.
   A party whose license is suspended, revoked or refused renewal may appeal
that decision to the electrical board of appeals and examiners. Appeals shall
be commenced by filing written appeal with the department within ten days of
the decision. The appeal shall include a statement of the action complained of,
why the same should be modified or rescinded, whether the appellant desires an
open or closed hearing, and an address where the appellant can be mailed notice
of hearing. The department shall immediately deliver a copy of the appeal to
the city attorney who will act as legal counsel.
(1992 Code, § 15-37) (Ord. 113-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 150.237 TIME OF HEARING AND NOTICE.
   A public hearing, or a closed hearing if the board determines it is
necessary, shall be held on all appeals within 15 working days after the filing
of the appeal, unless a later date is agreed upon by the appellant and the
board. The department shall cause written notice of the date, time and place of
the hearing to be served upon the appellant by personal service or certified
mail to the address set forth in the appeal at least five days before the
hearing date.
(1992 Code, § 15-38) (Ord. 113-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-
2014)
§ 150.238 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The following rules shall govern the procedures for an administrative
hearing on matters concerning license suspension, revocation, or refusal to
renew.
   (a)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according to
the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (b)   Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
   (c)   The chairperson of the board or the board recorder shall administer
oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
   (d)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of the evidence after objection in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
   (e)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence that lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
   (f)   The appellant, the major organization unit or agency, and any other
party to an appeal shall have these rights among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      (3)   To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
      (4)   To rebut evidence.
   (g)   After each appeal hearing, the board or hearing examiner shall perform
the following:
      (1)   Make written findings of fact; and
      (2)   Based upon the written findings, sustain, remand for further
hearing or action, or rescind the complained action or decision. The board may
in its discretion waive the payment of any reinstatement or late penalty fee.
      (3)   A written report of the decision, including the findings of fact,
shall be furnished to the appellant and the chief building official within 15
working days from the date the appeal hearing is closed. The city and the
appellant shall bear their own respective costs of the appeal proceeding. The
decision of the board shall be final.
(1992 Code, § 15-39) (Ord. 113-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 68-20, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 150.239 APPEAL TO CIRCUIT COURT.
   The decision of the board or the hearing examiner is subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 15-40) (Ord. 113-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 30-07, passed 2-20-
2007; Ord. 75-14, passed 10-14-2014)
PLUMBING
§ 150.301 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix
A—Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System; Appendix B—Explanatory
Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems; Appendix C—Alternate Plumbing
Systems; Appendix D—Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems; Appendix
E—Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks; Appendix
I—Installation Standards; Appendix K—Private Sewage Disposal Systems; and the
Green Plumbing & Mechanical Code Supplement which is deemed to be a non-
mandatory referenced standard and is applicable only when plumbing systems or
installation methods are not referenced in the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code,
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
and amendments and additions thereto as provided in this chapter, are hereby
adopted by the city for regulating and controlling design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of any plumbing and
providing for the performance of inspections and collection of fees therefor.
   (b)   A printed copy of the code as amended is on file with the city clerk.
(1992 Code, § 33-1) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 118-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 25-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 2-11, passed
1-10-2011; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.302 MODIFICATIONS BY THE CITY TO THE 2015 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code
adopted in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or not adopted by the city
as follows. All other sections or subsections of the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code
as published shall remain the same.
   102.1 Conflicts Between Codes. In instances where this code, applicable
standards, or the manufacturer's installation instructions conflict, the more
stringent provisions shall prevail. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall prevail.
   102.4 Additions, Alterations, Renovations, or Repairs. Additions,
alterations, renovations, or repairs shall conform to that required for a new
system without requiring the existing plumbing system to be in accordance with
the requirements of this code. Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs
shall not cause an existing system to become unsafe, insanitary, or overloaded.
   Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs to existing plumbing
installations shall comply with the provisions for new construction and the
International Existing Building Code, unless such deviations are found to be
necessary and are first approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   102.6 Changes in Building Occupancy. Plumbing systems that are a part of a
building or structure undergoing a change in use or occupancy, as defined in
the building code, shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code
and the International Existing Building Code that are applicable to the new use
or occupancy.
   102.7 Moved Structures. Parts of the plumbing system of a building or part
thereof that is moved from one foundation to another, or from one location to
another, shall be in accordance with the provisions of this code and the
International Existing Plumbing Code for new installations and completely
tested as prescribed elsewhere in this section for new work, except that walls
or floors need not be removed during such test where other equivalent means of
inspection acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction are provided.
   103.2 Liability. The Authority Having Jurisdiction charged with the
enforcement of this code, acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the Authority Having Jurisdiction's duties, shall not thereby be
rendered personally liable for damage that accrues to persons or property as a
result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of duties.
A suit brought against the Authority Having Jurisdiction or employee because of
such act or omission performed in the enforcement of provisions of this code
shall be afforded all of the protection provided by the city's insurance pool,
immunities, and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws
and be defended by legal counsel provided by this jurisdiction until final
termination of such proceedings.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of
any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or structure for any
damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city, its
officers and employees, be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under
this code.
   104.1 Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for a homeowner, person, firm,
or corporation to make an installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or
remodel a plumbing system regulated by this code except as permitted in Section
104.2, or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate
plumbing permit for each separate building or structure. Any regulation herein
referring to permits shall also apply to inspections.
   104.3.2 Plan Review Fees. Where a plan or other data is required to be
submitted in accordance with SDCL 36-18 or when the building official requires
the submittal of plans, computations, or specifications in accordance with
Section 104.3.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting
construction documents for review.
   The plan review fees for plumbing work shall be 25 percent of the building
permit fee in Table 1-B in Section 150.017 of the Revised Ordinances of Sioux
Falls, South Dakota. The plan review fees specified in this subsection are
separate fees from the permit fees specified in Table 104.5.
   Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional review, a
fee shall be charged at the rate shown in Table 104.5.
   105.2  New plumbing work and such portions of existing systems as affected
by new work or changes shall be inspected by the Authority Having Jurisdiction
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this code and to ensure that the
installation and construction of the plumbing system is in accordance with
approved plans. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall make the following
inspections and other such inspections as necessary. The permittee or the
permittee's authorized agent shall be responsible for the scheduling of such
inspections as follows:
   (1)   Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before backfill is put in place.
   (2)   Rough-in inspection shall be made prior to the installation of wall or
ceiling membranes.
   (3)   Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the installation.
   The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the
operation of any heating appliance installed to replace an existing heating
appliance serving an occupied portion of a structure in the event a request for
inspection of such heating appliance has been filed with the department not
more than 48 hours after replacement work is placed into operation or
substantially completed, and before any portion of such appliance is concealed
by any permanent portion of the structure.
   106.3 Penalties. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly,
the plumbing official is authorized to utilize the administrative provisions of
the code enforcement system, or request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction
to deem the violation as a strict liability offense and institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy
of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of
the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   107.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Authority Having Jurisdiction relative to the
application and interpretations of this code, to review all prospective changes
to the respective codes and to submit recommendations to the responsible
official and the city council, and to examine applicants for licensing and to
investigate matters brought before the board, there shall be and is hereby
created a Plumbing Board of Appeals consisting of members who are qualified by
experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to plumbing design,
construction, and maintenance and the public health aspects of plumbing systems
and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Authority Having
Jurisdiction shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary to said
board but shall have no vote upon a matter before the board. Members shall be
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and
shall hold office for a term of three years. The board shall adopt rules and
procedures for conducting its business. All decisions and findings shall be
provided in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy provided to the
building services department. The Plumbing Board of Appeals shall hold office
at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its
business and shall render decisions and findings in writing to the appellant
with a duplicate copy to the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   107.2 Limitations of Authority. The Plumbing Board of Appeals shall have no
authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this
code, nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
   Through December 31, 2021, the following fees shall be charged for plumbing
permits and inspections:
TABLE 104.5
PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
1.    Homeowner’s permit    $20
Unit Fee Schedule (in addition to Item 1 above)
1.    For each plumbing fixture on one trap or a set of fixtures on one trap
   (including water, drainage piping, and backflow protection therefor)    $4
2.    For each building sewer and each trailer park sewer    $40
3.    Rainwater systems—per drain (inside building)    $7
4.    For each private sewage disposal system    $40
5.    For each water heater, vent, or both    $7
6.    For each gas piping system of one to five outlets    $5
7.    For each additional gas piping system outlet, per outlet    $1
8.    For each industrial waste pretreatment interceptor, including its trap
and vent, except kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture traps
   $7
9.    For each installation, alteration, or repair of water piping, or both
   $7
10.   For each repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each fixture
   $4
11.   For each lawn sprinkler system on one meter including backflow protection
devices therefor    $4
12.   For atmospheric-type vacuum breakers not referenced in Item 12:
      One to five    $5
      Over five, each    $1
13.   For each backflow protective device other than atmospheric-type vacuum
breakers:
      Two inches (50 mm) in diameter and smaller    $4
      Over two inches (50 mm) in diameter    $15
14.   For each gray water system    $20
15.   For initial installation and testing for a reclaimed water system    $7
16.   For each annual cross-connection testing of a reclaimed water system
   (excluding initial test)    $7
17.   *For each medical gas piping system serving one to five inlet(s)/outlet
(s)
   for a specific gas    $20
18.   *For each additional medical gas inlet(s)/outlet(s)    $4
19.   Minimum inspection fee    $19
Other Inspections and Fees
1.    Inspections outside of normal business hours    $70
2.    Reinspection fee    $70
3.    Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated    $70
4.    Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
approved plans (minimum charge—1/2 hour)    $70
5.   Appeals. Before any action is taken by the board, the party or parties
requesting such hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board or his
authorized agent, the sum of $65.00 to cover the approximate cost of the
procedure. Under no condition shall such sum or any portion thereof be refunded
for failure of said request to be approved.
6.    Delinquent accounts. The administrative authority may refuse to issue
permits or conduct inspections for any plumbing contractor whose account is
delinquent.
7.    Bond claims. An administrative fee shall be charged to cover the
administrative cost of filing a claim    $150
8.    Examination fees per examination   $75
9.    Fee for late corrections. A $100 administrative fee may be charged for
failure to correct violations within the time specified on a contractor’s
correction report.
10.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where plumbing work is
completed without a request for an inspection, an administrative fee of $250
may be charged.
   *Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is greater. This cost shall
include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of
the employees involved.
   Commencing January 1, 2022, the following fees shall be charged for permits
and inspections:
TABLE 104.5
Plumbing Permit Fees*
Total Project Valuation % of Project Plumbing Valuation Fee
TABLE 104.5
Plumbing Permit Fees*
Total Project         % of Project Plumbing Valuation   Fee
Valuation
$0.01 to $50,000.00   10%          $0.01 to $5,000.00   $40
                                                        $40 for the first
$50,000.01 to                      $5,000.01 to         $5,000, plus $6 for
$250,000.00           10%          $25,000.00           each additional $1,000
                                                        or fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including $25,000
                                                        $160 for the first
$250,000.01 to                     $25,000.01 to        $25,000, plus $5.25 for
$500,000.00           10%          $50,000.00           each additional $1,000
                                                        or fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including $50,000
                                                        $291.25 for the first
$500,000.01 to                     $50,000.01 to        $50,000, plus $4.50 for
$1,000,000.00         10%          $100,000.00          each additional $1,000
                                                        or fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including $100,000
                                                        $516.25 for the first
$1,000,000.01 to                   $100,000.01 to       $100,000 plus $4.25 for
$2,500,000.00         10%          $250,000.00          each additional $1,000
                                                        or fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including $250,000
                                                        $1,153.75 for the first
$2,500,000.01 to                   $250,000.01 to       $250,000, plus $4 for
$5,000,000.00         10%          $500,000.00          each additional $1,000
                                                        or fraction thereof, to
                                                        and including $500,000
                                                        $2,153.75 for the first
                                                        $500,000, plus $3.50
$5,000,000.01 to      10%          $500,000.01 to       for each additional
$10,000,000.00                     $1,000,000.00        $1,000 or fraction
                                                        thereof, to and
                                                        including $1,000,000
                                                        $3,903.75 for the first
$10,000,000.01 and up 10%          $1,000,000.01 and up $1,000,000, plus $3 for
                                                        each additional $1,000
                                                        or fraction thereof.
 
Other Inspections and Fees
Other Inspections and Fees
1.   Homeowner's permit.                                                       $25
2.   Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge, one hour), p$200**
hour.
3.   Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 104 of the Uniform $200**
Plumbing Code (minimum charge, one hour), per hour.
4.   When a plan or other data is required to be submitted by SDCL 36-18A or when
the building official requires submittal of plans, computations, or
specifications in accordance with Section 104.3.2, a plan review fee shall be
charged. The plan review fee shall be 25 percent of the plumbing permit fee as
shown on Table 1-B, Commercial Building Permit Fees, of § 150.017 of the Code of
Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
5.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, revisions to approv$100**
plans (minimum charge, one hour), per hour.
6.   Fee for late corrections. If corrections listed on an inspection report are
not completed within the specified time, the inspector shall issue a correction   $100
order and assess a $100 administrative fee. The inspector shall also assess a
reinspection fee.
7.   Fee for failure to request a required inspection. Where plumbing work is
completed without a request for an inspection, an administrative fee of $250 may  $250
be charged.
8.   Board of appeals fees. Before any action is taken by the board, the party or
parties requesting the hearing shall deposit with the secretary of the board or
his or her authorized agent, the sum of $100 to cover the approximate cost of the $100
procedure. Under no condition shall the sum or any portion thereof be refunded
for failure of the request to be approved.
9.   Examination fee; per examination.                                         $75
10.   A mileage fee at the current rate as established by the finance department
shall be charged for any inspection occurring outside the city limits.
11.   Bond claims; an administrative fee shall be charged to cover the         $250
administrative cost of filing a claim.
*The Total Project Valuation of the project will be used when a building permit is
issued.      
**Or the total hourly cost to the city, whichever is greater. This cost shall include
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees
involved.      
 
   The building official may refuse to issue permits or conduct inspections for
any delinquent account.
   Section 221.0 S Add the following definition:
   Strict Liability Offense. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   312.13 Exposed ABS Piping. Not adopted by city.
   312.14 Exposed PVC Piping. Not adopted by city.
   312.6 Freezing Protection. No soil or waste pipe shall be installed or
permitted outside of a building, in attics or crawl spaces, or in an exterior
wall unless, where necessary, adequate provision is made to protect such pipe
from freezing.
   No water piping shall be installed in an exterior wall or unheated attic. An
exterior wall includes any wall between a heated space and an unheated space.
Water service piping must be installed with a minimum earth cover of 72 inches.
Building sewers must be installed with a minimum earth cover of 42 inches.
Building sewers on septic systems may be installed at any depth that will
accommodate the burial depth of the septic tank. If the building sewer is
installed at a depth less than 30 inches, the pipe shall be protected from
freezing with a minimum of 3 inches of foam insulation above and below the
pipe.
   312.10 Sleeves. Sleeves shall be provided to protect piping through concrete
and masonry walls and concrete floors.
      Exception: Sleeves shall not be required where openings are drilled or
wrapped or bored.
   312.12.2 Collars. In or on buildings where openings have been made in walls,
floors, or ceilings for the passage of pipes, such openings shall be closed and
protected by the installation of approved collars.
   317.1 General. Food or drink shall not be stored, prepared, or displayed
beneath soil or drain pipes, unless those areas are protected against leakage
or condensation from such pipes reaching the food or drink as described below.
Where building design requires that soil or drain pipes be located over such
areas, the installation shall be made with the least possible number of joints
and shall be installed so as to connect to the nearest adequately sized
vertical stack with the provisions as follows:
      (1)    Openings through floors over such areas shall be sealed watertight
to the floor construction.
      (2)    Floor and shower drains installed above such areas shall be
equipped with integral seepage pans.
      (3)   Soil or drain pipes shall be of an approved material as listed in
Table 1701.1 and Section 701.2. Materials shall comply with established
standards. Cleanouts shall be extended through the floor construction above.
      (4)   Piping subject to operation at temperatures that will form
condensation on the exterior of the pipe shall be thermally insulated.
   321.0 Boilers and pressure vessels. The following provisions shall govern
the installation, alteration, and repair of boilers and pressure vessels:
      Chapter 10 Boilers of the International Mechanical Code
      Section 631 Boilers of the International Fuel Gas Code
      Part V—Mechanical, Section M2001 Boilers and Part VI—Fuel Gas, Section
G2452 Boilers of the International Residential Code
   322 Hydronic piping. The following provisions shall govern the installation,
alteration, and repair of hydronic piping:
      Chapter 12 Hydronic Piping of the International Mechanical Code
      Part V—Mechanical, Chapter 21 of the International Residential Code
   402.6.1 Closet Rings (Closet Flanges). Closet rings (closet flanges) for
water closets or similar fixtures shall be of an approved type and shall be
copper alloy, copper, hard lead, cast-iron, galvanized malleable iron, ABS,
PVC, or other approved materials. Each such closet ring (closet flange) shall
be approximately 7 inches (178 mm) in diameter and, where installed, shall,
together with the soil pipe, present a 1 1/2-inch (38 mm) wide flange or face
to receive the fixture gasket or closet seal.
   Caulked-on closet rings (closet flanges) shall be not less than 1/4 of an
inch (6.4 mm) thick and not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in overall depth.
   Closet rings (closet flanges) shall be burned or soldered to lead bends or
stubs, shall be caulked to cast-iron soil pipe, shall be solvent cemented to
ABS and PVC, and shall be screwed or fastened in an approved manner to other
materials.
   The top of the closet flange shall be installed above the finished floor not
to exceed 3/8".
   Closet rings (closet flanges) shall be adequately designed and secured to
support fixtures connected thereto.
   407.3 Limitation of Hot Water Temperature for Public Lavatories. Hot water
delivered from public use lavatories, including hair salon and pedicure sinks,
shall be limited to a maximum temperature of 120°F (49°C) by a device that is
in accordance with ASSE 1070 or CSA B125.3. The water heater thermostat shall
not be considered a control for meeting this provision.
   407.4 Transient Public Lavatories. Self-closing or metering faucets may be
installed on lavatories intended to serve the transient public, such as those
in, but not limited to, service stations, train stations, airports,
restaurants, and convention halls.
   418.3 Location of Floor Drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the
following areas:
      (1)   Toilet rooms containing two or more water closets or a combination
of one water closet and one urinal, except in a dwelling unit.
      (2)   Commercial kitchens and in accordance with Section 704.3.
      (3)   Laundry rooms in commercial buildings and common laundry facilities
in multi-family dwelling buildings and in all mechanical rooms or the lowest
level of a structure.
      (4)    Boiler rooms.
   422.1 Fixture Count. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for the type of
building occupancy and in the minimum number in accordance with Chapter 29 and
Table 2902.1 of the International Building Code. The total occupant load and
occupancy classification shall be determined in accordance with the building
code.
   The minimum number of fixtures shall be calculated at 50 percent male and 50
percent female based on the total occupant load. Where information submitted
indicates a difference in distribution of the sexes, such information shall be
used in order to determine the number of fixtures for each sex. Once the
occupancy load and occupancy are determined, Table 2902.1 of the International
Building Code shall be applied to determine the minimum number of plumbing
fixtures required.
   422.2 Separate Facilities. Not adopted by city.
   422.3 Fixture Requirements for Special Occupancies. Not adopted by city.
   422.4 Toilet Facilities Serving Employees and Customers. Not adopted by
city.
   422.4.1 Access to Toilet Facilities. Not adopted by city.
   422.5 Toilet Facilities for Workers. Not adopted by city.
   506.4.3 Alternate combustion air sizing (IFGC) Outdoor combustion air shall
be provided through opening(s) to the outdoors. The minimum dimension of air
openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm).
      Exception: When all air is taken from the outdoors for appliances and the
total input of the appliances is less than 300,000 Btu/hr (1,704,000 W/ meters
squared K), one outside air duct may be used and shall terminate below the
draft hood. An exterior
      opening may be used in place of a duct provided that it is located at
least one foot below the draft hood.
   As an alternate to the above-referenced combustion air openings, the net
free area of openings, ducts, or plenums supplying air to an area containing
gas-burning appliances shall be as specified in Table 7-B.
Table No. 7-B—Combustion Air Requirements for Appliances Requiring an Outside
Air Opening in Areas with 5,000 degrees Fahrenheit (2,777 degrees Celsius) or
Greater Heating Degree Days
Total Input of Appliances1 Thousand of Required Free Area of Air Supply Opening
Btu/h                                  or Duct, Square Inches2
Total Input of Appliances1 Thousand of Required Free Area of Air Supply Opening
Btu/h                                  or Duct, Square Inches2
25 (26.4 KJ/h)                         7 (4,516 mm2)
50 (52.8 KJ/h)                         7 (4,516 mm2)
75 (79.1 KJ/h)                         11 (7,097 mm2)
100 (106 KJ/h)                         14 (9,032 mm2)
125 (132 KJ/h)                         18 (11,610 mm2)
150 (158 KJ/h)                         22 (14,190 mm2)
175 (185 KJ/h)                         25 (16,130 mm2)
200 (211 KJ/h)                         29 (18,710 mm2)
225 (237 KJ/h)                         32 (20,650 mm2)
250 (264 KJ/h)                         36 (23,230 mm2)
275 (290 KJ/h)                         40 (25,810 mm2)
300 (317 KJ/h)                         43 (27,740 mm2)
 
      1.    For total inputs that fall between the listing figures, use the
next largest listed input.
      2.    These figures are based on the maximum equivalent duct length of 20
feet (6.1 m). For equivalent duct lengths in excess of 20 feet (6.1 m) to and
including a maximum of 50 feet (15.2 m), increase the round duct diameter by
one size. A square or rectangular duct may be considered only where the
required duct size is 9 inches2 (5,800 mm2) or larger and the smaller dimension
must be not less than 3 inches (76.2 mm).
      3.   The combustion air duct is required to be upsized one diameter size
when a dryer is installed in the same room as the combustion air.
   506.9 Combustion Air Ducts. Combustion air ducts shall comply with the
following [NFPA 54:9.3.8]:
      (1)   Ducts shall be constructed of galvanized steel or a material having
equivalent corrosion resistance, strength, and rigidity.
         Exception: Within dwelling units, unobstructed stud and joist spaces
shall not be prohibited from conveying combustion air, provided that not more
than one fireblock is removed. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.1]
      (2)   Ducts shall terminate in an unobstructed space, allowing free
movement of combustion air to the appliances. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.2]
      (3)   Ducts shall serve a single space. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.3]
      (4)   Ducts shall not service both upper and lower combustion air
openings where both such openings are used. The separation between ducts
serving upper and lower combustion air openings shall be maintained to the
source of combustion air. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.4]
      (5)   Ducts shall not be screened where terminating in an attic space.
[NFPA 54:9.3.8.5]
      (6)   Combustion air intake openings located on the exterior of the
building shall have the lowest side of the combustion air intake openings
located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) vertically from the adjoining finished
ground level. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.8]
      (7)   Horizontal upper combustion air ducts shall not slope downward
toward the source of combustion air. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.6]
      (8)   The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special
gas vent, or plastic piping installed within a masonry, metal, or factory-built
chimney shall not be used to supply combustion air.
         Exception: Direct-vent appliances designed for installation in a solid
fuel-burning fireplace where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.7]
      (9)   Mechanical and gravity outdoor air intake openings shall be located
not less than 10 feet (3,048 mm) from any hazardous or noxious contaminant
source, such as vents, streets, alleys, parking lots, and loading docks, except
as specified in Item 3 or Section 501.2.1.
   602.3 Backflow Prevention. No plumbing fixture, device, or construction
shall be installed or maintained, or shall be connected to a municipal potable
water supply, where such installation or connection provides a possibility of
polluting such water supply or cross-connection between a distributing system
of water for drinking and domestic purposes and water that becomes contaminated
by such plumbing fixture, device, or construction unless there is provided a
backflow prevention device approved for the potential hazard. A backflow
preventer shall be installed immediately downstream of the water meter and
before any branch piping leading off of the water service line. The protection
level required will be determined by the hazard level and water use in the
facility as outlined in the City of Sioux Falls Cross-Connection Control
Manual.
   603.2 Approval of Devices of Assemblies. Before a device or an assembly is
installed for the prevention of backflow, it shall first have been approved by
the Authority having Jurisdiction. The City of Sioux Falls Cross-Connection
Control Manual shall be referenced for containment backflow protection. Devices
or assemblies installed in a potable water supply system for protection against
backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons
having control of such devices or assemblies. Such device or assembly shall be
tested at the time of installation, repair, or relocation and not less than on
an annual schedule thereafter or more often where required by the Authority
Having Jurisdiction. Where found to be defective or inoperative, the device or
assembly shall be repaired or replaced. No device or assembly shall be removed
from use or relocated or other device or assembly substituted without the
approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   603.4.2 Testing. The premise owner or responsible person shall have the
backflow prevention assembly tested by a certified backflow assembly tester at
the time of installation, repair, or relocation and not less than on an annual
schedule thereafter, or more often where required by the Authority Having
Jurisdiction. The periodic testing shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures listed in the City of Sioux Falls Cross-Connection Control Manual by
a tester certified in the approved procedures. Copies of the initial
installation assembly test report shall be sent to the water supplier. A
testable assembly is an assembly with properly located, resiliently seated test
cocks and tightly closing resiliently seated shut off valves at each end of the
assembly.
   603.5.4 Heat Exchangers. Heat exchangers used for heat transfer, heat
recovery, or solar heating shall protect the potable water system from being
contaminated by the heat transfer medium. Single-wall heat exchangers used in
indirect-fired water heaters shall meet the requirements of Section C302.0 to
C302.3 inclusive. Double-wall heat exchangers shall separate the potable water
from the heat transfer medium by providing a space between the two walls that
are vented to the atmosphere. Water-to-water heat exchangers that return the
water back to the public system of waterworks shall not be allowed on a public
water system unless approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
   603.5.17 Potable Water Outlets and Valves. Potable water outlets, freeze-
proof yard hydrants, combination stop-and-waste valves, or other fixtures that
incorporate a stop and waste feature that drains into the ground shall not be
installed underground unless they are installed above the known groundwater
table, they are installed at least 10 feet away from any sewer line, or any
other source of contamination.
   604.3 Copper or Copper Alloy Tube. Copper or copper alloy tube for water
piping shall have a weight of not less than Type L.
      Exception: Type M copper or copper alloy tubing shall be permitted to be
used for water piping where piping is aboveground in, or on, a building.
   604.13 Water Heater Connectors. Flexible metallic (copper and stainless
steel), reinforced flexible, braided stainless steel, or polymer braided with
EPDM core connectors that connect a water heater to the piping system shall be
in accordance with ASME A112.18.6/CSA B125.6. Copper, copper alloy, or
stainless steel flexible connectors shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm). PEX,
PEX-AL-PEX, PE-AL-PE, or PE-RT tubing shall not be installed within the first
18 inches (457 mm) of piping connected to a water heater. This does not apply
to electric water heaters.
   605.12.2 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement joints for PVC pipe and
fittings shall be clean from dirt and moisture. Pipe shall be cut square and
pipe shall be deburred. Where surfaces to be joined are cleaned and free of
dirt, moisture, oil, and other foreign material, apply primer purple or un-
purple in color in accordance with ASTM F656. Primer shall be applied until the
surface of the pipe and fitting is softened. Solvent cements in accordance with
ASTM D2564 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. Joints shall be made while
both the inside socket surface and outside surface of pipe are wet with solvent
cement. Hold joint in place and undisturbed for one minute after assembly.
   606.5 Control Valve. A control valve shall be installed immediately ahead of
each water-supplied appliance and immediately ahead of each slip joint or
appliance supply. Parallel water distribution systems shall provide a control
valve either immediately ahead of each fixture being supplied or installed at
the manifold, and shall be identified with the fixture being supplied. Where
parallel water distribution system manifolds are located in attics, crawl
spaces, or other locations not readily accessible, a separate shutoff valve
shall be required immediately ahead of each individual fixture or appliance
served.
   Individual shutoff valves shall be installed on each plumbing fixture and
each exterior hose bib.
      Exception: In single-family dwellings, individual valves are not required
on tub valves, shower valves, and exterior hose bibs.
   608.2 Excessive Water Pressure. Where static water pressure in the water
supply piping is exceeding 80 psi (552 kPa), an approved-type pressure
regulator preceded by an adequate strainer shall be installed and the static
pressure reduced to 80 psi (552 kPa) or less. Pressure regulator(s) equal to or
exceeding 1 1/2 inches (40 mm) shall not require a strainer. Such regulator(s)
shall control the pressure to water outlets in the building unless otherwise
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Each such regulator and strainer
shall be accessibly located aboveground or in a vault equipped with a properly
sized and sloped bore-sighted drain to daylight, shall be protected from
freezing, and shall have the strainer readily accessible for cleaning without
removing the regulator or strainer body or disconnecting the supply piping.
Pipe size determinations shall be based on 80 percent of the reduced pressure
where using Table 610.4. An approved expansion tank shall be installed in the
cold water distribution piping downstream of each such regulator to prevent
excessive pressure from developing due to thermal expansion and to maintain the
pressure setting of the regulator. Expansion tanks used in potable water
systems intended to supply drinking water shall be in accordance with NSF 61.
The expansion tank shall be properly sized and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and listing. Systems designed by
registered design professionals shall be permitted to use approved pressure
relief valves in lieu of expansion tanks, provided such relief valves have a
maximum pressure relief setting of 100 psi (689 kPa) or less.
   All expansion tanks must be marked with a permanent marker with the date
installed and the set pressure written on the tank by the installer. Tanks
installed in the horizontal position shall be adequately supported.
   609.1 Installation. Water piping shall be adequately supported in accordance
with Table 313.3. Burred ends shall be reamed to the full bore of the pipe or
tube. Changes in direction shall be made by the appropriate use of fittings,
except that changes in direction in copper or copper alloy tubing shall be
permitted to be made with bends, provided that such bends are made with bending
equipment that does not deform or create a loss in the cross-sectional area of
the tubing. Changes in direction are allowed with flexible pipe and tubing
without fittings in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Provisions
shall be made for expansion in hot water piping. Piping, equipment,
appurtenances, and devices shall be installed in a workmanlike manner in
accordance with the provisions and intent of the code.
   609.2 Trenches. Water pipes shall not be run or laid in the same trench as
building sewer or drainage piping constructed of clay or materials that are not
approved for use within a building unless both of the following conditions are
met:
      (1)   The bottom of the water pipe shall be not less than 12 inches (305
mm) above the top of the sewer or drain line.
      (2)   The water pipe shall be placed on a solid shelf excavated at one
side of the common trench with a clear horizontal distance of not less than 12
inches (305 mm) from the sewer or drain line.
   Water pipes crossing sewer or drainage piping constructed of clay or
materials that are not approved for use within a building shall be laid not
less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the sewer or drain pipe.
   Potable water service piping shall not be located in, under, or above
cesspools, septic tanks, septic tank drainage fields, or drainage pits. A
separation of 25 feet shall be maintained from such systems, except for
livestock confinement facilities which may be 3 feet.
   609.4 Testing. Upon completion of a section or of the entire hot and cold
water supply system, it shall be tested and proved tight under a water pressure
not less than the working pressure under which it is to be used. The water used
for tests shall be obtained from a potable source of supply. A 50 psi (345 kPa)
air pressure shall be permitted to be substituted for the water test. In either
method of test, the piping shall withstand the test without leaking for a
period of not less than 15 minutes.
   609.5 Unions. Not adopted by city.
   609.11.1 Insulation Requirements. Not adopted by city.
   609.11.2 Pipe Insulation Wall Thickness. Not adopted by city.
   610.1 Size. The size of each water meter and each potable water supply pipe
from the meter or other source of supply to the fixture supply branches,
risers, fixtures, connections, outlets, or other uses shall be based on the
total demand and shall be determined according to the methods and procedures
outlined in this section. Water piping systems shall be designed to ensure that
the maximum velocities allowed by the code and the applicable standard are not
exceeded. The minimum size water service allowed is one (1) inch (25.4 mm)
except to travel trailer or mobile home sites, which shall be not less than
three quarter (3/4) inch (19.1 mm).
   701.2 Drainage Piping. Materials for drainage piping shall be in accordance
with one of the referenced standards in Table 701.2 except that:
      (1)   No galvanized wrought-iron or galvanized steel pipe shall be used
underground and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground.
Plastic pipe and fittings installed underground outside of buildings may be SDR
35 ASTM 3034 or heavier.
      (2)   ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be installed in
accordance with applicable standards referenced in Table 1701.1 and the
building code. Except for individual single-family dwelling units, materials
exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a flame-spread index of not more
than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 50, where tested in
accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.
      (3)    No vitrified clay pipe or fittings shall be used aboveground or
where pressurized by a pump or ejector. They shall be kept not less than 12
inches (305 mm) belowground.
      (4)   Copper or copper alloy tube for drainage and vent piping shall have
a weight of not less than that of copper or copper alloy drainage tube type
DWV.
      (5)   Stainless steel 304 pipe and fittings shall not be installed
underground and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground.
      (6)   Cast-iron soil pipe and fittings shall be listed and tested in
accordance with standards referenced in Table 1701.1. Such pipe and fittings
shall be marked with the country of origin and identification of the original
manufacturer in addition to markings required by referenced standards.
   701.4 Continuous Wastes. Continuous wastes and fixture tailpieces shall be
constructed from the materials specified in Section 701.2 for drainage piping,
provided, however, that such connections where exposed or accessible shall be
permitted to be of seamless drawn brass not less than No. 20 B & S Gauge (0.032
inches) (0.8 mm) tubular PVC or tubular ABS.
   703.1 Minimum Size. The minimum sizes of vertical, horizontal, or both
drainage piping shall be determined from the total of fixture units connected
thereto, and additionally, in the case of vertical drainage pipes, in
accordance with their length.
   Underground drains are required to be a minimum of 2 inches inside diameter.
TABLE 703.2
MAXIMUM UNIT LOADING AND MAXIMUM LENGTH OF DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7224.png]
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
   Notes:
   1    Excluding trap arm.
   2    Except sinks, urinals, and dishwashers—exceeding 1 fixture unit.
   3    Except six-unit traps or water closets.
   4    Only four water closets or six-unit traps allowed on a vertical pipe or
stack; and not to exceed three water closets or six-unit traps on a horizontal
branch or drain.
   5    Based on 1/4 inch per foot (20.8 mm/m) slope. For 1/8 of an inch per
foot (10.4 mm/m) slope, multiply horizontal fixture units by a factor of 0.8.
   6    The diameter of an individual vent shall be not less than 1 1/4 inches
(32 mm) nor less than one-half the diameter of the drain to which it is
connected. Fixture unit load values for drainage and vent piping shall be
computed from Table 702.1 and Table 702.2(2). Where vents are increased one
pipe size for their entire length, the maximum length limitations specified in
this table do not apply. This table is in accordance with the requirements of
Section 901.3.
   705.5.2 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement joints for PVC pipe and
fittings shall be clean from dirt and moisture. Pipe shall be cut square and
pipe shall be deburred. Where surfaces to be joined are cleaned and free of
dirt, moisture, oil, and other foreign material, apply primer purple or un-
purple in color in accordance with ASTM F656. Primer shall be applied until the
surface of the pipe and fitting is softened. Solvent cements in accordance with
ASTM D2564 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. Joints shall be made while
both the inside socket surface and outside surface of pipe are wet with solvent
cement. Hold joint in place and undisturbed for one minute after assembly.
   All underground PVC piping must be provided with a purple primer.
   706.1 Approved Fittings. Changes in direction of drainage piping shall be
made by the appropriate use of approved fittings and shall be of the angles
presented by a one-sixteenth bend, one-eighth bend, or one-sixth bend, or other
approved fittings of equivalent sweep.
      Exception: One-quarter (1/4) bends may be used on individual fixture
drains, horizontal to vertical changes in direction of drainage piping, and
vertical to horizontal changes in directions for more than one fixture.
   707.4 Location. Each horizontal drainage pipe shall be provided with a
cleanout at its upper terminal, and each run of piping that is more than 100
feet (30,480 mm) in total developed length shall be provided with a cleanout
for each 100 feet (30,480 mm), or fraction thereof, in length of such piping.
An additional cleanout shall be provided in a drainage line for each aggregate
horizontal change in direction exceeding 135 degrees (2.36 rad). A cleanout
shall be installed above the fixture connection fitting, serving each urinal,
regardless of the location of the urinal in the building.
      Exceptions:
      (1)   Cleanouts shall be permitted to be omitted on a horizontal drain
line less than 5 feet (1,524 mm) in length unless such line is serving sinks or
urinals.
      (2)   Cleanouts shall be permitted to be omitted on a horizontal drainage
pipe installed on a slope of 72 degrees (1.26 rad) or less from the vertical
angle (one-fifth bend).
      (3)   Excepting the building drain, its horizontal branches, and urinals,
a cleanout shall not be required on a pipe or piping that is above the floor
level of the lowest floor of the building.
      (4)   An approved type of two-way cleanout fitting, installed inside the
building wall near the connection between the building drain and the building
sewer or installed outside of a building at the lower end of a building drain
and extended to grade, shall be permitted to be substituted for an upper
terminal cleanout.
      (5)   Where the piping is concealed, a fixture trap or a fixture with
integral trap, readily removable without disturbing concealed roughing work,
shall be accepted as a cleanout equivalent.
   710.1 Backflow Protection. Whenever required by the administrative
authority, fixtures installed on a floor level that is lower than the next
upstream manhole cover of the public or private sewer shall be protected from
backflow of sewage by installing an approved type of backwater valve. Fixtures
on such floor level that are not below the next upstream manhole cover shall
not be required to be protected by a backwater valve. Fixtures on floor levels
above such elevation shall not discharge through the backwater valve. Cleanouts
for drains that pass through a backwater valve shall be clearly identified with
a permanent label stating "backwater valve downstream."
   710.3 Sewage Ejector and Pumps. A sewage ejector or sewage pump receiving
the discharge of water closets or urinals:
      (1)   Shall have a discharge capacity of not less than 20 gpm (1.26 L/s).
      (2)   In single dwelling units, the ejector or pump shall be capable of
passing a 1 1/2-inch (38 mm) diameter solid ball, and the discharge piping of
each ejector or pump shall have a backwater valve and be not less than 2 inches
(50 mm) in diameter.
      (3)   In other than single-dwelling units, the ejector or pump shall be
capable of passing a 2-inch (51 mm) diameter solid ball, and the discharge
piping of each ejector or pump shall have a backwater valve and full port valve
and be not less than 3 inches (80 mm) in diameter.
   710.14 Subsoil drainage systems. When subsoil drainage systems are
installed, such systems shall be discharged into an approved sump or receiving
tank and shall be discharged in a manner satisfactory to the Authority Having
Jurisdiction.
   The sump pit shall be at least 15 inches (381 mm) in diameter, 18 inches
(457 mm) in depth, and provided with a fitted cover. A one and one-half-inch
(38 mm) diameter rigid line within 36 inches (914 mm) of the sump pit shall be
installed with the opposite end terminating to the outside.
   712.1 Media. The piping of the plumbing, drainage, and venting systems shall
be tested with water or air. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be
permitted to require the removal of cleanouts, etc., to ascertain whether the
pressure has reached all parts of the system.
   Where the administrative authority, due to practical difficulties or
hardships, finds that a water or air test cannot be performed, a smoke or
peppermint test shall be substituted in lieu thereof. A smoke test shall be
made by introducing into the entire system a pungent, thick smoke proceeded by
one or more smoke machines. When the smoke appears at stack openings on the
roof, they shall be closed and at a pressure equivalent to a 1-inch water
column shall be developed and maintained for the period of the inspection. A
peppermint test shall be conducted by the introduction of two ounces of oil of
peppermint into the roof terminal of every line or stack to be tested. The oil
of peppermint shall be followed at once by 10 quarts of hot water whereupon all
roof vent terminals shall be sealed. A positive test which reveals leakage
shall be the detection of the odor of peppermint at any trap or other point on
the system. Oil of peppermint or persons whose person or clothes have come in
contact with oil of peppermint shall be excluded from the test area.
   713.6 Lot. On every lot or premises hereafter connected to a public sewer,
plumbing and drainage systems or parts thereof on such lot or premises shall be
connected with such public sewer where the public sewer is within 200 feet of
the structure.
   801.4 Bar and Fountain Sink Traps. Where the sink in a bar, soda fountain,
or counter is so located that the trap serving the sink cannot be vented, the
sink drain shall discharge through an air gap or air break (see Section
801.3.3) into an approved receptor that is vented. The developed length from
the fixture outlet to the receptor shall not exceed 15 feet (4,572 mm).
   801.7 Drip or Drainage Outlets. Appliances, devices, or apparatus not
regularly classified as plumbing fixtures, but which have drip or drainage
outlets, shall be permitted to be drained by indirect waste pipes discharging
into an open receptor through either an air gap or air break (see Section
801.3.1).
   Drip pans shall be installed under storage-type water heaters to prevent
tank leakage from causing property damage.
      Exceptions:
      1.   The lowest level of buildings provided that the floor is concrete or
other material that will not be damaged or deteriorated by water leakage by the
tank;
      2.    Crawl spaces;
      3.   Spaces having floor drainage that will collect leakage from the
tank; and
      4.   Locations where tank leakage will damage the building or its
contents.
   Drip pans shall be watertight and constructed of corrosive-resistant
materials. Metallic pans shall be 24 gauge minimum. Nonmetallic pans shall be
.0625-inch minimum thickness. Pans shall be not less than 1 1/2 inches deep and
shall be of sufficient size to hold the heater without interfering with drain
valves, burners, controls, and any required access. High-impact plastic pans
shall be permitted under gas-fired water heaters where the heater is listed for
zero clearance for combustible floors and the application is recommended by the
pan manufacturer. Drip pans shall have drain outlets not less than 1 inch size,
with indirect drain pipes extending to an approved point of discharge.
   807.3 Domestic Dishwashing Machine. The discharge from a residential kitchen
sink and dishwasher may discharge through a single 1 1/2-inch trap. The
discharge line from the dishwasher shall be not less than 1/2-inch nominal size
and shall either be looped up and securely fastened to the underside of the
counter or be connected to a deck-mounted dishwasher air gap fitting. The
discharge shall then be connected to a wye fitting between the sink waste
outlet and the trap inlet or to the disposal.
   811.5 Permanent Record. Not adopted by city.
   903.1 Applicable Standards. Vent pipe and fittings shall comply with the
applicable standards referenced in Table 701.2, except that:
      (1)   No galvanized steel or 304 stainless steel pipe shall be installed
underground and shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground.
      (2)   ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be in accordance with
the applicable standards referenced in the Building Code, Residential Code, and
Table 1701.1, and Chapter 14 "Firestop Protection." Except for individual
single-family dwelling units, materials exposed within ducts or plenums shall
have a flame-spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of
not more than 50 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.
   904.2 Length. Not adopted by the city.
   906.7 Frost or Snow Closure. Each vent extension through a roof shall be at
least 3 inches in diameter except kitchen sink vents in single-family
dwellings, which shall be at least 2 inches in diameter. The change in diameter
shall be made inside the building at least 1 foot below the roof with an
approved fitting.
   909.1 General. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed
in above the floor and shall be permitted to be vented by extending the vent as
high as possible, but not less than the drain board height and then returning
it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately
downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected
to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be
provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye
branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and
then through the roof to the open air, or shall be permitted to be connected to
other vents at a point not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood-level
rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on the vent below
the floor level, and a slope of not less than 1/4 inch per foot (20.8 mm/m)
back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain
board shall be a one piece fitting or an assembly of a 45-degree (0.79 rad), a
90-degree (1.57 rad), and a 45-degree (0.79 rad) elbow in the order named. Pipe
sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this code. The island sink drain,
upstream of the returned vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible
cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent.
   Alternate island sink installations require a minimum of a 3-inch diameter
drain undiminished in size which shall rise up through the sink cabinet and
capped off as high as possible. The vent shall connect no further than 15 feet
from the vertical section of the drain and shall be a minimum of 1 1/2 inches
in diameter. A 3- x 3- x 1 1/2-inch sanitary tee is required for connection to
the trap.
   910.1 Where Permitted. Combination waste and vent systems shall be permitted
where structural conditions preclude the installation of conventional systems
as otherwise prescribed by this code.
      Exception: In single-family dwellings, the maximum length for a floor
drain connected to a uniformly sized building drain vented on both the upstream
and downstream side of the connection to the floor drain is 15 feet. The
minimum trap seal shall be 4 inches.
   1003.1 General Requirements. Each trap, except for traps within an
interceptor or similar device, shall be self-cleaning. Traps for bathtubs,
showers, lavatories, sinks, laundry tubs, floor drains, urinals, drinking
fountains, dental units, and similar fixtures shall be of standard design,
weight, and shall be of ABS, cast-brass, cast-iron, lead, PP, PVC, or other
approved material. An exposed and readily accessible drawn-copper alloy tubing
trap, not less than 20 B&S Gauge (0.045 inch) (1.143 mm), shall be permitted to
be used on fixtures discharging domestic sewage.
      Exception: Drawn-copper alloy tubing traps shall not be used for urinals.
Each trap shall have the manufacturer's name stamped legibly in the metal of
the trap, and each tubing trap shall have the gauge of the tubing in addition
to the manufacturer's name. A trap shall have a smooth and uniform interior
waterway.
   1003.2 Slip Joint Fittings. A maximum of one approved slip joint fitting
shall be permitted to be used on the outlet side of a trap, and no tubing trap
shall be installed without a listed tubing trap adapter. Listed plastic trap
adapters shall be permitted to be used to connect listed metal tubing traps.
Slip joint extensions with 45-degree slip joint offsets are allowed.
   1003.3 Size. The size (nominal diameter) of a trap for a given fixture shall
be sufficient to drain the fixture rapidly, but in no case less than nor more
than one pipe size larger than given in Table 702.1.
   1016.3 Construction and Size. Sand interceptors shall be built of brick or
concrete, prefabricated coated steel, or other watertight material. The
interceptor shall have an interior baffle for full separation of the
interceptor into two sections. The outlet pipe shall be the same size as the
inlet pipe of the sand interceptor, the minimum being 3 inches (80 mm), and the
baffle shall have two openings of the same diameter as the outlet pipe and at
the same invert as the outlet pipe. These openings shall be staggered so that
there cannot be a straight line flow between the inlet pipe and the outlet
pipe. The invert of the inlet pipe shall be no lower than the invert of the
outlet pipe.
   The sand interceptor shall have a minimum dimension of 2 square feet (0.2
m2) for the net free opening of the inlet section and a minimum depth under the
invert of the outlet pipe of 2 feet (610 mm).
   For each 5 gpm (0.3 L/s) flow or fraction thereof over 20 gpm (1.26 L/s),
the area of the sand interceptor inlet section is to be increased by 1 square
foot (0.09 m2). The outlet section shall at all times have a minimum area of 50
percent of the inlet section.
   The outlet section shall be covered by a solid removable cover, set flush
with the finished floor, and the inlet section shall have an open grating, set
flush with the finished floor and suitable for the traffic in the area in which
it is located.
   Floor drains in garages serving dwelling units for parking purposes that are
connected to a building sanitary sewer shall have a means of collecting
sediment and shall be provided with a water trap seal.
   1018.0 Combination Sand and Oil Separator
   1018.1 The following illustration provides minimum dimensions for a
combination oil and sand interceptor which are required where floor
   drains are provided in commercial open and closed parking garages, motor
vehicle repair garages, or other uses deemed necessary by the Authority Having
Jurisdiction to protect the sanitary sewer system. Piping serving a sand and
oil separator shall be a minimum of 3 inches in diameter. The sewer side of the
trap is required to be sealed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7227.png]
   1101.4 Material Uses. Pipe, tube, and fittings conveying rainwater shall be
of such materials and design as to perform their intended function to the
satisfaction of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Conductors within a vent or
shaft shall be of cast-iron, galvanized steel, wrought iron, copper, copper
alloy, lead, Schedule 40 ABS DWV, Schedule 40 PVC DWV, stainless steel 304 or
316L [stainless steel 304 pipe and fittings shall not be installed underground
and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground], or other
approved materials, and changes in direction shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Section 706.0. ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be
installed in accordance with the building code and Chapter 14 "Firestop
Protection." Except for individual single-family dwelling units, materials
exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a flame- spread index of not more
than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 50, where tested in
accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.
   1101.15 Traps on Storm Drains and Leaders. Leaders and storm drains are
required to be attached to the storm drain or shall be discharged to the
outside.
   1101.15.1 Where Not Required. Not adopted by the city.
   1101.15.2 Trap Size. Not adopted by the city.
   1101.15.3 Method of Installation of Combined Sewer. Not adopted by the city.
   1101.16.2 Combining Storm with Sanitary Drainage. The sanitary and storm
drainage system of a building shall be entirely separate.
   1106.2 Methods of Testing Storm Drainage Systems. Except for outside leaders
and perforated or open-jointed drain tile, the piping of storm drain systems
shall be tested upon completion of the rough piping installation by water or
air and proved tight. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to
require the removal of cleanout plugs to ascertain whether the pressure has
reached parts of the system. One of the following test methods shall be used in
accordance with Section 1106.2.1 through Section 1106.2.3.
   1208.2 Provision for Location of Point of Delivery. The location of the
point of delivery shall be acceptable to the serving gas supplier. [NFPA 54:
5.2]
   The piping located on the exterior extending from the gas meter to the
inside of the structure shall be a metallic pipe in compliance with Section
1209.5.2. The entrance into the structure shall be provided with the
appropriate transition flange where an alternate gas piping material is
utilized on the inside of the structure.
   1210.2.3.1 Gas Piping Located on a Roof. All outside gas piping located on a
roof must be black iron pipe.
Table C304.2
Building Drains and Building Sewers1
                       Maximum Number of Drainage Fixture Units for Sanitary
Diameter of Pipe, in.  Building Drains and Runouts From Stacks
(mm)                   Slope, in./ft (mm/m)
                       1/16 (5.2) 1/8 (10.4) 1/4 (20.8) 1/2 (41.6)
                       Maximum Number of Drainage Fixture Units for Sanitary
Diameter of Pipe, in.  Building Drains and Runouts From Stacks
(mm)                   Slope, in./ft (mm/m)
                       1/16 (5.2) 1/8 (10.4) 1/4 (20.8) 1/2 (41.6)
2     (50)                                   21         26
2 1/2 (65)                                   24         31
3     (80)                                   422        502
4     (100)                       180        216        250
5     (125)                       390        480        575
6     (150)                       700        840        1,000
8     (200)            1,400      1,600      1,920      2,300
10    (250)            2,500      2,900      3,500      4,200
12    (300)            2,900      4,600      5,600      6,700
15    (380)            7,000      8,300      10,000     12,000
 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 inch per foot = 83.3 mm/m
   Notes:
   1.    On-site sewers that serve more than one building shall be permitted to
be sized according to the current standards and specifications of the
administrative authority for public sewers.
   2.   A maximum of two water closets or two bathroom groups, except in
single-family dwellings, where a maximum of three water closets or three
bathroom groups shall be permitted to be installed.
TABLE C 401.1 SIZE AND LENGTH OF VENTS of APPENDIX C. Not adopted by the city.
(Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017; Ord. 33-19, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 75-21, passed
7-6-2021; Ord. 93-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 150.303 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPRENTICE PLUMBER. A person who is learning the plumbing trade under the
supervision of a master plumber or journeyman plumber and is registered with
the city.
   EMPLOYEE. A person whose compensation for plumbing work is reported by the
employer on an Internal Revenue Service W-2 Form and is also otherwise
considered an employee under applicable laws.
   INACTIVE MASTER PLUMBER. A person who is licensed by the city as a master
plumber, but has not been designated as a master plumber for a plumbing
contractor and who may be issued upon request an inactive plumbing contractors
license.
   JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER. A person who has the necessary qualifications, training,
experience and technical knowledge to do plumbing installations in accordance
with the standard rules and regulations governing the installations and who is
licensed by the city and the State Plumbing Commission.
   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION CONTRACTOR. A person who engages in the business or
trade of installing, altering, repairing, relocating, replacing or adding to
irrigation systems inside or outside a building.
   MASTER PLUMBER. A person who undertakes or offers to undertake, to plan for,
lay out or install or make additions, alterations or repairs in the
installation of plumbing and irrigation systems or equipment with or without
compensation and who is licensed by the city and the State Plumbing Commission.
   OWNER. A natural person who physically performs plumbing work on the
premises the person owns and actually occupies as a resident or owns and will
occupy as a residence upon completion of construction.
   PLUMBING WORK. Installing, altering, repairing, planning, laying out of
plumbing systems or equipment.
(1992 Code, § 33-3) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 118-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 25-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 43-05, passed
4-18-2005; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.304 LICENSES.
   (a)   Master plumber. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall
install, alter, repair, plan, layout or supervise the installing, altering or
repairing of plumbing systems or equipment unless the person is:
      (1)   Licensed by the city as a master plumber; and
      (2)   The plumbing work is for a licensed master plumber and the person
is journeyman or apprentice plumber.
   (b)   Journeyman plumber. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall perform plumbing work unless the person is:
      (1)   Licensed by the city as a journeyman plumber; and
      (2)   The plumbing work is for a licensed master plumber and the person
is an employee, partner or officer of the master plumber and the work performed
is under the supervision of the master plumber.
   (c)   Inactive master plumber. Existing master plumbers, after paying the
appropriate fee, may be issued an inactive plumbing contractors license. At a
time as a person holding an inactive license desires to change to an active
contractors license, that person shall pay the appropriate fee and hold a state
contractors license.
   (d)   Landscape irrigation contractor. Except as otherwise provided in this
code, no person shall install irrigation systems without first obtaining a
landscape irrigation contractor license from the city.
(1992 Code, § 33-4) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 25-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 11-17, passed
1-10-2017)
§ 150.305 REGISTRATIONS.
   Apprentice plumbers. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall
perform plumbing work unless the person is:
   (a)   Registered by the city as an apprentice plumber; and
   (b)   The plumbing work is for a licensed master plumber and the person is
an employee, partner or officer of the licensed master plumber and the work is
performed in the presence of a master plumber and/or journeyman plumber also
employed by the person’s employer.
(1992 Code, § 33-5) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.306 LICENSE USE RESTRICTED.
   No licensed master plumber or landscape irrigation contractor shall allow
his or her name to be used by any other person directly or indirectly, either
to obtain a permit for the installation of any plumbing work or to install any
system or equipment.
(1992 Code, § 33-6) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.307 BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   As a condition of a license, each master plumber, each manufactured
and mobile home plumbing installation contractor, and each landscape irrigation
contractor shall give and maintain a surety bond in the penal sum of $10,000 in
a form approved by the city. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
and lawful performance of all plumbing work entered upon by the contractor
within the city and for compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. The
bond shall be in lieu of all other license bonds to any political subdivision
or government agency. The bond shall be written by a corporate surety licensed
to do business in the state.
   (b)   Claims upon the bond may be filed by any person damaged by reason of
the principal’s failure to perform his or her obligation under the bond.
   (c)   Suspension or revocation of the license of the principal shall not by
itself affect the liability of either the principal or the surety on the bond.
   (d)   Claims upon the bond may be filed by any person damaged by reason of
the principal’s failure to perform his or her obligation under the bond.
   (e)   Suspension or revocation of the license of the principal shall not by
itself affect the liability of either the principal or the surety on the bond.
(1992 Code, § 33-7) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 118-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 11-17,
passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.308 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any vehicle used by a contractor while performing plumbing work for which a
license is required shall have the contractor’s business name and city license
numbers as they appear on the license in contrasting color with characters one
and one-half-inch high by one and one-half-inch wide affixed to each side of
the vehicle.
(1992 Code, § 33-8) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.309 LICENSE AND REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to engage in the business of plumbing who is
contracting as a master plumber, journeyman plumber or landscape irrigation
contractor shall first make an application for a license therefor to the
administrative authority on forms furnished.
   (b)   Any person hired as an apprentice plumber under the supervision of a
master or journeyman plumber shall first make an application for registration
therefor to the administrative authority on forms furnished.
(1992 Code, § 33-9) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 43-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.310 LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
biennially beginning on December 31, 1995. All renewal fees shall be paid prior
to the expiration of the license.
   (b)   Any person who shall fail to renew a license within 60 days after it
has lapsed shall pay in addition to the license fee a reinstatement fee equal
to 50% of the renewal fee.
   (c)   Licenses not renewed within one year of the date of expiration shall
not be renewed until the applicant has submitted and passed the examination and
paid all fees required for a new license.
(1992 Code, § 33-10) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.311 EXAMINATION.
   (a)   Before a master plumber and journeyman license shall be issued, the
applicant shall be required to submit to and pass an examination as to his or
her qualifications and fitness to install plumbing systems and equipment. The
examination shall be given under the direction of the plumbing board of appeals
and examiners. Any applicant who fails to pass the examination shall not be
eligible to take another examination until at least 30 days have elapsed from
the date of the last examination.
   (b)   Applications for exams shall be made at least two weeks prior to the
examination date. The examination must be completed within 90 days of the
application submittal date. Failure to complete the examination within 90 days
shall result in the forfeiture of the examination application fee and the
application will be deemed null and void.
   (c)   After passing the examination, applicants shall secure the license
within 90 days after receiving the exam results.
(1992 Code, § 33-11) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 11-17,
passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.312 INSTALLATION BY OWNER.
   (a)   Owners may install plumbing systems or equipment on the premises of a
single-family residence which they occupy or will occupy as their own home. All
equipment installed by the owner shall be for the owner without compensation
from or to any other persons for labor or installation except a qualified city
licensed plumber. Installation by an owner shall comply with the requirements
of this Code. The owner shall file plans, apply for and secure a permit, pay
fees, and call for all inspections in the manner provided in this Code.
   (b)   After the work has been commenced, the owner shall make arrangements
for the plumbing inspector to inspect the installation. Failure to arrange for
an inspection shall cause the permit to expire by limitation and become null
and void and the work shall be presumed unsafe.
   (c)   All homeowner permits shall expire and become null and void if the
work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date
of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the permit is commenced for a period of 180 days,
and all work which has not received a final inspection shall be presumed
unsafe.
(1992 Code, § 33-12) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 114-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 118-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 43-05,
passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 130-15, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.313 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The chief building services official may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew
a license if he or she finds:
   (a)   In his or her discretion that the order is in the public interest; and
   (b)   Based upon substantial evidence presented, the applicant, or licensee:
      (1)   Has violated any applicable provision of this Code, city ordinance,
rule, regulation or state law;
      (2)   Has engaged in any fraudulent, deceptive or dishonest act or
practice;
      (3)   Has filed an application for a license which is incomplete in any
material respect or contains statements which are false or misleading;
      (4)   Fails to file with the chief building services official the
necessary bonds or certificates of insurance;
      (5)   Fails to provide copies of records in the person’s possession
related to a matter under investigation;
      (6)   Fails to pay inspection and permit fees in a timely manner as
determined by the chief building services official;
      (7)   Fails to respond to a directive or lawful order of the building
official; and
      (8)   Fails to employ a master plumber.
(1992 Code, § 33-13) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 114-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 118-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 105-08,
passed 8-18-2008; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.314 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL OF LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL TO
RENEW.
   (a)   A party whose license is suspended, revoked or refused renewal may
appeal that decision to the plumbing board of appeals and examiners.
   (b)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a written appeal with the
department within ten days of the decision. The appeal shall include a
statement of the action complained of, why the action should be modified or
rescinded, whether the appellant desires an open or closed hearing, and an
address where the appeal any can be mailed notice of hearings. The department
shall immediately deliver a copy of the appeal to the city attorney who will
act as legal counsel for the board.
(1992 Code, § 33-14) (Ord. 77-95, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 114-96, passed 10-7-
1996; Ord. 16-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 118-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 11-17,
passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.315 TIME OF HEARING AND NOTICE.
   A public hearing, or a closed hearing if the board determines it is
necessary, shall be held on all appeals within 15 working days after the filing
of the appeal, unless a later date is agreed upon by the appellant and the
board. The department shall cause written notice of the date, time and place of
the hearing to be served upon the appellant by personal service or certified
mail to the address set forth in the appeal at least five days before the
hearing date.
(1992 Code, § 33-15) (Ord. 114-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-
2017)
§ 150.316 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The following rules shall govern the procedures for an administrative
hearing on matters concerning license suspension, revocation or refusal to
renew.
   (a)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according to
the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (b)   Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
   (c)   The chairperson of the board or the board recorder shall administer
oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
   (d)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of the evidence after objection in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
   (e)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence that lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
   (f)   The appellant, the major organization unit or agency, and any other
party to an appeal shall have these rights among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      (3)   To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
      (4)   To rebut evidence.
   (g)   After each appeal hearing, the board or hearing examiner shall perform
the following:
      (1)   Make written findings of fact; and
      (2)   Based upon the written findings, sustain, remand for further
hearing or action, or rescind the complained action or decision. The board may
in its discretion waive the payment of any reinstatement or late penalty fee.
   (h)   A written report of the decision, including the findings of fact,
shall be furnished to the appellant and the chief building services official
within 15 working days from the date the appeal hearing is closed. The city and
the appellant shall bear their own respective costs of the appeal proceeding.
The decision of the board shall be final.
(1992 Code, § 33-16) (Ord. 114-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 105-08, passed 8-18-
2008; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 150.317 APPEAL TO CIRCUIT COURT.
   The decision of the board or the hearing examiner is subject to judicial
review as provided by law.
(1992 Code, § 33-17) (Ord. 114-96, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 30-07, passed 2-20-
2007; Ord. 11-17, passed 1-10-2017)
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
§ 150.401 ADOPTED.
   (a)   The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 edition, as
published by the International Code Council Inc., and amendments and additions
thereto as provided in this subchapter, are hereby adopted as the swimming pool
and spa code by the city for regulating and governing the design, construction,
alteration, repair, and maintenance of swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, and
aquatic facilities, as herein provided and provides for the issuance of permits
and the collection of fees therefor.
   (b)   The adoption of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021
edition, will become effective January 1, 2022. The minimum building standards
in the 2021 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code and
amendments thereto shall be applied to any building permit issued after
December 31, 2021.
   (c)   The city shall publish this ordinance, without attachments, after its
passage. The attachments are on file and available for inspection at the office
of the city clerk.
(Ord. 142-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.402 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   The following sections and subsections of the swimming pool and spa code
adopted in this subchapter shall be amended, added, or deleted as follows. All
other sections or subsections of the 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code shall remain the same.
   [A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the swimming pool and
spa code of the city of Sioux Falls, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   [A] 102.7 Application of the International Codes. Where the International
Residential Code is referenced in this code, the provisions of the
International Residential Code shall apply to related systems in detached one-
and two-family dwellings and town houses not more than three stories in height.
Other related systems shall comply with the applicable International Code,
National Electric Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, or referenced standard.
   [A] 103.1 Creation of agency. Building services is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The function of
the agency shall be in the implementation, administration, and enforcement of
the provisions of this code.
   [A] 103.2 Appointment. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 104.8 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals, or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered civilly or criminally liable personally and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties.
   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or the city be held as assuming any such liability
by reason of the inspection authorized by this code or any permits or
certificates issued under this code.
   [A] 104.8.1 Legal defenses. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted
against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be afforded all the protection provided by the city's insurance pool
and immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws
and shall be defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
   [A] 104.11 Alternative materials, design, and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any design or material or to prohibit any method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such
alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design, or method of
construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this
code, and that the material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose
intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in
quality, strength, effectiveness, durability, and safety.
   [A] 104.12.4 Construction documents. The registered design professional
shall submit to the code official one complete set of signed and sealed
construction documents in an electronic submittal in PDF format for the
alternative engineered design.
   [A] 104.12.5 Design approval. Where the code official determines that the
alternative engineered design conforms to the intent of this code, the system
shall be approved. If the alternative engineered design is not approved, the
code official shall notify the registered design professional, stating the
reasons why the alternative was not approved.
   [A] 105.4.1 Approved construction documents. When the code official issues
the permit where construction documents are required, the construction
documents shall be retained by the building official and be considered as
approved. Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified,
or altered without authorization from the code official. Work shall be done in
accordance with the approved construction documents.
   The code official shall have the authority to issue a permit for the
construction of a part of a system before the entire construction documents for
the whole system have been submitted or approved, provided that adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent
requirements of this code. The holders of such permit shall proceed at their
own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire system will be
granted.
   [A] 106.1 Construction documents. Construction documents, engineering
calculations, diagrams, and other such data shall be submitted electronically
in PDF format with each application for a permit. The code official shall
require construction documents, computations, and specifications to be prepared
and designed by a registered design professional where required by state law.
Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work proposed and
show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of this code.
   [A] 106.2 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved
construction documents shall be retained by the code official for a period of
not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as
required by state or local laws.
   [A] 108.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fees for work shall be as indicated
in Table No. 1-A Residential Building Permit Fees or Table No. 1-B as indicated
in Section [A] 109.2 of the adopted International Building Code §
150.015.
   [A] 108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences
any work on a mechanical system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a fee as established by the code official that shall be in addition
to the required permit fees. Administrative citations and legal and/or civil
proceedings may also be commenced.
   [A] R108.7 Delinquent accounts. The administrative authority may refuse to
issue permits or conduct inspections for any person or business whose account
is delinquent.
   [A] 111.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions,
or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, to review all proposed changes to the respective
codes and to submit recommendations to the responsible official and the city
council, to examine applicants for licensing, and to investigate matters
brought before the board, there shall be and is hereby created a board of
appeals and examiners. The building official shall be an ex officio member of
said board but shall not have a vote on any matter before the board. Members
shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall
hold office for a term of three years. The board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its business, and shall render decisions and findings in writing
to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
   [A] 112.1 Membership of board. Not adopted by the city.
   [A] 113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the code official shall request the legal counsel of
the jurisdiction to deem the violation as a strict liability offense and
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful pool or spa in violation of the provisions of this code or of the
order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   [A] 113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair a pool or spa in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of an ordinance violation and be subject to administrative citations through
the code enforcement process.
   Section 202 Definitions. Add the following definitions:
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or
failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   302.1 Electrical. Electrical requirements for aquatic facilities shall be in
accordance with NFPA 70, as applicable in accordance with Section 102.7.1.
      Exception: Internal wiring for portable residential spas and portable
residential exercise spas.
   302.2 Water service and drainage. Piping and fittings used for water
service, makeup, and drainage piping for pools and spas shall comply with the
Uniform Plumbing Code. Fittings shall be approved for installation with the
piping installed.
   302.5 Backflow protection. Water supplies for pools and spas shall be
protected against backflow in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, as
applicable in accordance with Section 102.7.1.
   302.6 Wastewater discharge. Where wastewater from pools or spas, such as
backwash water from filters and water from deck drains discharge to a building
drainage system, the connection shall be through an air gap in accordance with
the Uniform Plumbing Code as applicable in accordance with Section 102.7.1.
   SECTION 303 ENERGY. Not adopted by the city
   305.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of
barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. Where spas or
hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346,
the areas where those spas or hot tubs are located shall not be required to
comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7.
   306.9.1 Hose bibbs. Hose bibbs shall be provided for rinsing down the entire
deck and shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, as
applicable in accordance with
   Section 102.7.1, and shall be located not greater than 150 feet (45,720 mm)
apart. Water-powered devices, such as water-powered lifts, shall have a
dedicated hose bibb water source.
      Exception: Residential pools and spas shall not be required to have hose
bibbs located at 150 foot (45,720 mm) intervals, or have a dedicated hose bibb
for water-powered devices.
   410.1 Toilet facilities. Class A and B pools shall be provided with toilet
facilities having the required number of plumbing fixtures in accordance with
the International Building Code.
   609.1 General. Dressing and sanitary facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the International Building Code and
Sections 609.2 through 609.9.
   609.2 Number of fixtures. The minimum number of required water closets,
urinals, lavatory, and drinking fountain fixtures shall be provided as required
by the International Building Code, and the dressing facilities and number of
cleansing and rinse showers shall be provided in accordance with Sections
609.2.1, 609.2.2, and 609.3.1.
(Ord. 142-21, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.999.
   (b)   Any person violating any provision of §§
150.155 through
150.161 or providing false information to the city shall be punished as
provided in the general penalty section, §
10.999, of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 11-106) (Ord. 112-03, passed 11-17-2003)
CHAPTER 151: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Legislative findings; purpose of chapter
Historic Preservation Commission
   
151.015   Created
   
151.016   Composition
   
151.017   Vacancies
   
151.018   Meetings
   
151.019   Powers and authorities
   
151.020   Acquisition of historic easements
Sioux Falls Register of Historic Landmarks
   
151.035   Created
   
151.036   Criteria for designation
   
151.037   Nomination of structures and districts to the register
   
151.038   Notification of nomination
   
151.039   Determination of the board
   
151.040   Notification of determination
   
151.041   Appeal
   
151.042   Action by city council
   
151.043   Demolition and house moving
   
151.044   Notice of intent to demolish or move
   
151.045   Delay of demolition or house moving
   
151.046   Moving structures into a historic district
   
151.047   Burning of structures
   
151.048   Properties designated and listed on register
   
151.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Historic preservation activities, see SDCL 1-19B-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   Whereas the legislature of the state has determined that the historical,
architectural, archaeological, paleontological and cultural heritage of this
state is among its most important assets, it is hereby declared to be the
purpose of this chapter to authorize the city to engage in a comprehensive
program of historic preservation, to promote the use and conservation of
historic properties for the education, inspiration, pleasure and enrichment of
the citizens of this city. The city adopts this chapter pursuant to the
authority of SDCL ch. 1-19B and by incorporating provisions therefrom in this
chapter.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-1) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 151.015 CREATED.
   Pursuant to authority granted to the city in SDCL 1-19B-2, there is hereby
created a historic preservation commission for the city. The historic
preservation commission will be referred to as the Sioux Falls board of
historic preservation, referred to in this subchapter as the board.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-7) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 21-87, passed 4-6-
1987)
§ 151.016 COMPOSITION.
   The board shall consist of not less than five nor more than ten members who
shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of three years with due regard to
proper representation of the fields as history, architecture, urban planning,
archaeology and law.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-8) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-
1999)
§ 151.017 VACANCIES.
   Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as for appointment.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-9) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.018 MEETINGS.
   The board shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. The board
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, which shall be of public record.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-10) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.019 POWERS AND AUTHORITIES.
   (a)   Pursuant to SDCL ch. 1-19B, the board may exercise the following
powers, duties and responsibilities to:
      (1)   Conduct a survey of local historic properties, complying with all
applicable standards and criteria of the statewide survey undertaken by the
State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) of the state department of tourism;
      (2)   Participate in the conduct of land use, urban renewal and other
planning processes undertaken by the city;
      (3)   Acquire fee and lesser interests in historic properties, including
adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest or donation;
      (4)   Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under
the ownership or control of the board;
      (5)   Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the properties within its jurisdiction;
      (6)   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic properties within its jurisdiction;
      (7)   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the
purposes of historic preservation to the city council;
      (8)   Establish an endowment fund for the purpose of providing low
interest loans and grants to allow for the restoration and preservation of
historic properties;
      (9)   Recommend to the board of appeals exemptions from the building code
relating to exterior features of structures designated by the city council as
having historical or architectural significance;
      (10)   Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation; and
      (11)   Contract, with the approval of the city council, with the state or
the federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other
organization.
   (b)   All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by
funds appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the city unless
otherwise provided by the city council. If acquired by funds other than those
appropriated by the city, the lands, buildings or structures may be held in the
name of the board, the city, or both.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-11) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 45-87, passed 6-22-
1987)
§ 151.020 ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC EASEMENTS.
   The city may acquire by purchase, donation or condemnation historic
easements in any area within its jurisdiction wherever and to the extent that
the city council determines that the acquisition will be in the public
interest. For the purpose of this section, HISTORIC EASEMENT means any easement
restriction, covenant or condition running with the land designated to
preserve, maintain or enhance all or part of the existing state of places of
historical, architectural, archaeological, paleontological or cultural
significance.
(1972 Code, § 19-1/2-11(6); 1992 Code, § 19.5-12)
SIOUX FALLS REGISTER OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS
§ 151.035 CREATED.
   Pursuant to SDCL 1-19B-53, the city hereby creates the Sioux Falls Register
of Historic Landmarks, hereinafter referred to as the local register.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-21) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.036 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION.
   The board of historic preservation shall, upon an investigation as it deems
necessary, make a determination as to whether a nominated historic property,
structure or area meets one or more of the following criteria:
   (a)   It is associated with events that have made a significant contribution
to the broad patterns of city history;
   (b)   Its identification with a person who significantly contributed to the
development of the community, county, state or country;
   (c)   Its embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction;
   (d)   It represents the work of a master or possesses high artistic values;
   (e)   It represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
   (f)   It has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-22) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.037 NOMINATION OF STRUCTURES AND DISTRICTS TO THE REGISTER.
   Nominations for inclusion on the local register shall be made to the board
of historic preservation on a form prepared by it and may be submitted by a
member of the board, owner of record of the nominated property or structure,
the city council or any other person or organization.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-23) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.038 NOTIFICATION OF NOMINATION.
   The board of historic preservation shall notify the owners of all property
nominated to the local register of historic places of the date on which the
board will hear the nomination. Notification will be at least 14 days prior to
the meeting. The city shall also publish a notice of the time and place of the
meeting in the official newspaper of the city at least one week prior to the
meeting.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-24) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.039 DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD.
   The board of historic preservation shall adopt by resolution a
recommendation that the structure, property or district nominated for inclusion
on the local register does or does not meet the criteria for designation
specified in §
151.036. The resolution will be accompanied by a report to the city council
containing an explanation of the significance of the nominated structure,
property or district as it relates to the criteria for designation.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-25) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.040 NOTIFICATION OF DETERMINATION.
   A notice of the determination shall be sent by regular mail to the owner of
record of all property nominated to the local register. The notice shall
include a copy of the report sent to the city council concerning the nomination
and shall be sent within seven days of the board’s adoption of a resolution. If
the decision is that the nominated property does meet the criteria for
designation, a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent to the city
council for official designation by ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-26) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.041 APPEAL.
   A determination by the board of historic preservation that the nominated
property does or does not meet the criteria for designation on the local
register shall be a final decision unless the applicant files a written appeal
to the city council with the city clerk within 20 days of the postmarked date
of the notice of determination.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-27) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 45-87, passed 6-22-
1987)
§ 151.042 ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The city council shall either reject the recommendation or written appeal or
they shall designate the property on the local register by ordinance within 60
days after receiving the resolution from the board of historic preservation or
the appeal from the owner. The council’s action shall occur at a regular city
council meeting at least one week after a notice has been published in the
official newspaper stating the time and place of the meeting.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-28) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.043 DEMOLITION AND HOUSE MOVING.
   Every application for a demolition permit or a house moving permit for a
property listed on the local register of historic places shall be forwarded to
the board of historic preservation within seven days following receipt of the
application by the planning and building services department.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-29) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
§ 151.044 NOTICE OF INTENT TO DEMOLISH OR MOVE.
   The owner of any structure on the local register of historic places, upon
application for a demolition or house moving permit, shall be required to post
four signs on the property stating the intent to demolish or move the
structure. The signs shall be provided by the planning and building services
department and shall be placed on the four corners of the property. The signs
must be posted within seven days of the date of application and must remain
posted for a minimum of 90 days unless the board of historic preservation
approves the demolition or removal prior to the expiration of the 90-day
period.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-30) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 45-87, passed 6-22-
1987)
§ 151.045 DELAY OF DEMOLITION OR HOUSE MOVING.
   A permit to demolish or move a structure which is on the local register may
not be obtained for a period of 90 days from the date the application is
received by the planning and building services department unless approval for
removal or demolition is given by the board of historic preservation at an
earlier date. During this period, the board may attempt to preserve the
property by exercising the powers and authorities given to the board in §
151.019.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-31) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 45-87, passed 6-22-
1987)
§ 151.046 MOVING STRUCTURES INTO A HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   Before a structure can be moved into a historic district, the procedure
described in §§
151.043 and
151.044 must be followed. If the structure proposed for the district does not
meet the approval of the board of historic preservation, a permit will not be
issued for 90 days from the date the application is received by the planning
and building services department. During this period, the board may negotiate
with the property owner to attempt to find a reasonable alternative for the
proposed structure.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-32) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 45-87, passed 6-22-
1987)
§ 151.047 BURNING OF STRUCTURES.
   Any contract entered into by the fire department for burning a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the city register must
receive the approval of the board of historic preservation.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-33) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986)
Cross-reference:
    Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
§ 151.048 PROPERTIES DESIGNATED AND LISTED ON REGISTER.
   (a)   The following properties have been reviewed by the board of historic
preservation and the board has determined that the properties do meet the
criteria for designation to the local register as specified in §
151.036.
   (b)   A report has been presented to the city council containing an
explanation of the significance of:
      (1)   Queen Bee Mill: Falls Park, North Weber Avenue;
      (2)   Carnegie Free Public Library: lots 1–3, block 8, J. L. Phillips
Addition;
      (3)   Schaetzel-Lyon House: the south 103 feet of the north 639 feet of
tract 1, northwest 1/4 of 21-101-49;
      (4)   Central Fire Station: 100 South Minnesota Avenue, J. N. Bailey
Subdivision of lots 1–3 and lots 1–4, block 4, J. L. Phillips Addition;
      (5)   City Coliseum: 501 North Main Avenue, Brookings and Edmunds, Block
29;
      (6)   City Hall: 224 West Ninth Street, J.L. Phillips, block 10, lots
1–9;
      (7)   R. F. Pettigrew Home: 131 North Duluth Avenue, Bennett’s First
Addition, block 15, lots 1, 2 and the north 1/4 of 3;
      (8)   Sherman Park Indian Burial Mounds: boulevard area of Upper Sherman
Park Road, as located in tracts 9 and 10 of southwest 1/4 of 19-101-49 and
northwest 1/4, except northeast 1/4, northwest 1/4, northwest 1/4 of 19-101-49;
      (9)   Terrace Park Japanese Gardens: Fourth Street and Grange Avenue, as
located in the southwest 1/4, northeast 1/4, northwest 1/4 of 17-101-49;
      (10)   Penmarch Place: Rural Route 1, Box 142;
      (11)   McKennan Park Historic District:
         A.   105–731 East 21st Street;
         B.   1319–1635 South Second Avenue;
         C.   1310–1710 South Fourth Avenue;
         D.   1220 South Phillips Avenue; and
         E.   220 East 26th Street.
      (12)   Old Courthouse and Warehouse Historic District:
         A.   330–501 North Main Avenue;
         B.   333–501 North Phillips Avenue;
         C.   110 West Fifth Street;
         D.   200–220 West Sixth Street; and
         E.   196–206 East Sixth Street.
      (13)   All Saints Historic District:
         A.   619–1316 South Phillips Avenue;
         B.   600–1220 South First Avenue;
         C.   1100–1207 South Second Avenue;
         D.   1000–1207 South Third Avenue;
         E.   1101–1216 South Fourth Avenue;
         F.   1205 South Fifth Avenue;
         G.   131 West and 315 East 18th Street;
         H.   118 West–417 East 19th Street (except 406 and 410);
         I.   105–533 East 20th Street;
         J.   100 East 21st Street;
         K.   100–208 East 23rd Street;
         L.   All Saints School;
         M.   Longfellow School; and
         N.   The following item within Lyon Park: Civil War cannon.
      (14)   McKennan Park:
         A.   Pillars of the Nation monument located at the west entrance of
the park;
         B.   Sunken Gardens, including the stone wall and the fountain located
in the northeast section of the park;
         C.   Band shell located in the southwest section of the park;
         D.   Grand Army of the Republic Memorial Plaque;
         E.   World War I Memorial Tree Plaque; and
         F.   Curved sidewalk located in the northwest corner of the park. This
is the original sidewalk that led to the front door of the Melvin Grigsby and
Helen McKennan House.
      (15)   Sioux Falls (Cathedral) Historic District:
         A.   100–133 South Prairie Avenue;
         B.   101–330 North Prairie Avenue;
         C.   103–133 South Summit Avenue;
         D.   107–535 North Summit Avenue;
         E.   103–127 South Duluth Avenue;
         F.   109–519 North Duluth Avenue;
         G.   103–125 South Spring Avenue;
         H.   109–535 North Spring Avenue (west side only of North Spring
Avenue);
         I.   702 West Fifth Street;
         J.   609–700 West Sixth Street;
         K.   500–720 West Seventh Street;
         L.   516–732 West Eighth Street;
         M.   506–732 West Ninth Street; and
         N.   500–740 West Tenth Street (north side of West Tenth Street only).
      (16)   E. B. Meredith House: 1315 South Walts Avenue, Park Addition,
block 26, Meredith’s Subdivision of lots 4 and 5;
      (17)   Andrew O. Huseboe House: 223 South Prairie Avenue, Pettigrew
Addition, block 29, lot 9; and
      (18)   A portion of right-of-way located in the NE 1/4, SE 1/4 and SW 1/
4 of Section 9, Township 100 North, Range 50 West, also known as the Old
Yankton Road, more particularly described as follows:
The entire width of the right-of-way, beginning at the centerline of the
intersection of the Old Yankton Road and Ralph Rogers Road (previously platted
as Sixty-Fourth Street), and extending northeasterly 2,129.16 feet to the
northeast corner of Tract 2, Swift Park Addition.
   (c)   The above are hereby listed on the register of historic places.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-35) (Ord. 41-86, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. 42-86, passed 5-12-
1986; Ord. 92-86, passed 10-20-1986; Ord. 1-87, passed 1-5-1987; Ord. 35-87,
passed 5-26-1987; Ord. 38-87, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 48-87, passed 6-29-1987;
Ord. 97-87, passed 11-23-1987; Ord. 33-88, passed 5-9-1988; Ord. 11-93, passed
2-8-1993)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who demolishes or removes a structure listed on the local
register of historic places without following the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. Each and every day, up to 90 days,
the demolition and removal activity continues after notification shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1992 Code, § 19.5-34) (Ord. 14-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 45-87, passed 6-22-
1987)
CHAPTER 152: MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Definitions
Licensed Manufactured Home Parks
   
152.015   Duty of licensee and occupants
Licensed Manufactured Home Parks; License
   
152.030   Required; term, renewal, annual inspection and fee
   
152.031   Revocation or refusal
   
152.032   Transfer
Licensed Manufactured Home Parks; Permits and Inspections
   
152.045   Manufactured home placement permit
   
152.046   Detached accessory buildings and structures
   
152.047   Service buildings and equipment
   
152.048   Carports, cabanas, enclosed vestibules, canopies and decks
   
152.049   Work exempt from building code regulations
   
152.050   Inspections
Licensed Manufactured Home Parks; Park Standards
   
152.065   Placement of manufactured homes
   
152.066   Water supply
   
152.067   Waste disposal
   
152.068   Garbage disposal
   
152.069   Electricity
   
152.070   Fire protection
   
152.071   Park identification sign
   
152.072   Street and space numbering
Licensed Manufactured Home Parks; Administration and Enforcement
   
152.085   General
   
152.086   Placement permit revocation
   
152.087   Abandoned manufactured homes
   
152.088   Notice of removal of manufactured homes
   
152.089   Appeals
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Motor vehicles, see §§
73.001 through
73.007,
93.025 through
93.035
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Traffic code, see title VII
   Utilities, see title V
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate the use of house trailers, see SDCL 9-31-1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter will be known as the licensed manufactured home park ordinance
of Sioux Falls.
(1992 Code, § 24-1) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of the city through the regulation of the location, planning,
design, layout, construction and operation of licensed manufactured home parks
and manufactured homes. All licensed manufactured home parks established after
September 23, 1985, will be in conformity with this chapter. All existing
licensed manufactured home parks will follow these guidelines when increasing
or decreasing their size and whenever a manufactured home is added or
eliminated.
(1992 Code, § 24-2) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995)
§ 152.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The planning and building services department including the zoning
division.
   CABANA. A factory-built room enclosure erected or constructed attached to a
manufactured home for residential use by the occupants of a manufactured home.
   CODES. Any codes or other regulations that the city council or its
departments have adopted which include, but are not limited to, zoning code,
property maintenance code, fire code, health code, building and residential
code, plumbing code, mechanical and fuel gas code and electrical code. The
codes will be controlling when work is to be done in a given area where the
code is applicable.
   DATA PLATE. The data plate which verifies the following: manufacturer’s
name, trade/model name, year of manufacturer, serial number, HUD Construction
Code Label(s) and HUD construction zones. Per 1976 HUD regulation, this form is
to be affixed inside the home on or near the main electrical breaker box and is
printed on paper or foil stock eight and one-half inches by 11 inches to eight
and one-half inches by 14 inches in size.
   DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDING. An incidental freestanding building located on
the same lot which it serves and used solely for storage of personal equipment
and possessions of the manufactured home occupants.
   LICENSE. A licensed manufactured home park operator’s license.
   LICENSEE. The person to whom a manufactured home park license has been
granted.
   LICENSING ENTITY. The city council.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more
sections at a location other than the home site by assembly line-type
production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site
manufacturing process. A MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME is designed to be towed
on its own chassis or be site delivered by alternative means. Every section
shall bear a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. For manufactured homes
built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to the Standard for
Manufactured Homes, NFPA 501, ANSI 119.1, in effect at the time of manufacture
is required.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, LICENSED. A contiguous parcel of land, under the
same ownership where lots are rented for the temporary placement of
manufactured homes, with all necessary facilities and services, and is licensed
by the city.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A parcel of land designated and approved for the
placement of a single manufactured home.
   PARK OCCUPANT. A person living in a manufactured home located in a licensed
manufactured home park.
   PARK OPERATOR. The person to whom a manufactured home park license has been
issued or who is managing the licensed manufactured home park for someone who
has been issued a license.
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. Sections
150.095 and
150.096 of this Code, also known as the adopted International Property
Maintenance Code as amended.
   REQUIRED YARD. A yard of a manufactured home as set out in a licensed
manufactured home park layout plan.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. Any dwelling unit which is rented or offered for
rent as living quarters within a licensed manufactured home park.
   SERVICE BUILDING. An accessory building to a licensed manufactured home park
for related services.
   SERVICE EQUIPMENT. The plumbing, mechanical and electrical equipment
including piping, wiring, fixtures and other accessories which provide
sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, fire
protection and facilities essential for the habitable occupancy of a
manufactured home or accessory building or structure for its designated use and
occupancy.
   UTILITIES. Water and sewer, gas or electrical distribution system which is
available for connection to manufactured homes in a licensed manufactured home
park.
   YARD. An open space, other than a court on a lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The revised zoning ordinance of the city, as codified in
chapter 160.
(1992 Code, § 24-3) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 103-94, passed 11-21-
1994; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 26-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 87-11,
passed 11-21-2011)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
10.002
LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
§ 152.015 DUTY OF LICENSEE AND OCCUPANTS.
   (a)   Responsibility of licensee.
      (1)   The manufactured home park licensee will operate the park in strict
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the zoning ordinance and
provisions of the conditional use permit as may be required by the planning
commission or the city council.
      (2)   The licensee will provide adequate supervision to maintain the
park, its related facilities, roadways (including fire access), drainageways,
walkways, open spaces, utilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition.
      (3)   The licensee will be responsible for verifying and certifying that
all manufactured homes placed in the park meet or exceed the property
maintenance code.
      (4)   The licensee will be responsible for a one-time verification that
all manufactured homes located in a licensed manufactured home park are
anchored with a tie-down system within 12 months of placement.
      (5)   The licensee will also be responsible to see that all plumbing,
heating and electrical connections, alterations and additions comply with the
requirements of this chapter; all street signs and address numbers are
installed; and permits are secured for detached accessory buildings and park
service buildings.
      (6)   The licensee will be responsible for the proper placement of each
manufactured home and notification to the agency when new manufactured homes
are placed.
      (7)   The licensee will provide the agency with the name, address and
phone number of the local park management.
      (8)   The licensee will be responsible for titling or disposal of
abandoned manufactured homes.
   (b)   Responsibilities of park occupants.
      (1)   The park occupant will comply with all applicable requirements of
this chapter and will maintain the manufactured home space, its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   The park occupants of any manufactured home will be responsible to
see that all plumbing, heating, cooling and electrical connections, alterations
and additions comply with the requirements of this chapter and will secure the
necessary permits for detached accessory buildings.
      (3)   The park occupants shall see that their personal passenger vehicles
are licensed and operable. In no event shall any inoperable or unlicensed
vehicle be parked in a licensed manufactured home park. Stored vehicles are
allowed in designated screened parking lots as provided by the licensee within
the licensed manufactured home park.
      (4)   The park occupant or the installer shall follow the manufacturing
instructions for anchoring as required for HUD-labeled homes.
   (c)   Responsibilities of owners of residential rental units. The title
holder of a residential rental unit in a licensed manufactured home park will
be responsible for obtaining a permit as required under §§
150.175 through
150.181 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 24-4) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995;
Ord. 26-04, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; LICENSE
§ 152.030 REQUIRED; TERM, RENEWAL, ANNUAL INSPECTION AND FEE.
   (a)   It will be unlawful for any person to operate any licensed
manufactured home park within the city unless a valid annual license has been
issued. Each license will expire on June 30. Application for a license and
license renewal will be made in writing to the zoning enforcement manager on a
form furnished by them for that purpose and accompanied by a copy of park rules
and regulations, if any, and a fee payable to the city in the amount set forth
in
chapter 110.
   (b)   The deadline for filing applications will be 30 days prior to the
expiration of the license. Licenses filed after the expiration date of the
license will be charged, in addition to the license fee, a reinstatement fee
equal to 50% of the license fee.
   (c)   Annual inspection prior to renewal. The license renewal request will
cause the agency to inspect the licensed manufactured home park for adherence
to park standards as set forth in §§
152.065 through
152.072.
(1992 Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 103-94, passed 11-21-
1994; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see
§
10.999
§ 152.031 REVOCATION OR REFUSAL.
   The city council may, after a public hearing of which the licensee shall be
notified, revoke a manufactured home park license in whole or part as described
in this subchapter. The agency may refuse to renew a license for failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any other conditions
approved by the agency pursuant to this Code.
(1992 Code, § 24-7) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995;
Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 152.032 TRANSFER.
   Every licensed manufactured home park licensee will give notice in writing
to the agency within 30 days after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of interest in or control of the manufactured home park. The
notice will include the name and address of the new owners. Upon application in
writing for transfer of the license, the license may be transferred if the park
is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent
laws and regulations.
(1992 Code, § 24-7.1) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 92-85, passed 11-12-
1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995)
LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 152.045 MANUFACTURED HOME PLACEMENT PERMIT.
   (a)   It is unlawful to allow any manufactured home to be occupied in a
licensed manufactured home park unless the manufactured home is situated on a
manufactured home space and a placement permit issued as provided in this
subchapter. Only those manufactured homes constructed for thermal zone 3, as
defined by Housing and Urban Development, will be issued a placement permit.
   (b)   Prior to the placement or delivery of the manufactured home in a
licensed manufactured home park, every licensee shall ensure that an
application signed by the park occupant for a manufactured home park placement
permit is provided to the agency. The agency will cause an inspection to be
made only after the placement permit is received for the manufactured home
space to verify compliance of the manufactured home placement with the
provisions of this chapter dealing with proper placement, premises
identification, utility hookups, and skirting. A trip charge of $20.00 may be
applied if the manufactured home is not placed within 30 days of placement
permit issuance. The trip charge will not apply when a placement permit is
canceled.
   (c)   Every manufactured home park licensee shall give to every manufactured
homeowner desiring to place his or her manufactured home in the licensee’s park
an application for a placement permit provided by the agency. The licensee will
obtain two completed copies of the application form and will send one to the
agency prior to any inspections for compliance with codes; the manufactured
homeowner will have the responsibility of filing the original copy of the
application with the agency and will pay a permit fee of $50 at that time.
   (d)   After January 1, 2012, a copy of the data plate for all manufactured
homes will accompany the placement permit application. The data plate records
are maintained by the Institute for Building Technology and Safety. If the data
plate is missing or otherwise unavailable, the placement permit will not be
granted.
(1992 Code, § 24-8) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995;
Ord. 156-95, passed 12-18-1995; Ord. 94-97, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 87-11,
passed 11-21-2011; Ord. 54-14, passed 8-5-2014) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 152.046 DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   It is unlawful to alter, repair or add detached accessory buildings or
structures in a licensed manufactured home park without first obtaining a
permit. Permit issuance and fees will be in conformance with the codes
applicable to the type of work involved.
(1992 Code, § 24-9) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 152.047 SERVICE BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful to construct service buildings or install service equipment
in a licensed manufactured home park without first obtaining a permit. Permit
issuance and fees will be in conformance with the codes applicable to the type
of work involved.
(1992 Code, § 24-10) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 152.048 CARPORTS, CABANAS, ENCLOSED VESTIBULES, CANOPIES AND DECKS.
   (a)   It is unlawful to construct any of the following that are 40 square
feet in floor area or less in a licensed manufactured home park without first
obtaining a permit:
      (1)   Cabanas;
      (2)   Unenclosed canopies;
      (3)   Carports;
      (4)   Decks; or
      (5)   Enclosed vestibules.
   (b)   Permit issuance and fees will be in conformance with the codes
applicable to the type of work involved.
(1992 Code, § 24-11) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 103-94, passed 11-21-
1994; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 152.049 WORK EXEMPT FROM BUILDING CODE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Attached cabanas, unenclosed canopies, carports and enclosed
vestibules 40 square feet in floor area or less attached to the manufactured
home need not comply with building code regulations.
   (b)   Detached accessory buildings under 200 square feet of roof area need
not comply with building code regulations. Exemption from the permit
requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in
violation of the provisions of any other ordinance.
(1992 Code, § 24-12) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 103-94, passed 11-21-
1994; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 52-02, passed 7-1-2002)
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
§ 152.050 INSPECTIONS.
   The agency may enter a licensed manufactured home park to inspect the park
in the discharge of its duties. The inspection or reinspection may take place
at any time. The inspection will take place prior to the issuance or renewal of
a license to operate a licensed manufactured home park.
(1992 Code, § 24-13) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; PARK STANDARDS
§ 152.065 PLACEMENT OF MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   All manufactured homes will be positioned in compliance with
chapter 160 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 24-14) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
§ 152.066 WATER SUPPLY.
   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water will be provided
in each licensed manufactured home park capable of furnishing a minimum of 125
gallons per day per manufactured home space. Where a public supply of water of
the quality is available, connection will be made thereto and its supply will
be used exclusively. The development of an independent water supply to serve
the manufactured home park will be made only after express approval has been
granted by the agency.
(1992 Code, § 24-15) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
Cross-reference:
   Utilities, see title V
§ 152.067 WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (a)   All plumbing in the licensed manufactured home park will comply with
the plumbing code as adopted by the city and also applicable state codes.
   (b)   All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories
will be wasted into a sewer system extended from and connected with an approved
sewer system or private disposal system which has the approval of the agency.
(1992 Code, § 24-16) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
Cross-reference:
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Utilities, see title V
§ 152.068 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   (a)   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured
home park will be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution. All refuse will be
stored in flytight, weathertight, rodentproof containers, which will be
provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from
overflowing.
   (b)   Racks or holders will be provided for all refuse containers. The
containers will be stored on four-inch thick concrete slabs or in racks, the
bottoms of which are at least 18 inches above ground. The container racks or
holders will be designed to prevent containers from being tipped to minimize
spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them.
   (c)   Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health, as
recommended by the agency, will be applied in the licensed manufactured home
park. Skirting of manufactured homes will be done in a manner so as to prevent
rodent harborage.
(1992 Code, § 24-17) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and trash, see
ch. 57
§ 152.069 ELECTRICITY.
   It will be the responsibility of the licensed manufactured home park
operator to provide and maintain the park electrical wiring system in
compliance with the electrical code and specifically with the following.
   (a)   Service equipment will be weatherproofed in safe condition and
adequate for the load served.
   (b)   Supply cords and receptacles will be approved for the purpose, in safe
condition and have overcurrent protection at not more than their rating. Supply
cords will not be spliced except in an approved box under the manufactured
home.
   (c)   Manufactured home chassis will be grounded through a separate
grounding conductor in the supply cord. Any other method of grounding will be
only by special permission of the electrical inspector.
   (d)   Overhead conductors will have a clearance of three feet from the
manufactured home and any projection such as a television antenna.
(1992 Code, § 24-18) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
Cross-reference:
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
§ 152.070 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (a)   The licensed manufactured home park area will be subject to the fire
protection rules of the agency.
   (b)   All LP tanks will be secured against overturning with a minimum safety
factor of four based on a loading in any direction equal to four times the
filled weight of the container. LP tanks over 100-gallon capacity will be
installed on a concrete base.
   (c)   Safety relief valves of LP containers will have direct ventilation
with the atmosphere. The delivery side of the gas pressure regulator will be
equipped with a safety relief device set to discharge at a pressure not less
than two times and not more than three times the delivery pressure of the
regulator.
   (d)   Oil storage tanks will be supported by either noncombustible framing
or if of wood, not less than two-by-four-dimension stock. Oil tanks up to 500
gallons will be vented to the atmosphere by one and one-fourth inch diameter
vents. Oil tanks installed for gravity flow of oil to heating equipment will be
installed so that the top of the tank is no higher than eight feet above the
appliance oil control and the bottom of the tank is not less than 18 inches
above the appliance oil control. Listed automatic pumps (oil filter) will be
mounted no higher than eight feet above the appliance oil control and not less
than 18 inches above the appliance oil control. A readily accessible, approved
manual shutoff valve will be installed at the outlet of an oil supply tank. The
valve will be installed to close against the supply.
   (e)   Manufactured homes will have fuel piping materials and systems
compatible with type of fuel supply based on accepted national standards or
when applicable, city and state codes.
   (f)   LP or natural gas services will not be installed under manufactured
homes. Services installed under manufactured homes will be properly vented to
the atmosphere. Connections from natural gas supply to manufactured homes will
be by approved flexible connectors.
   (g)   Skirting installed around a manufactured home will be either fire
retardant or approved by the agency.
   (h)   Combustible storage may not be permitted under manufactured homes.
(1992 Code, § 24-19) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
§ 152.071 PARK IDENTIFICATION SIGN.
   It will be the responsibility of the manufactured home park licensee as a
condition for issuance of a manufactured home park license to erect and
maintain at the main entrance of the licensed manufactured home park a sign
displaying the manufactured home park name and office address. The size, height
and location of the sign will be approved by the agency.
(1992 Code, § 24-20) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
Cross-reference:
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
§ 152.072 STREET AND SPACE NUMBERING.
   Prior to issuance of a manufactured home park license, the manufactured home
park operator will:
   (a)   Develop and submit for approval of the agency a space or street
numbering system for the licensed manufactured home park and have the plan
available at the manufactured home park office at all times;
   (b)   Erect and maintain street signs within the licensed manufactured home
park of the size, height, number and location as prescribed by the traffic
engineer’s office of the city; and
   (c)   Display in front of or affix to the front of each manufactured home
service building or manufactured home space a street number in accordance with
the approved numbering system.
(1992 Code, § 24-21) (Ord. 76-85, passed 9-23-1985; Ord. 93-95, passed 7-3-
1995)
LICENSED MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.085 GENERAL.
   The city department of planning and building services is designated as the
agency to administer and enforce this chapter.
(1992 Code, § 24-22) (Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 152.086 PLACEMENT PERMIT REVOCATION.
   When a placement permit has been issued for a manufactured home and upon
inspection the agency has found that the manufactured home is unfit for human
occupancy, the agency shall cause the revocation of the placement permit. A
manufactured home found by the agency as unfit, because it is insanitary,
vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities, or other unsafe conditions as
defined by the property maintenance code, shall be removed by the licensee
within 30 days of notice. Manner of notice is prescribed in §
152.088.
(1992 Code, § 24-23) (Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 152.087 ABANDONED MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   The licensee may remove and dispose of abandoned manufactured homes as
prescribed by SDCL 21-54-17. The licensee shall notify the agency of disposal.
The agency shall cause an inspection to verify on-site disposal or the licensee
shall provide a receipt from a regional sanitary landfill within 15 days of
disposal. If the manufactured home has been abandoned and will not be disposed,
the licensee shall notify the agency by providing a copy of the Notice to
County Treasurer of Abandoned Mobile/ Manufactured Home (form MV-3013).
(1992 Code, § 24-24) (Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 152.088 NOTICE OF REMOVAL OF MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (a)   Form. The notice prescribed in §
152.087 shall be in accordance with all the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the manufactured home, including the
serial number or any other method sufficient for identification;
      (3)   A statement of condition of the manufactured home and why the
notice has been issued; and
      (4)   Inform of the right to appeal.
   (b)   Method of service.
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by first class or certified mail addressed to the licensee; or
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about
the manufactured home affected by the notice.
(1992 Code, § 24-25) (Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 152.089 APPEALS.
   The decision of the agency may be subject to judicial review as provided by
law.
(1992 Code, § 24-26) (Ord. 87-11, passed 11-21-2011)
CHAPTER 153: ANNEXATION POLICIES
Section
   
153.001   Petitioned annexation; generally
   
153.002   Petitioned annexation; resolution
   
153.003   Study required before annexation without petition
   
153.004   Annexation agreement
   
153.005   Pre-annexation agreement; generally
   
153.006   Pre-annexation agreement; resolution
   
153.007   Petitioned annexation; fee
   
153.008   Definitions
§ 153.001 PETITIONED ANNEXATION; GENERALLY.
   (a)   A petitioned annexation is a request from a property owner to annex
into the city of Sioux Falls a legally described property, and requires the
submission of an associated subdivision concept plan as described by §
157.035(c) which may be exempted by the city engineer.
   (b)   Upon submitted application to annex land into the municipal
boundaries, city planning and development services and the city public works
staff shall review and address all items within §
153.002.
   (c)   The planning and development services department shall follow the
policies within the urbanized, planned, and future urbanized areas adopted in
the comprehensive plan.
(1992 Code, § 9-1) (Ord. 113-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 153.002 PETITIONED ANNEXATION; RESOLUTION.
   (a)   The city council shall then adopt a resolution to extend its
boundaries.
   (b)   The resolution shall address the following:
      (1)   The description and boundaries of the contiguous territory to be
annexed; and
      (2)   A completed analysis considering the availability of municipal
utilities and access to a major street network for the proposed annexation area
and land uses; and that there is an agreed upon timetable which municipal
service will be extended into the contiguous territory.
(1992 Code, § 9-1.1) (Ord. 113-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-
2022)
§ 153.003 STUDY REQUIRED BEFORE ANNEXATION WITHOUT PETITION.
   (a)   Except as provided by SDCL 9-4-1, before a municipality may extend its
boundaries to include contiguous territory, the governing body shall conduct a
study to determine the need for the contiguous territory and to identify the
resources necessary to extend the municipal boundaries.
   (b)   The planning and development services department shall follow SDCL 9-
4-4.1 through 9-4-4.10 in annexing contiguous territory without a petition. Any
annexation without petition shall be within the urbanized, planned urbanized,
and future urbanized areas as detailed within the city's officially adopted
comprehensive plan. The City of Sioux Falls may initiate an annexation study
for an annexation without petition when the unannexed property is 100%
surrounded by city limits, adjacent land is fully developed, and one or more of
the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The unannexed property is currently adjacent to an improved city
street and connected to city water or sewer services; or
      (2)   The unannexed property will be impacted by a capital improvement
project such as a street improvement or utility extensions; or
      (3)   The unannexed property has a public health or safety issue that can
be corrected with city utility connections or street improvements; or
      (4)   There is no reasonable means for the city to physically access a
property that is adjacent to an unannexed property other than through the
unannexed property or ROW.
(1992 Code, § 9-2) (Ord. 113-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 29-22, passed 3-1-2022)
§ 153.004 ANNEXATION AGREEMENT.
   Upon receipt of a request from property owner(s) to annex property into city
limits, the petitioner, the public works department, and city attorney’s office
have the authority through SDCL 9-4-1.1 to enter into an agreement specifying
the conditions under which the landowner’s property may be annexed into the
municipal boundaries.
(Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 153.005 PRE-ANNEXATION AGREEMENT; GENERALLY.
   Upon receipt of a request from property owner(s) to complete a pre-annex
agreement, the petitioner, city planning office and the public works department
shall complete an analysis regarding utility schedules and associated costs for
including the non-contiguous territory into the municipal boundaries at a time
as the property becomes contiguous.
(1992 Code, § 9-3) (Ord. 113-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 153.006 PRE-ANNEXATION AGREEMENT; RESOLUTION.
   (a)   The city council shall then adopt a resolution for future extension of
its boundaries.
   (b)   The resolution shall address the following:
      (1)   The petitioners’ analysis;
      (2)   An agreement that the property owner(s) waive legal rights opposing
future annexation;
      (3)   The description and boundaries of the non-contiguous territory to
be annexed in the future;
      (4)   The proposed land uses and densities associated with the parcel to
be annexed in the future; and
      (5)   That municipal utilities and access to a major street network are
considered in terms of the proposed boundary and land uses; and that there is
an agreed upon timetable which municipal service will be extended into the
territory.
(1992 Code, § 9-3.1) (Ord. 113-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-
2022)
§ 153.007 PETITIONED ANNEXATION; FEE.
   To defray the costs of processing, investigating, conducting public
hearings, filing and recording of annexation petitions, a fee shall be required
as established by the city council and shall be paid by any person filing a
petition for annexation of territory of the city. The director of planning and
building services may waive all or a portion of the filing fee. The applicant
shall pay to the city the appropriate fee as designated in §§
160.745 through
160.760 of this Code.
(1992 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 113-05, passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-2022)
§ 153.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ADJACENT. Placed near or close; may be, but does not need to be, touching.
Property is adjacent when separated by a right-of-way.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alternation, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; or any use or extension of the use
of land.
   FULLY DEVELOPED. An area used intensively for residential, urban
recreational, or conservation parklands, commercial, industrial, institutional,
or governmental purposes or an area undergoing development for any of these
purposes.
   IMPACTED. Used in reference to CIP projects, this term is meant to refer to
improvements that will directly influence the available services to a property
in the future.
(Ord. 29-22, passed 3-1-2022; Ord. 89-22, passed 8-9-2022)
CHAPTER 154: PLANNING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Ordinances saved from repeal
   
154.002   Planning agency designated
Planning Commission
   
154.015   Created
   
154.016   Composition
   
154.017   Appointment
   
154.018   Terms of members
   
154.019   Vacancies
   
154.020   Removal for cause
   
154.021   Compensation; expenses
   
154.022   Organization
   
154.023   Meetings; rules; records
   
154.024   Annual report
   
154.025   Employment of staff
   
154.026   Contracts
   
154.027   Miscellaneous powers
   
154.028   Preparation of comprehensive plan for city development; contents of
plan; changes or additions
   
154.029   General purposes of comprehensive plan
   
154.030   Adoption of comprehensive plan
   
154.031   Legal status of comprehensive plan
   
154.032   Recommendation and adoption of building and setback regulations;
public hearing and notice required
   
154.033   Subdivision plats to be approved after major street plan adopted;
extraterritorial jurisdiction of city; reports and recommendations by planning
commission
   
154.034   Subdivision regulations; generally
   
154.035   Subdivision regulations; scope
   
154.036   Subdivision regulations; hearing
   
154.037   Approval of plats
   
154.038   Improvements in unapproved streets
   
154.039   Buildings prohibited on unapproved streets; action to enjoin erection
or remove building
Arts Commission
   
154.050   Created
   
154.051   Composition
   
154.052   Term of office
   
154.053   Compensation; expense
   
154.054   Organization
   
154.055   Meetings; quorum, staff
   
154.056   Committees
   
154.057   Purpose, duties, and responsibilities
Active Transportation Board
   
154.060   Created
   
154.061   Composition
   
154.062   Term of office
   
154.063   Operation
   
154.064   Compensation; expense
   
154.065   Organization
   
154.066   Meetings; quorum, staff
   
154.067   Mission of advisory board
   
154.068   Purpose of advisory board
   
154.069   Subcommittees
   
154.070   Official business duties—recommendations to city council
   
154.071   Official business duties—letter of advocacy
   
154.072   Public engagement
   
154.073   Definitions
   
154.074   Authorities for all boards, commissions, and agencies
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Extraterritorial zoning regulations, see
ch. 159
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Historic preservation, see
ch. 151
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
   Plumbing, see §§
150.301 et seq.
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Utilities, see title V
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Planning and zoning, see SDCL title 11
   Planning and zoning commissions, see SDCL 11-6-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   Nothing contained in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any manner:
   (a)   Any zoning ordinance of the city or amendment thereto;
   (b)   Any subdivision ordinance of the city or amendment thereto; or
   (c)   Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or
subdivision in the city or any part thereof.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 16.407; 1992 Code, § 32-1)
§ 154.002 PLANNING AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to the Sioux Falls city charter, §
4.04, the city department of planning and building services is hereby
designated as the planning agency.
(1992 Code, § 32-2) (Ord. 35-95, passed 3-6-1995)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 154.015 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a city planning commission for the city and for land
within the joint jurisdictional area and not located within any other
municipality.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.901; 1992 Code, § 32-17) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.016 COMPOSITION.
   The city planning commission shall consist of nine members, qualified by
knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development
administration of a comprehensive plan, and who shall not hold any elective
office in the city government.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.902; 1992 Code, § 32-18) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959;
Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-1999)
§ 154.017 APPOINTMENT.
   The members of the city planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor
subject to the approval of the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.902; 1992 Code, § 32-19) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.018 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   The appointment of each member of the planning commission shall be for terms
of five years so that there will be an overlapping of tenures.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.903; 1992 Code, § 32-20) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.019 VACANCIES.
   Any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled for
the unexpired term by the mayor in the same manner as for appointment.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.904; 1992 Code, § 32-21) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.020 REMOVAL FOR CAUSE.
   The mayor, with the confirmation of the city council, shall after public
hearing have authority to remove any member of the planning commission for
cause, which cause shall be stated in writing and made a part of the record of
the hearing.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.905; 1992 Code, § 32-22) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.021 COMPENSATION; EXPENSES.
   All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without
compensation, except for actual expenses, which shall be subject to approval of
the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.906; 1992 Code, § 32-23) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.022 ORGANIZATION.
   Upon appointment the planning commission shall be called together by the
mayor and shall organize by electing a chairperson from among its members for a
term of one year with eligibility for reelection, and may fill the other of its
offices as it may create in a manner prescribed by the rules of the planning
commission.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.907; 1992 Code, § 32-24) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.023 MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS.
   The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month.
Subject to the approval of the city council, it shall adopt those rules for
transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings and determinations which shall be a public record.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.908; 1992 Code, § 32-25) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.024 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The planning commission shall each year distribute a report to the city
council of its proceedings with a statement of its receipts and disbursements
and the progress of its work during the preceding year.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.909; 1992 Code, § 32-26) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.025 EMPLOYMENT OF STAFF.
   Subject to the approval of the city council, the planning commission may
employ technical, engineering, clerical and other assistance as may be deemed
essential to carry on the work of the planning commission. Persons so employed
shall not be under the civil service except as otherwise determined by the city
council. The compensation of all employees shall be fixed by the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.910; 1992 Code, § 32-27) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.026 CONTRACTS.
   All contracts and agreements relating to the work of the planning commission
and for services or materials required by it shall be made by the city council
in its discretion.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.911; 1992 Code, § 32-28) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.027 MISCELLANEOUS POWERS.
   (a)   The planning commission shall have all powers granted to zoning
commissions and shall also be the zoning commission of the city.
   (b)   The planning commission may make reports and recommendations relating
to the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies,
public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other
organizations, and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative
officials of the city programs for public improvements and the financing
thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning
commission, within a reasonable time, available information as it may require
for its work.
   (c)   The planning commission, its members and employees, in the performance
of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys and
place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. In general, the
planning commission shall have all powers as may be necessary to enable it to
fulfill and perform its functions, promote city planning or carry out all the
purposes of this chapter.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.915; 1992 Code, § 32-29) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.028 PREPARATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR CITY DEVELOPMENT; CONTENTS OF
PLAN; CHANGES OR ADDITIONS.
   (a)   It shall be a function and duty of the planning commission to propose
a plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside
the boundary and within its planning jurisdiction which, in the planning
commission’s judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city.
   (b)   The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the planning commission’s
recommendations for the physical development and may include, among other
things, the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges,
viaducts, parks, parkways, waterways and waterfront developments, playgrounds,
airports and other public ways, grounds, places and spaces; the general
location of public schools, of public buildings and other public property; a
zoning ordinance for the regulation of the height, area, bulk, location and use
of private and public structures and premises, and of population density as may
be provided by law may be included as an adjunct to the comprehensive plan; the
general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly
or privately owned, for water, light, power, heat, sanitation, transportation,
communication and other purposes; the acceptance, widening, removal, extension,
relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, or change of use of any of the
public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings, properties, utilities or
terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent of community
centers and neighborhood units and the general character, extent and layout of
the replanning of blighted districts and slum areas.
   (c)   The planning commission may from time to time propose amendments,
extensions or additions to the comprehensive plan or carry any of the subject
matter into greater detail. The planning director shall be responsible for
preparing the master plan and amendments and extensions thereof and for
submitting with recommendations the plans and modifications to the city
planning commission for its consideration and adoption.
   (d)   Types of amendments.
      (1)   Comprehensive plan amendments. The planning director shall be
responsible for preparing the master plan and amendments to the city planning
commission for its consideration and adoption.
      (2)   Future land use plan [comprehensive plan] amendments. Property
owners and/or the planning director may be responsible for preparing amendments
to future land use map for city planning commission consideration and adoption.
   (e)   The public should be notified of proposed amendments and allowed an
opportunity to be informed of the amendments and provide comment. The planning
director and planning commission will consider neighborhood opinions in
evaluating proposed amendments. A proposed amendment shall be considered on its
own merits using the following criteria as a guide:
      (1)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the goals,
policies and overall intent of the text within the comprehensive plan;
      (2)   Whether the proposed amendment is warranted by changed conditions
within the neighborhood surrounding and including the subject property;
      (3)   Whether the proposed amendment achieves an arrangement of
activities which promote harmonious interaction and minimizes land use
conflicts surrounding the subject property;
      (4)   Whether the proposed amendment would adversely affect the
environment, historic resources, natural resources, urban services, public
facilities and transportation system;
      (5)   Whether the proposed amendment is warranted by an approved
engineering analysis, including, but not limited to, adopted city-initiated
master plans;
      (6)   Whether the proposed amendment would result in a logical and
orderly development pattern;
      (7)   Whether the proposed amendment adversely affects any other part of
the city, or creates any direct or indirect adverse effects; and
      (8)   In conclusion, whether the proposed amendment creates an undue
impact on surrounding neighborhoods; whereas proposed developments should be
consistent with the physical characteristics of the surrounding neighborhoods
or improves their living environment and quality of life.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.912; 1992 Code, § 32-30) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959;
Ord. 06-06, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 154.029 GENERAL PURPOSES OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall
make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions
and probable future growth of the city and its environs. The plan shall be made
with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted
and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing
and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
prosperity or the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the
process of development.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.913; 1992 Code, § 32-31) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.030 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (a)   Plan proposed as a whole or in part. The planning commission shall
propose to the city council the comprehensive plan as a whole by a single
resolution, or, as the work of making the whole comprehensive plan progresses,
may from time to time propose parts thereof, any part to correspond generally
with one or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the
plan.
   (b)   Public hearing required before recommendation of plan to city council;
notice; submission. Before recommendation to the city council of the
comprehensive plan or part thereof, the planning commission shall hold at least
one public hearing, notice of the time and place of which shall be given at
least 15 days in advance by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city. The planning commission shall submit the recommended
comprehensive plan or part thereof to the city council.
   (c)   Vote required for adoption of plan; notice and hearing; reference to
maps and descriptive matters; signature of mayor; ordinance subject to
publication and protest provisions. The adoption by the city council of the
plan or any part, amendment or additions shall, following the same type of
notice and public hearing as required by division (b) above, be by resolution
carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all the members
of the city council. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps,
descriptive matter and other matters intended by the city council to form the
whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the
adopted plan or part thereof, by the identifying signature of the mayor. If a
zoning ordinance is included as an adjunct to the comprehensive plan, or any
part, amendment or addition, that zoning ordinance shall be subject to the
provisions of SDCL 11-4-5.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.914; 1992 Code, § 32-32) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.031 LEGAL STATUS OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (a)   Whenever the city council shall have adopted the comprehensive plan of
the city or any part thereof, no street, park or other public way, ground,
place, space, no public building or structure, no public utility, whether
publicly or privately owned, if covered by the comprehensive plan or any
adopted part thereof, shall be constructed or authorized in the city or within
its subdivision jurisdiction as defined in §
154.033, until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been
submitted to and approved by the planning commission.
   (b)   In case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its
reasons to the city council, and the city council, by vote of not less than
two-thirds of its entire membership, shall have the power to overrule the
disapproval and, upon the overruling, the city council or the appropriate board
or officer shall have the power to proceed.
   (c)   If the public way, ground, place, space, building, structure or
utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not, under the law
or charter provisions governing such, fall within the province of the city
council or other body or official of the city, the submission to the planning
commission shall be by the board or official having jurisdiction, and the
planning commission’s disapproval may be overruled by the board by a vote of
not less than two-thirds of its entire membership or by the official.
   (d)   The acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing,
vacation, abandonment, change of use, acquisition of land for any street or
other public way, ground, place, property or structure shall be subject to
similar submission and approval, and the failure to approve may be similarly
overruled.
   (e)   The failure of the planning commission to act within 65 days from and
after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval, unless a
longer period be granted by the city council or other submitting official.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.916; 1992 Code, § 32-33) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.032 RECOMMENDATION AND ADOPTION OF BUILDING AND SETBACK REGULATIONS;
PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE REQUIRED.
   From and after the time when the city council shall have adopted a
comprehensive plan which includes at least a major street plan or shall have
progressed in its comprehensive planning to the stage of the making and
adoption of a major street plan, the planning commission may recommend and the
city council is hereby authorized and empowered by ordinance to establish,
regulate and limit, and to change and amend, building or setback lines on the
streets and to prohibit any new building being located within the building or
setback lines. The regulations authorized by this section shall not be adopted,
changed or amended until a public hearing has been held thereon, following the
same notice as provided in §
154.030(b).
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.917; 1992 Code, § 32-34) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.033 SUBDIVISION PLATS TO BE APPROVED AFTER MAJOR STREET PLAN ADOPTED;
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF CITY; REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS BY PLANNING
COMMISSION.
   From and after the time when the city council shall have adopted a
comprehensive plan which includes at least a major street plan or shall have
progressed in its comprehensive planning to the stage of making and adoption of
a major street plan, and shall have filed a certified copy of the major street
plan in the office of the register of deeds of the county, no plat of a
subdivision of land lying within the city, or of land within the joint
jurisdictional area and not located in any other municipality, shall be filed
or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and a report and
recommendations thereon made by the planning commission to the city council and
the city council has approved the plat. This section shall be applicable to
land within three miles of the city limits of the city and not located in any
other municipality only if the comprehensive plan or major street plan includes
that land. However, in the case of extra municipal land lying within three
miles of more than one city, the jurisdiction of each municipality shall
terminate at a boundary line equidistant from the respective corporate limits
of the cities, unless otherwise agreed to by a majority vote of the governing
body of each city. The plats shall, after report and recommendations of the
planning commission are made and filed, be approved or disapproved by the city
council. The planning commission shall make its recommendation to the city
council within 60 days of submission.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.918; 1992 Code, § 32-35) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
Cross-reference:
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
§ 154.034 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; GENERALLY.
   In exercising the duties granted to it by this chapter, the planning
commission shall recommend and the city council shall by ordinance adopt
regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction as
defined in §
154.033. The regulations may provide for the harmonious development of the city
and its environs; for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with
other existing or planned streets or with other features of the comprehensive
plan of the city; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and
air; and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create
conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience or prosperity. Before an
adoption of its subdivision regulations or any amendment thereof, a public
hearing thereon shall be held by the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.919; 1992 Code, § 32-36) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.035 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; SCOPE.
   (a)   Subdivision regulations may include requirements as to the extent to
which and the manner in which the streets of the subdivision shall be graded
and improved, and water, sewer and other utility mains, piping, connections or
other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of
the subdivision. The regulations may provide for the tentative approval of the
plat previous to the improvements and installation; but any tentative approval
shall not be entered on the plat.
   (b)   The regulations may provide that, in lieu of the completion of the
work and installations prior to the final approval of a plat, the city council
may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to
it, providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and
installation of the improvements and utilities within a period specified by the
city council and expressed in the bond; and the city is hereby granted and has
the power to enforce bonds by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
   (c)   The regulations may provide, in lieu of the completion of the work and
installations previous to the final approval of a plat, for an assessment or
other method whereby the city is put in an assured position to do the work and
make the installations at the cost of the owners of the property within the
subdivision.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.919; 1992 Code, § 32-37) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
Cross-reference:
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
§ 154.036 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; HEARING.
   Before adoption of its subdivision regulations or any amendment thereof, a
public hearing thereon shall be held by the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.919; 1992 Code, § 32-38) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.037 APPROVAL OF PLATS.
   (a)   The plat shall be approved or disapproved within 90 days after
submission thereof; otherwise the plat shall be deemed to have been approved
and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the city council on demand,
provided, however, that the applicant for the approval may waive this
requirement and consent to the extension of the period. The ground of
disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the city council.
   (b)   Any plat submitted for approval shall contain the name and address of
a person to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no plat shall be acted upon
by the city council without affording a hearing thereon, notice of the time and
place of which shall be sent by mail to the address not less than five days
before the date fixed therefor.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.920; 1992 Code, § 32-39) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
§ 154.038 IMPROVEMENTS IN UNAPPROVED STREETS.
   (a)   Approved plat required for street or utility work after attachment of
platting jurisdiction. From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction
of the city shall have attached by virtue of the adoption of a major street
plan as provided in §
154.033, the city or other public authority shall not, except as provided by
division (b) below, accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any
street or lay or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections or
other facilities or utilities in any street within the city unless the street
shall have been accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the
legal status of, a public street prior to the adoption of a comprehensive plan,
or unless the street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown
on a subdivision plat approved by the city council or on a street plat made by
the planning commission and adopted by the city council.
   (b)   Street construction specifically authorized by ordinance; vote
required to overrule planning commission. The city council, or, in the case of
a street outside of the city, the governing body of the outside territory, may
locate and construct or may accept any other street if the ordinance or other
measure for the location and construction or for the acceptance be first
submitted to the planning commission for its consideration, and, if disapproved
by the planning commission, be passed by not less than two-thirds of the entire
membership of the city council or the governing body; and a street approval by
the planning commission upon the submission, or constructed or accepted by two-
thirds vote after disapproval by the planning commission, shall have the status
of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally shown on a
subdivision plat approved by the city council or on a plat made by the planning
commission and adopted by the city council.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.921; 1992 Code, § 32-40) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
Cross-reference:
    Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
§ 154.039 BUILDINGS PROHIBITED ON UNAPPROVED STREETS; ACTION TO ENJOIN ERECTION
OR REMOVE BUILDING.
   From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction of the city shall
have attached by reason of the adoption of a major street plan as provided in §
154.033, no building permit shall be issued for or no building shall be erected
on any lot within the territorial jurisdiction of the planning commission and
the city council as provided in §
154.033, unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is
proposed to be placed shall be accepted as opened as, or shall have otherwise
received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time, or unless the
street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a
subdivision plat approved by the city council or on a street plat made by the
planning commission and adopted by the city council or with a street located or
accepted by the city council, or, in the case of territory outside of the city,
by the governing body thereof, after submission to the planning commission,
and, in case of the planning commission’s disapproval, by the favorable vote
required in §
154.038(b). Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed
an unlawful structure, and the city or city council may bring action to enjoin
the erection or cause it to be vacated or removed.
(1957 Rev. Ords., § 2.922; 1992 Code, § 32-41) (Ord. 1992, passed 8-3-1959)
ARTS COMMISSION
§ 154.050 CREATED.
   An arts commission is hereby established.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.051 COMPOSITION.
   The arts commission shall consist of no more than seven voting members
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. Three
ex officio non-voting members shall also serve, with two being city directors,
or their designee, and one shall be a member of the city council. Appointed
members shall be arts advocates that represent a diverse mixture of citizen
representatives of the community, including one member representing arts
organizations, one member with experience in architecture or design, one member
with experience in community development, and one member with experience in
finance and business. The remaining three members shall be appointed at large.
Any member of the arts commission may serve without being a registered voter of
the city.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.052 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The board shall consist of seven appointed voting members who serve three-
year terms for a maximum of two consecutive full terms, with two members to
initially serve a two-year first term and one member to serve a one-year first
term so that there will be an overlapping of terms as determined by the mayor.
An appointed person may continue to serve on the commission for up to an
additional four months after the expiration of the term of office until a
replacement is appointed and approved. If any person is appointed to serve an
unexpired term then that person would be eligible to serve an additional two
consecutive full terms of office.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.053 COMPENSATION; EXPENSE.
   All members of the arts commission shall serve as such without compensation,
except for actual expenses, which shall be subject to approval by the mayor.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.054 ORGANIZATION.
   Upon appointment, the arts commission shall be called together by the mayor
and shall organize by electing a chair from any of its voting members for a
term of one year with eligibility for reelection, and may fill such other of
its offices as it may create.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.055 MEETINGS; QUORUM, STAFF.
   The arts commission shall meet at least once each quarter. A majority of the
voting members constitute a quorum. The director of planning and development
services or designee shall act as staff to the commission.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.056 COMMITTEES.
   The arts commission may create one or more committees to assist in
fulfilling its purpose, duties, and responsibilities, including but not limited
to a visual arts committee. Committees may make advisory recommendations to the
arts commission. Committee members do not need to be members of the arts
commission, but each committee shall include at least one voting member of the
arts commission.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 154.057 PURPOSE, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The arts commission shall act as an advisory body to the mayor and city
council on matters pertaining to the arts and the integration of art to
activate public spaces and neighborhoods, and the utilization of arts to
promote the city, its facilities, and activities.
   Its duties will include:
      (1)   Developing criteria based on recommendations from the arts
committee on the public placement of art, including compatibility with general,
social, and physical environment with which the art is to relate;
      (2)   Receive and review recommendations upon all works of art to be
acquired by the city, either by purchase, gift, or otherwise;
      (3)   Developing criteria for review and awarding of projects funded
through the city's arts promotion program;
      (4)   Collaborate with strategic partners for the development and
implementation of the city's cultural plan to enhance quality of life and
promote economic impact through arts and activation and support workforce
development;
      (5)   Preparing an annual report to the mayor and city council on the
status of the arts and its economic and community impact. The report shall
include all financial and project information on the arts promotion program.
(Ord. 82-23, passed 9-12-2023)
ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION BOARD
§ 154.060 CREATED.
   An Active Transportation Board is hereby established.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.061 COMPOSITION.
   The active transportation board shall consist of nine members with seven
members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council.
The board shall be chaired by the Director of Planning and Development Services
or their designee. One member shall be the Director of Public Works or their
designee. The seven appointed members shall be a diverse mix of citizen
representatives of the community including; three persons representing the
bicycle subcommittee, the pedestrian subcommittee, and the PATH subcommittee.
One member shall be appointed representing the development/real estate
community. The remaining three members shall be appointed at-large and
representing the values, needs, and concerns of all users of the city's
roadways and transportation network system, including people who walk, ride
bicycles, use transit, drive, and use other mobility devices.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.062 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The board shall consist of no less than seven and no more than nine members
who serve three year terms for a maximum of two consecutive full terms with two
members to initially serve only a one-year first term and two members to serve
only a two-year first term so that there will be an overlapping of terms as
determined by the mayor. The Public Works and Planning and Development Services
Director positions shall remain as permanent positions of the board. An
appointed person may continue to serve the board for up to an additional four
months after the expiration of the term of office until a replacement is
appointed and approved. If any person is appointed to serve an unexpired term
and serves less than one-half of that remaining unexpired term, then that
person would be eligible to serve an additional two consecutive full terms of
office. A board member may serve up to four months after the expiration of his/
her term of office until a replacement is appointed and approved.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.063 OPERATION.
   The board shall establish bylaws that include election of officers as
needed, meetings, conflict of interests, and quorums. The bylaws shall be
approved or amended by a two-thirds majority of all members of the board.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.064 COMPENSATION; EXPENSE.
   All members of the active transportation board shall serve as such without
compensation, except for actual expenses, which shall be subject to approval by
the mayor.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.065 ORGANIZATION.
   During its first meeting, the active transportation board shall adopt
bylaws. The active transportation board may fill such other of its offices as
it may create.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.066 MEETINGS; QUORUM, STAFF.
   The active transportation board shall generally meet monthly. A majority of
the members constitute a quorum. The planning and development services
department shall staff the board.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.067 MISSION OF ADVISORY BOARD.
   The mission of the active transportation board shall be to significantly
reduce all transportation fatalities and severe injuries, while increasing
safe, comfortable, healthy, and equitable mobility for all.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.068 PURPOSE OF ADVISORY BOARD.
   The purpose of the Sioux Falls Active Transportation Board (ATB) is to
advise the city council, city departments, and city boards regarding bicycle,
pedestrian, and other active transportation and accessible pedestrian
transportation modes.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.069 SUBCOMMITTEES.
   ATB shall have three subcommittees to assist in working through details of
active transportation plans, programs, design, implementation, and funding
recommendations. The subcommittees include a bicycle subcommittee, a pedestrian
subcommittee, and a school traffic safety advisory (PATH) subcommittee.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.070 OFFICIAL BUSINESS DUTIES—RECOMMENDATIONS TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Recommendation of the active transportation board is required as a part of
official business before city council approval on the following items and as
detailed in the advisory board bylaws:
   (a)   Bicycle and pedestrian projects within the CIP and city operating
budget.
   (b)   City's bicycle plan and pedestrian plan.
   (c)   City complete street policy.
   (d)   Ordinance changes related to bicycle, pedestrian, or any other
transportation accessibility law.
   (e)   To prepare recommendations in matters related to the school traffic
safety plans and programs.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.071 OFFICIAL BUSINESS DUTIES—LETTER OF ADVOCACY.
   The active transportation board may provide letters of advocacy on the
following matters pertaining to complete streets and active and accessible
pedestrian transportation as detailed in the advisory board bylaws; to include,
but not limited to the following:
   (a)   Bicycle and pedestrian corridor and connection plans.
   (b)   On-street bicycle route changes.
   (c)   Any complete street design review.
   (d)   Pedestrian and bicycle safety programs and education.
   (e)   Bicycle trail projects.
   (f)   Walk or bicycle on-site reviews.
   (g)   Traffic signal, intersection control, and crosswalk improvements.
   (h)   Bicycle parking.
   (i)   Sidewalk furnishing.
   (j)   School traffic and safe routes to school improvements.
   (k)   Other complete street, pedestrian, or bicycle issues that the board
would like to provide an advocacy letter.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.072 PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
   The active transportation board shall listen to citizen input and develop
methods on improving conditions for active transportation users as detailed in
the advisory board bylaws. The board shall encourage an informal and robust
discussion during the public engagement portion of the meeting agenda allowing
any and all members of the public to join the informational and discussion
topics. A good portion of the meeting shall be devoted to public engagement.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.073 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN TRANSPORTATION. Any form of transportation that
requires a personal assistive mobility device to complete pedestrian
activities.
   ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN TRANSPORTATION USERS. Any person with a disability who
uses a mobility device to complete pedestrian activities and use the street and
trail system of the city devices include, but are not limited to: wheelchairs,
scooters, or any other electric personal assistive mobility device as defined
by the Americans with Disability Act.
   ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION. Traveling on a street, sidewalk, or trail through
human power.
   ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION USERS. Any person who uses the following forms of
active transportation including, but not limited to bicycles, pedestrians,
joggers, runners, wheelchair users, skateboarders, inline skaters, and other
active forms of transportation. Active transportation users also include
transit users because of the requirement to walk or wheel to a bus stop.
   COMPLETE STREETS. Streets that are designed to accommodate all potential
users including all active and accessible pedestrian transportation users.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
§ 154.074 AUTHORITIES FOR ALL BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AGENCIES.
   All ATB policies shall follow
Chapter 30 of Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, SD, including:
   (a)   Section
30.025. Creation of agencies, authorities, committees, boards, commissions, and
districts.
   (b)   Section
30.026. Rules for committees and commissions.
(Ord. 141-22, passed 12-13-2022)
CHAPTER 155: SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Signs upon, over public ways
   
155.002   Maintenance
Licenses
   
155.015   Required
   
155.016   Chapter 110 applicable
   
155.017   Insurance
   
155.018   Transferability
   
155.019   Bond required
   
155.020   Portable signs
Permits and Inspections
   
155.030   Permits required
   
155.031   Penalty when work begun without permit
   
155.032   Application for permit
   
155.033   Inspections required
   
155.034   Violations
Cross-reference:
   Advertising, see
ch. 97
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Electricity, see
ch. 55
   Extraterritorial sign regulations, see §§
159.330 through
159.338,
159.350 through
159.355
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Historic preservation, see
ch. 151
   Licenses, see
ch. 110
   Manufactured home park identification sign, see §
152.071
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Off-premises signs, see §§
160.587 through
160.592
   On-premises signs, see §§
160.570 et seq.
   Pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals or precious gems, see
ch. 116
   Peddlers and vendors, see
ch. 117
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Signs in parks, see §
95.011
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivision, see
ch. 157
   Traffic code, see title VII
   Vehicles for hire, see
ch. 124
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Signs and advertising in public places, see SDCL 9-30-3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 SIGNS UPON, OVER PUBLIC WAYS.
   Except as otherwise authorized in §
160.573 et seq. of this Code, as amended, no sign or supporting structure shall
be located upon or over any portion of the dedicated right-of-way of any public
street, alley or thoroughfare.
(1992 Code, § 37-1) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987)
§ 155.002 MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and
anchors, shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation. The
display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted.
   (b)   The director of planning and building services may order the removal
of or cause to be removed any sign that is not maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
(1992 Code, § 37-2) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987)
LICENSES
§ 155.015 REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the activity or business of sign or outdoor
advertising by erecting, maintaining, leasing or providing to others ground
signs, roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs, marquee signs, portable signs,
or changeable signs in the city without first having procured a license from
the city council to conduct that activities or business.
(1992 Code, § 37-14) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987; Ord. 104-16, passed 10-4-
2016)
§ 155.016 CHAPTER 110 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
chapter 110, insofar as the provisions may be applicable and not in conflict,
shall apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, § 37-15) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987)
§ 155.017 INSURANCE.
   Along with the application for a license required by this subchapter, the
applicant shall file with the city finance department a certificate of standard
form contractor’s public liability insurance, covering bodily injuries,
including death, with limits of not less than $100,000 for each person and
$300,000 for each accident and covering property damage with a limit of $50,000
for each accident.
(1992 Code, § 37-16) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987)
§ 155.018 TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
transferable.
(1992 Code, § 37-17) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987)
§ 155.019 BOND REQUIRED.
   As a condition of his or her license, every person who engages in the
activity or business of sign or outdoor advertising in the city shall maintain
and deliver to the zoning enforcement manager a continuous bond in the penal
sum of $10,000 in a form approved by the city with the licensee as principal on
the bond and the city as the obligee for its benefit and that of consumers
dealing with the contractor. The bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and
chapter 160 of this Code. Claims upon the bond may be filed by any person
damaged by reason of the principals failure to perform his or her obligation
under the bond. The bond shall be in addition to all other license bonds. The
bond shall be written by a corporate surety authorized to transact business in
the state. Suspension or revocation of the license of the principal shall not
by itself affect the liability of either the principal or the surety on the
bond except that the liability of the surety shall not extend to acts or
omissions of the principal occurring after the effective date of his or her
license suspension or revocation.
(1992 Code, § 37-18) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987; Ord. 157-95, passed 12-18-
1995)
§ 155.020 PORTABLE SIGNS.
   It shall be the duty of persons engaged in the activity or business of
renting or providing portable signs to others to record the date of the
transaction, the name of the sign users and the proposed location of the
portable sign and to maintain these records for a period of two years.
Furthermore, it shall be their duty to require applicants placing portable
signs within city limits to produce a valid permit prior to transfer of the
sign. All portable signs must prominently display the name of its owner,
whether business or individual.
(1992 Code, § 37-19) (Ord. No. 30-87, § 1, passed 5-18-1987)
PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 155.030 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, alter, relocate or maintain within the city any sign
without first obtaining an erection permit from the department of planning and
building services and making payment of the required fee.
(1992 Code, § 37-29) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 155.031 PENALTY WHEN WORK BEGUN WITHOUT PERMIT.
   When work for which a permit is required by this subchapter is started or
proceeded with prior to obtaining the permit, the fees specified therefor shall
be doubled, but payment of the double fee shall not relieve any person from
fully complying with the requirements of city ordinances in the execution of
the work nor from any other penalties prescribed for the violation of city
ordinances.
(1992 Code, § 37-31) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987)
§ 155.032 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (a)   An application for permit required by this subchapter shall be
submitted to the department of planning and building services in a form as they
may prescribe and shall include the information as may be required for a
complete understanding of the proposed work and the other information to show
full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the
city.
   (b)   Action on application. If the planning and building services official
is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the code
and ordinances applicable thereto, the official shall issue a permit therefor
as soon as practicable.
   (c)   Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be
construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the
provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or
other ordinances of this jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a
permit based on the application, sketch, and site plan or other construction
documents shall not prevent the planning and building services official from
requiring the correction of errors in the application or other data.
   (d)   Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
on the site authorized by such permit is completed within 180 days after its
issuance. If an inspection has not been requested after 180 days of permit
issuance and the permit has not been extended, the permit shall expire without
notice. The planning and building services official is authorized to grant, in
writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   (e)   Suspension or revocation. The planning and building services official
is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this
code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect,
inaccurate, or incomplete information or in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
   (f)   Placement of permit. The sign permit or copy shall be kept on file
with the applicant until the completion of the project.
(1992 Code, § 37-32) (Ord. 30-87, passed 5-18-1987; Ord. 104-16, passed 10-4-
2016; Ord. 15-21, passed 2-2-2021)
§ 155.033 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (a)   General. Work for which a sign permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the planning and building services official. Approval as a result
of an inspection shall not be construed to be approval of a violation of the
provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or
of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the
duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible for
inspection purposes. Neither the planning and building services official nor
the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
   (b)   Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the sign
permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the planning and building
services official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of
the permit holder to provide access to and means for any inspection of such
work that are required by this code. If an inspection has not been requested
after 180 days of permit issuance and the permit has not been extended, the
permit shall expire without notice.
   (c)   Approval required. The planning and building services official shall
make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the
sign work that is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder
or agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this code.
Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected.
(Ord. 104-16, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 155.034 VIOLATIONS.
   Notice of violation. The planning and building services official is
authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible
for the violation of the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation.
(Ord. 104-16, passed 10-4-2016)
CHAPTER 156: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
   
156.001   Statutory authorization
   
156.002   Findings of fact
   
156.003   Statement of purpose
   
156.004   Methods of reducing flood losses
Definitions
   
156.015   Definitions
General Provisions
   
156.030   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
156.031   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
156.032   Floodplain development permits and certificates
   
156.033   Compliance
   
156.034   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
156.035   Interpretation
   
156.036   Warning and disclaimer or liability
   
156.037   Severability
Administration
   
156.050   Designation of the floodplain administrator
   
156.051   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator and
designated staff
   
156.052   Permit procedures
   
156.053   Permit review
   
156.054   Variance procedures
   
156.055   Fees
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
156.060   Inclusion of standards for flood hazard reduction
   
156.061   New regulatory data
   
156.062   Temporary storage
   
156.063   Removal of non-conversion agreements
   
156.064   [Reserved]
   
156.065   General standards
   
156.066   Specific standards
   
156.067   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
156.068   Floodways
   
156.069   Floodproofing standards for nonresidential structures or uses
   
156.070   Records
   
156.071   Certificate of occupancy
   
156.072   Hazardous materials
   
156.073   Critical facilities
   
156.074   Compensatory storage
   
156.075   [Reserved]
   
156.076   [Reserved]
   
156.077   [Reserved]
   
156.078   [Reserved]
   
156.079   [Reserved]
Enforcement
   
156.080   Stop work order
   
156.081   Violations
 
   
156.999   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND METHODS
§ 156.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (a)   The Legislature of the State of South Dakota has in SDCL 9-36-15 and
7-18-14 authorized local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses.
   (b)   The city elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq. (Pub. L. No. 90-488, as
amended). The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid
act, provides that areas of the town having a special flood hazard be
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain
management measures be applied in the flood hazard areas. The National Flood
Insurance Program was broadened and modified with the passage of the Flood
Disaster Protection Act of 1973, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq. and other
legislative measures. It was further modified by the National Flood Insurance
Reform Act of 1994, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq. The National Flood
Insurance Program is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, a
component of the United States Department of Homeland Security.
(1992 Code, § 45-1) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3- 2009)
§ 156.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (a)   The flood hazard areas of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, are subject to
periodic inundation which results in damage to persons and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   These flood impacts are created by the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface waters from any source, the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
(1992 Code, § 45-2) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 156.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in a manner as to minimize future flood blight
areas; and
   (g)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
   (h)   Qualify the city of Sioux Falls for participation in the National
Flood Insurance Program and Community Rating System program, thereby giving
citizens and businesses the opportunity to purchase flood insurance,
potentially at discounted rates;
   (i)   Work with existing city ordinances in stormwater and health to
maintain the quality of water in rivers, streams, lakes, estuaries, and marine
areas and their floodplains so as to protect public water supplies, areas of
the public trust, and wildlife habitat protected by the Endangered Species Act;
   (j)   Retain the natural channel, shoreline, and floodplain creation
processes and other natural floodplain functions that protect, create, and
maintain habitat for threatened and endangered species; and
   (k)   Prevent or minimize loss of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological
functions of floodplains and stream channels.
(1992 Code, § 45-3) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.004 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (a)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (b)   Require those uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (d)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(1992 Code, § 45-4) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
DEFINITIONS
§ 156.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure, as defined in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1, which is
on the same parcel of property as a principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure; specifically excludes
structures used for human habitation.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE. A structure, as defined in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1, which
is used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage,
raising, or drying of agricultural commodities and livestock; specifically
excludes any structures used for human habitation.
   AREA OF FUTURE-CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% (100-year) flood based on future-conditions hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident. The flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE, or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the 1% annual
chance flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached
by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of
coastal and riverine areas.
   BASE LEVEL ENGINEERING (BLE). The minimal investment for the region to allow
the region to build a base level understanding of flood risk for the watersheds
throughout the region. Areas can be used as long as they meet the minimum
requirements by FEMA.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BEST AVAILABLE INFORMATION. The most restrictive information is determined
by consulting (1) the Effective and/or Preliminary FIRMs and FIS as identified
in the latest Available Flood Hazard Information Table; and (2) the Advisory
Flood Hazard Information, if developed. If only one source of flood information
is available, then that is the best available. Where multiple sources of flood
information are available, the best available information is the source that
provides the more restrictive flood hazard zone, the highest base flood
elevation, and/or the greatest discharge. Must be determined for the proposed
project site.
   CERTIFIED FLOODPLAIN MANAGER. The Association of State Floodplain Managers
(ASFPM) has established a national program for certified floodplain managers
(CFM). This program recognizes continuing education and professional
development that enhances the knowledge and performance of local, state,
federal, and private-sector floodplain management professionals.
   CHANNEL MIGRATION ZONE. The area within the lateral extent of likely stream
channel movement due to stream bank destabilization and erosion, rapid stream
incision, aggradation, avulsions, and shifts in location of stream channels.
   COMMUNITY. City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, which has authority to adopt
and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its
jurisdiction.
   CRITERIA. The comprehensive criteria for land management and use for flood-
prone areas developed under 42 U.S.C. § 4102 for the purposes set forth in part
60 of this subchapter.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare during a flood. Critical facilities include, but are not
limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency
operations installations, water and wastewater treatment plants, electric power
stations, and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste (other than consumer products containing hazardous substances
or hazardous waste intended for household use).
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION (DFE). The elevation of the highest flood (generally
the BFE including freeboard) that a retrofitting method is designed to protect
against. Also referred to as a flood protection elevation.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DRY FLOODPROOFING. A combination of measures that results in a structure,
including the attendant utilities and equipment, being watertight with all
elements substantially impermeable to the entrance of floodwater with
structural components having the capacity to resist flood loads.
   ELEVATED BUILDING.
      (1)   A non-basement building:
         A.   Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water; and
         B.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the
case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D.
      (2)   ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
      (3)   In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of ELEVATED BUILDING, even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway
walls met the standards of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 17, 1979, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for  servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for
administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, related erosion areas
having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation above the datum of the
effective FIRM to which new and substantially improved structures must be
protected from flood damage.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. That system typically includes hurricane
tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See definition of FLOODING.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control
ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term describes the
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents. FLOODPROOFING is not an encouraged method of
protection in the city.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodwayconditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of
the watershed.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HARDSHIP. The inability to comply with an NFIP floodplain management
regulation and make reasonable use of a property because of unusual physical
and topographical conditions that are unique to the property, are not caused by
the applicant, and pertain to the land and not any structures, its inhabitants,
or the personal circumstances of the property owner.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         A.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         B.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOCAL FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The local official or other person
designated by a community as responsible for administering NFIP floodplain
management regulations.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. Elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches
any of the exterior walls of a structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that the
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. Means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD), to which base flood
elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   MINIMUM GROUND ELEVATION (MGE). It is the minimum finished ground elevation
at the home. This is the top of black dirt under the grass, or the top of
landscape rock or other landscape material at the lowest exposed part of the
house.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE ACT OF 1968 (NFIA). Created the Federal Insurance
Administration and made federal flood insurance available for the first time.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A program enacted by congress
intended to reduce the impact of flooding on private and public structures by
making federal flood insurance available within communities that adopt and
enforce NFIP floodplain management regulations.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after January 17, 1979, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to the structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to the structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   OPENING. Open area or space within a wall that meets certain performance
characteristics related to allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   PARCEL. Any contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or
recorded as the property of the same claimant, person, or company.
   PROTECTED AREA. The lands that lie within the boundaries of the floodway,
the riparian habitat zone, and the channel migration area. Because of the
impact that development can have on flood heights and velocities and habitat,
special rules apply in the protected area.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The
SFHA is inclusive of A Zones.
   SPECIAL HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow),
or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO,
A1-30, AE, AR, AR/AII-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V,
M, or E.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STATE COORDINATOR. The person, office, or agency of the state of South
Dakota designated by the governor of South Dakota, or by South Dakota statute,
that assists in the implementation of the NFIP in the state of South Dakota.
   STRUCTURE. (for floodplain management purposes) A walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. Walled and roofed shall be interpreted
as two outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels, sites, condominiums, or divisions for the purpose of sale,
lease, or transfer of ownership.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
      (1)   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the three-
year running cumulative (starting after December 31, 2022) cost of restoring
the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 45% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
      (2)   This includes the costs of, but are not necessarily limited to, all
materials, labor, built-in appliances, overhead, profit, and repairs to damaged
portions of the building that are done concurrent with the subject
improvements. This term does not, however, include the costs of the improvement
associated with post-storm debris removal; permitting; fees, preparation of
surveys, costs, plans, and/or specifications; or improvements outside of the
structure, such as landscaping, sidewalks, fences, or detached structures; or
work exempted from building permit requirements.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the three-year running cumulative (starting
after December 31, 2022) cost of which equals or exceeds 45% of the market
value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This
includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. This includes the costs of, but are not
necessarily limited to, all materials, labor, built-in appliances, overhead,
profit, and repairs to damaged portions of the building that are done
concurrent with the subject improvements. This term does not, however, include
either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by a local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
      (3)   The costs of the improvement associated with post-storm debris
removal; permitting; fees, preparation of surveys, costs, plans, and/or
specifications; or improvements outside of the structure, such as landscaping,
sidewalks, fences, or detached structures; or work exempted from building
permit requirements.
   VARIANCE. Is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.6 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. §§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations is presumed to be in VIOLATION until a time as that documentation
is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. The channel and banks of an identifiable watercourse. The
WATERCOURSE does include adjoining floodplain areas. The flood-carrying
capacity of a WATERCOURSE refers to the flood-carrying capacity of the channel
(except in the case of alluvial fans, where a channel is not typically
defined).
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National American
Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in
the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   WET FLOODPROOFING. Use of flood- damaged-resistant materials and
construction techniques to minimize flood damage to a structure by
intentionally allowing floodwaters to enter and exit automatically (without
human intervention).
(1992 Code, § 45-5) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 78-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 32-18, passed 5-2- 2018; Ord. 77-21, passed
7-6-2021)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.030 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of regulatory floodplain, which is
comprised of the special flood hazard area and all protected areas within the
jurisdiction of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
(1992 Code, § 45-6) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.031 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study for Minnehaha County, South Dakota and Incorporated Areas”
dated September 2, 2009; March 7, 2017; or October 5, 2017, with accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Any areas annexed by
the city of Sioux Falls will continue to use the latest effective Flood
Insurance Study and map panel. Any information that meets FEMA specifications
for best available information will be applicable in setting floodplain
restrictions.
(1992 Code, § 45-7) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 85-11, passed 11-14-
2011; Ord. 94- 16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 78-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 77-21,
passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.032 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
   (a)   Required. Any person, owner, or authorized agent who intends to
conduct any development (or change in water quality through spills, dumping, or
inlets) in a special flood hazard area shall first make application to the
floodplain administrator and shall obtain the required floodplain development
permit prior to the start of development.
   (b)   Application for floodplain development permit. The applicant shall
file an application in writing on a form furnished by the floodplain
administrator. The application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be
conducted by legal description, street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the site;
      (3)   Include a site plan showing the delineation of special flood hazard
areas, floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, ground
elevations, proposed fill and excavation, and drainage patterns and facilities;
      (4)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development
is intended;
      (5)   Be accompanied by construction documents, grading and filling
plans, and other information deemed appropriate by the floodplain
administrator;
      (6)   State the valuation of the proposed work when required; and
      (7)   Be signed by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.
   (c)   Validity of permit. The issuance of a floodplain development permit
under this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of,
any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. The
issuance of a permit based on submitted documents and information shall not
prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors.
The floodplain administrator is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a
structure or site which is in violation of this chapter.
   (d)   Expiration. A floodplain development permit shall become invalid if
the proposed development is not commenced within one year after its issuance,
or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the work commences. Extensions shall be requested in writing and
justifiable cause demonstrated. The floodplain administrator is authorized to
grant, in writing, extensions of up to two years.
   (e)   Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized
to suspend or revoke apermit issued under this chapter wherever the permit is
issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, or in violation of any ordinance or code of this jurisdiction.
   (f)   Flood hazard documents. Based on the permit review under § 156.053 and
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the floodplain administrator may
require the following documents:
      (1)   Elevation certificate upon the placement of the lowest floor,
including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor, of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement. The
floodplain administrator may require submission upon the placement of the
lowest floor, including basement, prior to further vertical construction;
      (2)   Designed opening certificate prepared by a registered professional
engineer for fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation where
provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do not meet
the minimum requirements in § 156.066(c);
      (3)   “No-rise” certificate along with supporting hydraulic computations,
prepared by a registered professional engineer, that development in a
designated floodway will result in no increase in the base flood heights during
the occurrence of a base flood (100-year) discharge;
      (4)   Fill placement certification prepared by a registered professional
engineer when required by the floodplain administrator to ensure proper
compaction and slope protection for fill placed in the floodplain;
      (5)   Manufactured home foundation design certification by a registered
professional engineer to meet the requirements in §
156.066(d); and
      (6)   Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses requirements within §
156.060.
(1992 Code, § 45-8) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 85-11, passed 11-14-
2011; Ord. 94- 16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.033 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or parcel shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(1992 Code, § 45-9) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016)
§ 156.034 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(1992 Code, § 45-10) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 156.035 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(1992 Code, § 45-11) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 156.036 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within the areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1992 Code, § 45-12) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 156.037 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudicated
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the chapter shall not
be affected.
(1992 Code, § 45-13) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.050 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The chief building official is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator
to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other
appropriate sections of title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (National
Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(1992 Code, § 45-14) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 30-19, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 156.051 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR AND
DESIGNATED STAFF.
   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator and designated
staff shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of §§
156.051 and
156.052;
   (b)   Review floodplain development permit application to determine whether
proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
   (c)   Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development
permits required by adoption of this chapter;
   (d)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334, and the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973) from
which prior approval is required;
   (e)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the floodplain administrator or designated staff shall make the
necessary interpretation;
   (f)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the water management board authorized by SDCL 46-
1-6, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of the notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (g)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (h)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with § 156.031, the floodplain administrator or designated staff shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the
provisions of §§
156.060 through
156.068;
   (i)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator or designated staff must require that no new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community;
   (j)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH on the community’s FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that
the applicant first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   (k)   Upon receipt of a floodplain development permit request, the
floodplain administrator or designated staff shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood elevation. A development project is not subject to the
requirements of this chapter (with the exceptions of restrictions specifically
set by this chapter for areas outside the regulated floodplain) if the
development project is entirely located on a portion of the land that can be
shown to be:
      (1)   Outside the protected area; and
      (2)   Higher than the base flood elevation.
   (l)   The floodplain administrator or designated staff shall inform the
applicant that the project, permit, or development may still be subject to the
flood insurance purchase requirements unless the owner receives a Letter of Map
Amendment from FEMA.
(1992 Code, § 45-15) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 85-11, passed 11-14-
2011; Ord. 94- 16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.052 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to
the floodplain administrator or designated staff on forms furnished by them and
may include, but not be limited to, plans drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
   (b)   Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be “floodproofed;”
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
156.066(b);
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      (5)   Maintain a record of all information in accordance with §
156.051(a);
      (6)   If along an approximate Zone A or AE, a BFE will need to be
determined using either a detailed study or best available data through FEMA;
      (7)   The elevations of the ten-, 50-, 100-, and 500-year floods where
the data is available;
      (8)   The boundaries of the regulatory floodplain, SFHA, floodway, and
channel migration area delineated in accordance with
156.065(j)(3);
      (9)   The proposed drainage system including, but not limited to, storm
sewers, overland flow paths, detention facilities, and roads;
      (10)   Existing and proposed structures, fill, pavement and other
impervious surfaces, and sites for storage of materials;
      (11)   All wetlands;
      (12)   Habitat areas identified for conservation or protection under
state or federal or local laws or regulations (e.g., Endangered Species Act,
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act, Growth Management
Act, Shorelines Management Act, Priority Habitat and Species List); and
      (13)   Existing native vegetation and proposed revegetation.
   (c)   If the proposed project includes a new structure, substantial
improvement, or repairs to a substantially damaged structure that will be
elevated, the application shall include the Flood Protection Elevation for the
building site and the proposed elevations of the following:
      (1)   The top of the bottom floor (including basement, crawl space, or
enclosure floor);
      (2)   The top of the next higher floor;
      (3)   The top of the slab of an attached garage;
      (4)   The lowest elevation of machinery or equipment servicing the
structure;
      (5)   The lowest adjacent (finished) grade next to structure;
      (6)   The highest adjacent (finished) grade next to structure; and
      (7)   The lowest adjacent grade at the lowest elevation of a deck or
stairs, including structural support.
   (d)   If the proposed project will result in a new elevated building,
substantial improvements to an elevated building, or repairs that require the
building become elevated, a non-conversion agreement will need to be signed by
the permit applicant and filed at the county register of deeds office. The non-
conversion agreement shall:
      (1)   Acknowledge the risk associated with this building practice;
      (2)   Acknowledge the use of the area that was permitted as an enclosure
will be used solely on nonresidential accessory or appurtenant structure of low
value whose usage is only for building access, parking, or storage;
      (3)   Allow for community, state, and/or federal officials to conduct
periodic inspections to ensure compliance; and
      (4)   Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or final inspection,
whichever occurs last, the property owner must execute a non-conversion
agreement and the agreement must be recorded with the county real estate
records. The agreement will be in the form of a restrictive covenant or other
county-approved binding instrument, where the benefits of the covenant run in
favor of the city of Sioux Falls. The covenant must be drafted to run with the
land and bind successors in perpetuity. The purpose of the covenant is to
document the current owner's understanding of the limitations on construction
and use of the enclosed area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
and to put prospective purchasers on notice of such restrictions. The covenant
will also reference retrofitting criteria necessary to properly convert
accessory buildings or structures to habitable space, should the owner choose
to do so. In addition to any other enforcement mechanisms available, violation
of the agreement will be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to
all applicable zoning enforcement procedures.
   (e)   For any nonresidential construction that has been wet floodproofed, a
non-conversion agreement must be completed as part of the permitting process.
The non-conversion agreement:
      (1)   Acknowledges the risk associated with this building practice;
      (2)   Acknowledges the use of the area that was wet floodproofed will be
used solely on nonresidential accessory or appurtenant structure of low value
whose usage is only for building access, parking, or storage;
      (3)   Allows for community, state, and/or federal officials to conduct
periodic inspections to ensure compliance; and
      (4)   Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or final inspection,
whichever occurs last, the property owner must execute a non-conversion
agreement and the agreement must be recorded with the county real estate
records. The agreement will be in the form of a restrictive covenant or other
county-approved binding instrument, where the benefits of the covenant run in
favor of the city of Sioux Falls. The covenant must be drafted to run with the
land and bind successors in perpetuity. The purpose of the covenant is to
document the current owner's understanding of the limitations on construction
and use of the enclosed area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
and to put prospective purchasers on notice of such restrictions. The covenant
will also reference retrofitting criteria necessary to properly convert
accessory buildings or structures to habitable space, should the owner choose
to do so. In addition to any other enforcement mechanisms available, violation
of the agreement will be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to
all applicable zoning enforcement procedures.
(1992 Code, § 45-16) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.053 PERMIT REVIEW.
   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
   (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (b)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
   (c)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (d)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (e)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (f)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
   (g)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
   (h)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (i)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
   (j)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(1992 Code, § 45-17) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009)
 
§ 156.054 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   The building board of appeals as established by the community shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   (a)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the building board
of appeals may appeal the decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   The floodplain administrator shall request an opinion letter from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state Office of Emergency
Management prior to hearing any variance. Additionally, the floodplain
administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and
shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state
Office of Emergency Management upon issuing a variance.
   (c)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
relevant factors in division (f)(2) below have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
   (d)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the building board of appeals may attach those conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter. (See §
156.003.)
   (e)   Variances shall not be issued:
      (1)   A.   To habitable structures within any designated floodway that
impacts upstream and downstream per requirements within 44 C.F.R. § 60.6 (a)
(1) and 44 C.F.R.§ 60.3 that need to be addressed to eliminate any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge.
         B.   Regarding floodway variances: The structures must be accessory
buildings and represent a low cost in potential to damage to building materials
as well as public expense;
      (2)   To reduce the base flood elevation requirement within §
156.066(a) Residential construction; or
      (3)   To reduce the freeboard and/or base flood elevation requirement
within §
156.066(b) Nonresidential construction.
   (f)   Prerequisites for granting variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         A.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
(1992 Code, § 45-18) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 78-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 32-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 77-21, passed
7-6-2021)
§ 156.055 FEES.
   (a)   A fee of $75 shall be charged for the issuance of a floodplain
development permit pertaining to individual lots.
   (b)   A fee of $250 shall be charged for the issuance of a floodplain
development permit pertaining to a group of lots or subdivisions (either
platted or preliminary).
   (c)   Fee will be administratively voided by staff for the following
exceptions:
      (1)   If the improvement is not a substantial improvement;
      (2)   For zoning permits (fence, sheds, paving, and the like); and/or
      (3)   For any organization identified under §
41.007.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 78-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 30-19, passed
3-19-2019; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 156.060 INCLUSION OF STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The city of Sioux Falls shall review all floodplain development permit
applications to determine whether proposed development areas will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
   (a)   Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. The hydraulic and hydrologic
analyses must be completed prior to the public hearing on the Preliminary
Subdivision Plan.
      (1)   No development shall:
         A.   Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the
BFE flood height; or
         B.   Cause any increase in the BFE flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
      (2)   The floodplain administrator and/or designated staff shall deny
permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or
cause any increase in the BFE flood height, based on the officially adopted
FIRM or other adopted map.
      (3)   The city of Sioux Falls Engineering Design Standards, Chapter 11,
Drainage Improvements, shall regulate the hydraulic and hydrologic analyses
standards and compliance.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.061 NEW REGULATORY DATA.
   (a)   All requests to revise or change the flood hazard data, including
requests for a Letter of Map Revision and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
shall be reviewed by the floodplain administrator and/or designated staff.
      (1)   The floodplain administrator shall not sign the community
acknowledgment form for any requests based on filling or other development,
unless the applicant for the letter documents that such filling or development
is in compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   The floodplain administrator shall not approve a request to revise
or change a floodway delineation until FEMA has issued a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision that approves the change.
   (b)   If an applicant disagrees with the regulatory data prescribed by this
section, they may submit a detailed technical study needed to replace existing
data with better data in accordance with FEMA mapping guidelines. If the data
in question are shown on the published FIRM, the submittal must also include a
request to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision to correct the flood risk in the
area based on existing conditions.
   (c)   Where base flood elevation data are not available in accordance with
this section, applicants for approval of new subdivisions and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions)
greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include such
data when submitting for their permit.
   (d)   Where floodway delineation is not available in accordance with this
section, the floodway will be designated to be one-half the distance of the
mapped 100-year floodplain at any point, and the prohibition on floodway
development adheres, unless a floodway study indicates otherwise. This
provision applies to any floodplain development permit, including those for
substantial improvements.
   (e)   The floodplain administrator and/or designated staff shall use the
most restrictive data available for the channel migration zone, floodways, and
future conditions.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.062 TEMPORARY STORAGE.
   All temporary storage of materials or equipment on sites within Zones A1-30,
AE, AH, AO, and A on the community's FIRM or area that has been identified as a
flood hazard area through the use of best available data are required to:
   (a)   For commercial, industrial, or government uses:
      (1)   Obtain an annual floodplain development permit prior to temporary
storage; and
      (2)   Provide a city-approved response flood plan to detail what
activities will take place if a flood warning is issued to ensure that
materials aren't swept away by the flood; and
      (3)   Provide an erosion control plan for all feasible levels of water
events.
   (b)   For all other uses:
      (1)   Obtain a floodplain development permit prior to temporary storage;
and
      (2)   Be on the site for fewer than 90 consecutive days and no more than
180 cumulative days within a calendar year; and
      (3)   Have a plan in place for the removal of the equipment or materials
including a list of necessary supplies, tools, and resources needed to achieve
the removal; and
      (4)   Have proper documentation to support when the materials or
equipment are moved on and off the site.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.063 REMOVAL OF NON-CONVERSION AGREEMENTS.
   The floodplain administrator or designated staff can allow a non-conversion
agreement to be removed if the owner of a property can show that based on the
most current information that the property no longer qualifies for floodplain
restrictions that would require the non-conversion agreement.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.064 [RESERVED.]
§ 156.065 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (a)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (b)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (c)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (d)   New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service equipment shall be
located at least two feet above the base flood elevation. Electrical wiring and
outlets, switches, junction boxes, and panels shall be elevated at least two
feet above the base flood elevation unless they conform to the provisions of
the electrical code for location of such items in wet locations. Duct systems
shall not be installed below two feet above the base flood elevation;
   (e)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
   (f)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters;
   (g)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding;
   (h)   The flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be the base flood elevation
plus two feet;
   (i)   Where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been provided in
special flood hazard areas, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state, or other source; and
   (j)   Protected area.
      (1)   The protected area is comprised of those lands that lie within the
boundaries of the floodway and the channel migration area.
      (2)   In riverine areas where a floodway has not been designated in
accordance with this chapter, the protected area is comprised of those lands
that lie within the boundaries of the channel migration area and the SFHA;
      (3)   Channel migration area.
         A.   The channel migration area shall be the channel migration zone as
delineated on Sioux Falls Floodplain Protection Area Map plus 25 feet.
         B.   Where more than one channel migration zone has been delineated,
the floodplain administrator shall use the delineation that has been adopted
for other local regulatory purposes.
         C.   Where a channel migration zone has not yet been mapped, it is
designated as the entire SFHA as the channel migration zone.
(1992 Code, § 45-19) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.066 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided, the following provisions are required:
   (a)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standards of this chapter are satisfied.
      (1)   Site plans for new residential structures are required to specify
the minimum ground elevation (MGE) which designates the elevation of the top of
the black dirt under the grass, or the top of the landscape rock or other
landscape material at the lowest exposed part of the house.
      (2)   Exception: Structures on areas removed from areas of special flood
hazard with a FEMA-approved LOMR-F may proceed with construction per standards
listed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built on Fill
In or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe From Flooding.
      (3)   Structures on areas removed from areas of special flood hazard with
a FEMA-approved LOMR-F, and per the community acknowledgment form submitted
with Letter of Map Change, shall have elevation drawings at the time of
application for a building permit and must be signed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
The professional is verifying that no new construction or substantial
improvement is allowed unless the lowest floor elevation is two feet or more
above the BFE. The elevation drawing shall include the following:
         A.   Lowest floor elevation (including basement);
         B.   The lowest ground elevation touching the building (entry point);
and
         C.   Base flood elevation.
   (b)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated two feet above the
base flood level. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop
and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this section.
   (c)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade; and
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (d)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites:
         A.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
         B.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
         C.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
         D.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated two feet above the base flood elevation, and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   (e)   Recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-
30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM either:
         A.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         C.   Meet the elevation certificate requirements of § 156.052(b)(1),
and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in division
(d) above.
      (2)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (f)   Crawl space. New construction and substantial improvements built on a
crawl space or sub-grade (below-grade) crawl space may be permitted if the
development is designed and meets or exceeds the standards found in FEMA's
Technical Bulletins 1, 2, and 11, which include but are not limited to the
following:
      (1)   The structure must be affixed to a permanent foundation, designed
and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawl space construction is
not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second
unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a
registered architect or professional engineer.
      (2)   The crawl space is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such,
must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening
can be no more than one foot above the LAG.
      (3)   The crawl space enclosure must have proper openings that allow
equalization of hydrostatic pressure by allowing automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. To achieve this, a minimum of one square inch of flood opening is
required per one square foot, or smaller openings if they are approved
engineered openings of the enclosed area subject to flooding.
      (4)   Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation
walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation, piers, or other materials that extend below the BFE. Ductwork, in
particular, must either be placed two feet above the BFE or sealed from
floodwaters.
      (5)   Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be
elevated above the BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or
accumulate within the system components during flood conditions.
      (6)   The interior grade of a crawl space below the BFE must not be more
than two feet below the LAG.
      (7)   The height of the below-grade crawl space, measured from the lowest
interior grade of the crawl space floor to the bottom of the floor joist of the
next higher floor cannot exceed four feet at any point.
      (8)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space. The enclosed area should be drained
within a reasonable time after a flood event.
      (9)   Buildings with below-grade crawl spaces will have higher flood
insurance premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawl space
construction with the interior elevation at or above the LAG.
(1992 Code, § 45-20) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 85-11, passed 11-14-
2011; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 78-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 77-21,
passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.067 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (a)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   Preliminary plans and development engineering plans shall include
the special flood hazard area and drainage data as required by engineering
design standards.
      (2)   Residential building lots shall be provided with adequate buildable
area outside the floodway.
      (3)   Streets and sidewalks shall be designed to minimize potential for
increasing or aggravating flood levels.
   (b)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of §§
156.032,
156.052, and
156.065 through
156.068.
   (c)   Base flood elevation data shall be determined and shown on subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is lesser.
   (d)   (1)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      (2)   Residential subdivisions outside areas of special flood hazards for
lots platted after August 25, 2016. For areas located within 100 feet of a
special flood hazard area, the following minimum requirements shall apply to
construction of residential structures:
         A.   The minimum setback distance from the edge of a flood hazard area
to the nearest wall of a basement shall be 20 feet;
         B.   The lowest floor level elevation (including basement) shall be no
more than five feet below the closest adjacent base flood elevation;
         C.   The lowest opening shall be no less than one foot above the base
flood elevation;
         D.   Additional requirements in conformance with the provisions of
FEMA/FIA-Technical Bulletin 10-01 may be required to ensure that a structure is
reasonably safe from flooding.
   (e)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
   (f)    Any subdivision proposals along any regulated floodplain are required
to determine the BFE through a study or best available data through FEMA and
provide that information with the first subdivision submittals.
   (g)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision
proposals where a flood hazard exists as illustrated on a floodplain map (FIRM
map or best available information data). The property owner(s) or designated
representatives of any subdivision which proposes changes to the 100-year
floodplain limits shall have a licensed professional prepare, request the city
to sign a community acknowledgment form, and submit for a conditional Letter of
Map Change directly to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Building
permits for any areas of the subdivision affected by proposed changes shall not
be approved by the city prior to acceptance of the Letter of Map Change by
FEMA. Upon verification of the FEMA acceptance, the city floodplain
administrator shall issue a floodplain development permit.
(1992 Code, § 45-21) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 78-17, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.068 FLOODWAYS.
   (a)   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 156.031 are areas designated as floodways.
   (b)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Designate a regulatory floodway which will not increase the base
flood level more than one foot; and
      (2)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway (except for public works projects such as bridges, culverts, low water
crossings, roads, public utilities, and the like); and
      (3)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the applicant first applies
for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA; and
      (4)   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the stream
bed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to
channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows; and
      (5)   The maintenance of existing levees is permissible; and
      (6)   Residential development is prohibited within the regulated floodway
portion of the regularity floodplain; and
      (7)   Any work exempted and allowed is required to show a no-rise for any
floodway and floodplain up and downstream from the project area.
(1992 Code, § 45-22) (Ord. 70-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 85-11, passed 11-14-
2011; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.069 FLOODPROOFING STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES OR USES.
   (a)   Dry floodproofing. No permit or variance shall be issued for a
nonresidential structure designed to be watertight below the base flood
elevation until the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures will protect
the structure or development to the flood protection elevation and submits a
FEMA floodproofing certificate. Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as
appropriate, to:
      (1)   Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces, and other regional flood factors;
      (2)   Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
      (3)   Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
      (4)   Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters; and
      (5)   Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters.
   (b)   Wet floodproofing. New construction and substantial improvements of
any accessory structure less than 600 square feet (including, but not limited
to, detached garages, carports, storage and tool sheds, and small boathouses)
may be allowed to be wet floodproofed provided that:
      (1)   The structure is strictly a nonresidential structure used for
parking or storage only;
      (2)   The accessory building or structure must represent a maximum
investment of less than 10% of the value of the principal building on the
property, or a maximum floor area of 600 square feet;
      (3)   Designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters
through the use of openings;
      (4)   Be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
      (5)   Be properly anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
      (6)   Mechanical and utility equipment, outlets, and switches must be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE plus two feet;
      (7)   Must comply with the floodway encroachment provisions of the NFIP
and this chapter; and
      (8)   Designed and built to adhere to FEMA Technical Bulletins 1, 2, and
7.
   (c)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or
review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and
shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this division. A record of
such certification that includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
floodplain administrator. If the use or occupancy of the building changes in
the future to residential, then the wet floodproofing of the structure cannot
be used when determining compliance of the structure to the residential
construction of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.070 RECORDS.
   (a)   Where base flood elevation data have been obtained pursuant to this
chapter, the floodplain administrator or designated staff shall obtain, record,
and maintain the actual "finished construction" elevations for the locations
listed in §
156.052(c). This information shall be recorded on a current FEMA elevation
certificate (FEMA Form 81-31), signed and sealed by a professional land
surveyor, currently licensed in the state of South Dakota.
   (b)   For all new or substantially improved dry floodproofed nonresidential
structures where base flood elevation data has been obtained pursuant to this
chapter, the floodplain administrator and/or designated staff shall obtain,
record, and maintain the elevation (in relation to the datum of the effective
FIRM) to which the structure was floodproofed. This information shall be
recorded on a current FEMA floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), signed
and sealed by a professional engineer, currently licensed in the state of South
Dakota.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.071 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   A certification of use for the property or a certificate of occupancy
for a new or substantially improved structure or an addition shall not be
issued until:
      (1)   The permit applicant provides a properly completed, signed, and
sealed elevation or floodproofing certificate showing finished construction
data as required by § 4.6;
      (2)   If a mitigation plan is required by this chapter, all work
identified in the plan has been completed according to the plan's schedule;
      (3)   The applicant provides copies of all required federal, state, and
local permits noted in the permit application per this chapter;
      (4)   All other provisions of this chapter have been met.
   (b)   The floodplain administrator or designated staff may accept a
performance bond or other security that will ensure that unfinished portions of
the project will be completed after the certification of use or certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.072 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (a)   No new development shall create a threat to public health, public
safety, or water quality. Chemicals, explosives, gasoline, propane, buoyant
materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other
materials that are hazardous, toxic, or a threat to water quality are
prohibited from the regulatory floodplain. This prohibition does not apply to
small quantities of these materials kept for normal household use. This
prohibition does not apply to the continued operations of existing facilities
and structures, reuse of existing facilities and structures, or functionally
dependent facilities or structures.
   (b)   If the proposed project cannot meet division (a) above, then a habitat
assessment must be conducted that includes an assessment of the impact of the
project on federal, state, or locally protected species and habitat, water
quality, and aquatic habitat. The assessment shall be:
      (1)   A biological evaluation or biological assessment developed per 50
C.F.R. § 402.12 to initiate federal interagency consultation under Endangered
Species Act § 7(a)(2); or
      (2)   Documentation that the activity fits within § 4(d) of the
Endangered Species Act; or
      (3)   Documentation that the activity fits within a habitat conservation
plan approved pursuant to § 10 of the Endangered Species Act, where any such
assessment has been prepared or is otherwise made available; or
      (4)   An assessment prepared in accordance with FEMA standards. The
assessment shall determine if the project would adversely affect:
         A.   Species that are federal, state, or local listed as threatened or
endangered;
         B.   The primary constituent elements for critical habitat, when
designated;
         C.   Essential fish habitat designated by the National Marine
Fisheries Service;
         D.   Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas; or
         E.   Other protected areas and elements necessary for species
conservation.
      (5)   Habitat mitigation plan.
         A.   If the assessment conducted under this section concludes the
project is expected to have an adverse effect on water quality and/or aquatic
habitat or habitat functions, the applicant shall provide a plan to mitigate
those impacts in accordance with applicable FEMA regulations.
            1.   If the USFWS or NMFS issues an incidental take permit under §
10 ESA, Biological Opinion under § 7, ESA, then it can be considered to qualify
as a plan to mitigate those impacts.
            2.   If the project is located outside the protected area, the
mitigation plan shall include such avoidance, minimization, restoration, or
compensation measures so that in-direct adverse effects of development in the
floodplain (effects to stormwater, riparian vegetation, bank stability, channel
migration, hyporheic zones, wetlands, large woody debris, and the like) are
mitigated such that equivalent or better habitat protection is provided.
            3.   No new stream crossings are allowed outside the protected
area, unless approval has been obtained as stated in this chapter.
            4.   If the project is located in the protected area, the
mitigation plan shall stipulate avoidance measures as are needed to ensure that
there is no adverse effect during any phase of the project.
         B.   The plan's habitat mitigation activities shall be incorporated
into the proposed project. The floodplain development permit shall be based on
the redesigned project and its mitigation components.
         C.   As required in this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall
not issue a certificate of occupancy until all work identified in the habitat
assessment and mitigation plan has been completed or the applicant has provided
the necessary assurance that unfinished portions of the project will be
completed in accordance with §
156.071(b).
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.073 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the 500-year floodplain.
   (b)   Construction of new critical facilities in the regulatory floodplain
shall be permissible if no feasible alternative site is available, provided:
      (1)   Critical facilities shall have the lowest floor elevated two feet
above the base flood elevation or to the height of the 500-year flood,
whichever is higher. If there is no available data on the 500-year flood, the
permit applicants shall develop the needed data in accordance with FEMA mapping
guidelines.
      (2)   Access to and from the critical facility shall be protected to the
elevation of the 500-year flood.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.074 COMPENSATORY STORAGE.
   New development shall not reduce the effective flood storage volume of the
regulatory floodplain. A development proposal shall provide compensatory
storage if grading or other activity eliminates any effective flood storage
volume. Compensatory storage shall:
   (a)   Provide equivalent volume at equivalent elevations within the same
drainage basin that is being displaced. For this purpose, "equivalent
elevation" means having a similar relationship to ordinary high water and to
the best available ten-year, 50-year, and 100-year water surface profiles; and
   (b)   Be hydraulically connected to the source of flooding; and
   (c)   Provide compensatory storage in the same construction season as when
the displacement of flood storage volume occurs and before the flood season
begins; and
   (d)   The newly created storage area shall be graded and vegetated to allow
fish access during flood events without creating fish stranding sites.
(Ord. 77-21, passed 7-6-2021)
§ 156.075 [RESERVED.]
§ 156.076 [RESERVED.]
§ 156.077 [RESERVED.]
§ 156.078 [RESERVED.]
§ 156.079 [RESERVED.]
CHAPTER 157: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Title
   
157.002   Purpose
   
157.003   Authority
   
157.004   Jurisdiction
   
157.005   Interpretation, abrogation and severability
   
157.006   Amendments
   
157.007   Enforcement and violations
   
157.008   Definitions
Subdivision Plan Approval Process
   
157.020   Applicability
   
157.021   Overview of approval process
   
157.022   Fees
   
157.023   Subdivision plan and plat exemptions
Concept Plan
   
157.035   Information required
Preliminary Subdivision Plan
   
157.050   General provisions
   
157.051   Submittal and process
   
157.052   Preliminary subdivision plan elements and approval criteria
   
157.053   Effective period of preliminary approval
   
157.054   Revisions to preliminary subdivision plan
Development Engineering Plans
   
157.065   The development engineering plans
The Plat
   
157.066   The plat
   
157.067   Plat submission
   
157.068   Plat approval
Subdivision Process Exemptions
   
157.080   Subdivision plan exemptions; minor plat, transfer of ownership plat
and replat
   
157.081   Plat exemptions
Preliminary Subdivision Plan Lot, Block, and Street Layout Criteria
   
157.095   Preliminary subdivision plan intent
   
157.096   Preliminary subdivision plan blocks
   
157.097   Preliminary subdivision plan lots
   
157.098   Preliminary subdivision plan street system
   
157.099   Preliminary plan shared use paths
Development Engineering Plan Criteria
   
157.112   Development engineering plan lots, blocks, and streets
   
157.113   Development engineering plan streets system
   
157.114   Shared use paths
   
157.115   Development engineering plan minimum subdivision improvements
   
157.116   Private maintenance and repair agreements
   
157.117   Easements
Water Facilities
   
157.130   General requirements
   
157.131   Public water supply
   
157.132   Design standards
Sanitary Sewers
   
157.145   Provided for each lot
   
157.146   Exceptions
   
157.147   Design standards
Grading and Drainage
   
157.160   Grading plan
   
157.161   Drainage plan
   
157.162   Design standards
Erosion
   
157.175   Specifications
   
157.176   Subdivisions and individual lots
Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities
   
157.190   Existing features
   
157.191   Sensitive natural areas
Rural Subdivisions
   
157.205   In general
   
157.206   Roads
   
157.207   Lots and blocks
   
157.208   Grading and drainage
   
157.209   Water supply
   
157.210   Sanitary sewers
Assurances for the Completion of Minimum Improvements
   
157.225   Assurances required
 
   
157.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Certificates for Preliminary Plans
   
Appendix B: Certificates for Plats and Replats
   
Appendix C: Subdivision Construction Agreement
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of subdivision regulations, see §§
154.034 through
154.036
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Extraterritorial zoning regulations, see
ch. 159
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
   Health and sanitation, see
ch. 92
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Plumbing, see
ch. 55
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Storm drainage fee, see §
51.100
   Streets and sidewalks, see
ch. 96
   Subdivision plats to be approved after major street plan adopted, see §
154.033
   Utilities, see title VII
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
Statutory reference:
   Platting of subdivisions, see SDCL ch. 11-3
   Subdivision regulations, see SDCL 11-6-27 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 TITLE.
   These regulations may be referred to as the “2018 Revised Subdivision
Ordinance for the City of Sioux Falls” and the area of joint jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.002 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the subdivision of land so as
to coordinate streets/roads with other subdivisions and uses, to provide water
and sanitation facilities, drainage and flood control, to foster efficient and
orderly urban growth compatible with the natural environment, to provide
adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light, and air, and for a
distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions
favorable to health, safety, convenience or prosperity, to minimize cut and
fill operations, to prevent premature land subdivision, and to conform with the
comprehensive plan for the city and its area(s) of joint jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.003 AUTHORITY.
   In accordance with SDCL ch. 11-3 and ch. 11-6 and any other authority
provided by law or as those statutes may be amended, the city does hereby
exercise the power and authority to review and approve or disapprove plats for
the subdivision of land within the city and for land in the area(s) of joint
jurisdiction. As allowed by SDCL 11-3-6, the city council designates the
director of planning and development services or designee and the city engineer
or designee as the administrative officials of the municipality to approve
plats in lieu of approval by the governing body.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.004 JURISDICTION.
   (a)   These regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined
herein, located within the city and its area(s) of joint jurisdiction as
referenced by the map in the Minnehaha and Lincoln County joint jurisdictional
zoning ordinances.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person having control of any land within
the city and its area of jurisdiction to subdivide or lay out the land in lots,
unless in accordance with the laws of the state and the regulations contained
herein. Any parcel of land of 40 acres or less which is located within the
joint jurisdiction boundary shall be platted prior to the sale or transfer of
the land unless the requirement is waived by the city director of planning and
development services.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.005 INTERPRETATION, ABROGATION AND SEVERABILITY.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, these
regulations are the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety,
health and general welfare. It is not the intent of this chapter to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenant or deed restriction, where
these provisions conflict or overlap. Whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.050) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.006 AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing for the health, safety and general welfare of
the community, the city council may from time to time amend the provisions
imposed by these subdivision regulations. Public hearings on all proposed
amendments shall be held by the planning commission and the city council in the
manner prescribed by SDCL 11-6.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.060) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.007 ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   The city director of planning and development services and city
engineer are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of
this chapter and establish rules for its administration. For those purposes,
the director shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
   (b)   No owner, or developer, of any parcel of land located in a proposed
subdivision shall transfer or sell any part of the parcel before a final plat
of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions of the
regulations and filed with the county register of deeds unless provisions of
plat exemptions apply as within §§
157.080 and
157.081.
   (c)   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, the city director of planning and development services may order the
work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or
causing the work to be done; and any persons shall forthwith stop the work
until authorized by the city director of planning and development services to
proceed with the work.
   (d)   The city director of planning and development services and city
engineer shall together have the authority to make interpretations of this
chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to
clarify the application of its provisions.
   (e)   No permit shall be issued for the demolition or construction of any
building or structure located on a lot or parcel subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.070) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way which affords only a secondary means
of access to abutting property.
   ARTERIAL. A main traffic artery, more or less continuous across the city,
which acts as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways and
includes each street designated as an arterial street on the major street plan.
   BASEMENT. Any story located below the main floor.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways
or boundary lines of municipalities.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for
shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
   CITY. The City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
   COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from local streets/roads to
arterial streets or highways, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation in that development.
   COMMON AREAS. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires
and unless otherwise provided in the master deed or lease, include:
      (1)   The land whether fee simple or leased on which the building or
buildings stand;
      (2)   The land which is used to access the building or buildings;
      (3)   The foundations, main walls, roofs, halls, lobbies, stairways and
entrances and exits and communication ways;
      (4)   The basements, flat roofs, yards, gardens, recreation facilities
and parking areas, unless otherwise provided or stipulated;
      (5)   The premises for the lodging of janitors or persons in charge of
the building or buildings, except as otherwise provided or stipulated;
      (6)   The compartments or installations of central services such as
power, light, gas, cold and hot water, refrigeration, reservoirs, water tanks,
pumps and the like;
      (7)   The elevators, garbage incinerators and in general all devices or
installations existing for common use; and
      (8)   All other elements of the property rationally of common use or
necessary to its existence, upkeep and safety. See SDCL 43-15A-5.
   COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Any legally adopted part or element of the
comprehensive plan of the City of Sioux Falls.
   CONCEPT PLAN. A basic plan that is preparatory to the preliminary plan.
   CONDOMINIUM. Includes separate interest in common areas and other portions
of real property.
   CONTRACTOR. The person who contracts with an individual or the developer to
construct a building or structure on a parcel of land.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet having an appropriate
terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   DEDICATED. A grant of land to the public for their perpetual use.
   DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its authorized
agent who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner.
Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which abuts a street on two opposite sides (not a
corner lot).
   EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for
a specified purpose, of any designated part of the property. An EASEMENT is
also a means to acquire a legal right for a specific use of land owned by
others.
   ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS. The current engineering design standards for
public improvements of the city entitled City of Sioux Falls Engineering Design
Standards for Public Improvements, also referred to as "EDS" or "city design
standards."
   EXPRESSWAY. A principal traffic artery, serving the major centers of
activity, the highest traffic volume corridors and the longest trip desired,
with partially or fully controlled access.
   DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN. The development engineering plan shall address
the engineering aspects of topography and infrastructure.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A street used only for access to abutting property where
there will be constructed an expressway or arterial street.
   HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. An association or organization, whether or not
incorporated, which operates under and pursuant to recorded covenants or deed
restrictions through which each owner or a portion of a subdivision, be it a
lot, parcel site, unit plot, condominium or any other interest, is
automatically a member or assessment for a prorated share of expense of the
association which may become a lien against the lot, parcel, unit, condominium,
or other interest or member.
   LOCAL STREET. A street intended to provide access to other streets from
individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for various
utilities but not intended to be used for through traffic.
   LOT. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or for building development.
   LOT, FLAG. A flag lot has two distinct parts: the flag and the pole. The
flag contains the buildable area and is located behind another lot; and the
pole, which connects the flag to the street, and provides the only street
frontage for the lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A parcel established by the county or a lot that is platted
as part of a subdivision that has been recorded in the office of the register
of deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of
the register of deeds prior to the effective date of the subdivision ordinance.
Any lot or parcel of land created through a violation of any applicable laws or
ordinances of the state, county, or the city shall not, in this instance, be
considered a LOT OF RECORD.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement), but not including an unfinished crawl space used for access.
   MAIN FLOOR. The lowest story in which more than six feet lies above grade
for more than 50% of the perimeter or in which any point is more than 12 feet
above grade.
   MAJOR DRAINAGEWAY. The main corridor for storm water flow through
developments. MAJOR DRAINAGEWAYS are identified as intermittent streams on USGS
quadrangle maps or as otherwise approved by the city engineer.
   MAJOR STREET PLAN. The major street plan adopted through the MPO
transportation planning process and as approved by the city council.
   MINOR PLAT. Any plat containing not more than three lots fronting on an
existing street that meets all standards of §§
157.067,
157.068, and
157.080.
   MUTUAL ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement granting the perpetual right of abutting
property owners to use a designated portion of property for common ingress and/
or egress purposes. The easement area shall be maintained by the abutting
property owners. The easement is not to be considered required frontage.
   OWNER. The record owners of real property in fee simple including any
person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any
other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be subdivided.
   PARCEL. Any contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by or
recorded as the property of the same claimant, person or company.
   PLAT. A map, a representation on paper or transferable to paper (e.g.,
electronic), of a piece of land subdivided into lots, parcels, tracts or
blocks, including streets/roads, commons and public grounds, if any, all drawn
to scale and complete with all irrevocable offers of dedication.
   PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN. The preliminary subdivision plan shall address
the preliminary subdivision plan’s internal street network and associated lot
and block layout and the relationship to proposed zoning and land use.
   PRIVATE STREET. A street that has not been accepted by the city or other
governmental entity, but rather reserved by platting a private easement.
Private streets shall be named based upon the standards of §
157.113(j) Street naming criteria.
   REPLATS. The adjustment and/or vacation of property lines which reallocates
or consolidates land area of contiguous lots or parcels, provided that the
adjustment or vacation of property lines, sites or other divisions of land
under stated conditions of this subdivision chapter.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. A responsible party means any person seeking to plat a
subdivision, including but not limited to (a) owners holding the land for
investment purposes, who are not engaged in construction and not holding
themselves out as real estate developers, and (b) any developer who is holding
or purchasing the land primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course
of business and who is seeking to subdivide property or obtaining a
construction permit authorizing the commencement of construction activities for
a subdivision. A responsible party must file and comply with subdivision plans
and other requirements under this chapter (including entering into a
Subdivision Construction Agreement and posting a suitable Performance Security
and/or Warranty Security, as applicable), regardless of whether such
requirements refer to an "Owner" or "Developer" or both.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land, defined as an easement, occupied by a public
or private street, railroad, pedestrian walkways, or other special use.
   SETBACK. The line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line
that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be created
or placed.
   SHARED USE PATH. A multi-use path designed primarily for use by bicyclists
and pedestrians, including pedestrians with disabilities, for transportation
and recreation purposes. Shared use paths are physically separated from motor
vehicle traffic by an open space or barrier, and are either within the highway
right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way.
   STRUCTURES. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, structures include buildings, walls, fences and signs.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels, sites, condominiums, or divisions for the purpose of sale,
lease or transfer of ownership, except as provided in §§
157.080 and
157.081.
   SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENT. A contract entered into by the developer
or owner and the city by which the responsible party warrants and promises to
complete the required public improvements within the subdivision within a
specified time period.
   SUBSTANTIAL BUILD-OUT. A subdivision in which at least 90% of the individual
lots or 90% of the real property within the approved subdivision has been
developed by the completion of planned vertical and  horizontal construction
and the remaining property has been permanently stabilized.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP PLAT. A plat only for the purpose to subdivide into
one additional lot a larger piece of land to transfer from one owner to another
that must follow the requirements within §
157.080.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.080) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 92-12,
passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 08-17, passed 1-3-2017; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018;
Ord. 97-22, passed 8-16-2022)
SUBDIVISION PLAN APPROVAL PROCESS
§ 157.020 APPLICABILITY.
   Subdivision of land shall be required before the division of land (for any
purpose) into two or more parcels.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.02.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.021 OVERVIEW OF APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (a)   Generally. Proposed subdivision development plans must be approved by
the city in accordance with the following procedures which include four
principal steps:
      (1)   Concept plan is not required, but advisory (submit for comments to
prepare for next steps);
      (2)   Preliminary plan (in coordination with rezoning);
      (3)   Development engineering plans (in preparation for engineering
construction plans); and
      (4)   Plat (before a building permit is approved or issued).
   (b)   Simultaneous review. It is the intent of these subdivision regulations
that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of a
zoning application.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.02.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.022 FEES.
   A fee shall be deposited with the city for all preliminary subdivision
plans, development engineering plans and plats. The fees for these applications
are to cover the costs of administration, publication of notice, and similar
matters shall be charged to developers. The amount of fees charged are listed
below. Fees established in accordance with this section shall be paid upon
submission of a complete application.
   Preliminary Subdivision Plan - $350.
   Development Engineering Plan - $300 plus $10 for each lot in the plan.
   Plats - A charge of $80 shall be made for the first two lots on final plats
and $110 for the first two lots on replats; plus a fee of $10 for each
additional lot within a plat and $10 for each additional lot within a replat.
   Construction Plan - $100.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.02.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.023 SUBDIVISION PLAN AND PLAT EXEMPTIONS.
   The following situations shall be exempted from concept plans, preliminary
subdivision plans and development engineering plans as a part of the
subdivision procedures of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt a plat in these situations if required by state law.
   (a)   Preliminary subdivision plan and development engineering plan
exemptions as specified within §
157.080:
      (1)   Minor plats;
      (2)   Replats; and
      (3)   Transfer of ownership.
   (b)   Plat exemptions as specified within §
157.080:
      (1)   Cemetery gravesite plats;
      (2)   Government lots;
      (3)   Boundary line adjustment; and
      (4)   Add-on agreements for zoning parcels.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.02.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
CONCEPT PLAN
§ 157.035 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (a)    A concept plan is a process designed to help a developer save time
and expense in preparing a preliminary plan and a plat. A concept plan does not
have a requirement for engineering information; however, the more engineering
design work that is done, the developer will be more likely to avoid future
zoning, subdivision, or construction plan amendments because of lot and block
reconfigurations due to drainage and other utility requirements. The advantage
of a concept plan is that city staff will provide information upfront that may
significantly affect the lot and block layout and utility plans. It is
recommended that at least some preliminary sanitary and storm drainage
engineering be completed during the concept plan stage. All concept plans for
review shall be submitted to the planning office.
   (b)   The developer may submit a concept plan to the online plan review of
the city of Sioux Falls website prior to the submission of the preliminary
subdivision plan. The concept plan online review will include comments from all
applicable city departments. City staff comments on the concept plan shall be
sent to the developer within 15 working days unless city staff notifies the
developer that more time is required in which case an additional 15 days will
be allowed.
   (c)   The concept plan will include the following:
      (1)   The general layout of streets and access points to adjacent street
systems; location of major drainageways, approximate flow paths, and detention
ponds; water line locations; nearest existing sanitary sewer line locations;
wetland, natural features and amenities and preservation of public land,
proposed zoning districts; pedestrian connectivity; and agreement with the
city’s comprehensive plan goals and policies;
      (2)   Vicinity map to scale, showing locations of the concept plan and
other property for at least 660' in every direction; and
      (3)   The consultant or developer addresses and telephone numbers.
   (d)   Comments from city staff on the concept plan may include future land
use amendments, zoning transitions, street right-of-way width and type of
street (minor or major collector), pedestrian circulation, lot and block
layout, street access points, water and sanitary sewer locations, assessments
cost per acre including sanitary sewer, water main, regional detention cost,
and storm sewer. Staff shall track consistency of comments between concept plan
and preliminary subdivision plan.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.03.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018; Ord. 88-22, passed 8-9-2022)
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN
§ 157.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   A preliminary subdivision plan is a process designed to assist the developer
and the city with the efficient and timely development of utilities to and
throughout a development. Plans will be evaluated for compliance with the
city’s comprehensive plan goals and policy framework, adopted master plans and
the capital improvement program.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.04) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.051 SUBMITTAL AND PROCESS.
   (a)   The developer shall submit an electronic copy of the preliminary
subdivision plan to the online plan review at the city of Sioux Falls’ website.
The applicant shall submit all elements as required by §
157.052 before the planning commission submittal deadline in order to stay on a
standard public hearing schedule.
      (1)   The planning office shall determine if the application and
preliminary subdivision plan contains all elements as required by §
157.052.
         A.   If it is determined that not all elements are completed, then the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific deficiencies and that
the application shall not be distributed for review until all elements of the
application are submitted. The applicant has until the submittal deadline to
submit all elements.
         B.   If the planning office determines that the application does
contain all elements as required by §
157.052, the application will be distributed to applicable departments for
review.
      (2)   Applicable city departments will review within ten working days of
submittal to determine compliance with all approval criteria of §
157.052.
         A.   If the planning and development services director determines that
the preliminary subdivision plans do not meet the criteria, the plan may not be
placed on the planning commission agenda and the planning office shall identify
specific required information in its written notification to the applicant at
the end of the ten-working day review period. The planning and development
services director may schedule the preliminary plan for a planning commission
public hearing only after all criteria has been met.
         B.   If the planning office determines that the preliminary
subdivision application is in sufficient compliance with §
157.052, but there are specific design, improvement, or other compliance
deficiencies, the planning and development services director may list
conditions to the approval of the subdivision application to the planning
commission.
   (b)   The preliminary subdivision plan application shall be scheduled for a
planning commission public hearing by the planning office on a day when the
planning commission is regularly scheduled to meet as determined by the rules,
policies, and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the
planning commission for holding public hearings on those requests. The planning
commission shall then make a recommendation to city council on the preliminary
plan application or shall defer the application for more information.
   (c)   The city council, in taking action on a preliminary plan, shall
consider the recommendations of the planning commission and shall hold a public
hearing. The city council shall then approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions by means of a resolution based upon the criteria within §
157.052. Approval of the preliminary plan shall indicate council’s approval of
the general location of the lots, blocks, and streets including the
interrelationship to proposed zoning districts or land uses, all which shall be
so noted on the preliminary subdivision plan’s certificate of approval. The
approved plan shall be available by contacting the city office of planning and
development services. Any conditions included by the city council shall be
resolved on a revised preliminary plan which would be submitted to the planning
office for administrative approval before any development engineering plans and
plats are submitted.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.04.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.052 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN ELEMENTS AND APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   Preliminary subdivision plans must have all elements within Table 1 included
in the application before a staff review is completed. The planning commission
in its recommendation and the city council in its approval shall take into
consideration all elements and approval criteria in Table 1.
Table 1 Element and Approval Criteria for Preliminary Plans
Elements Approval Criteria
Table 1 Element and Approval Criteria for Preliminary Plans
Elements                                                               Approval Criteria
The owner, developer, and engineer’s names, addresses, and telephone Use as contact for the project for comments and notifications.
numbers
                                                                       The earmark that distinguishes a licensed/registered professional engineer is
Submitted by licensed engineer                                         the authority to sign and seal or “stamp” engineering documents for a design or
                                                                       analysis, thus taking legal responsibility for it.
                                                                       The name shall not duplicate, be the same in spelling, or alike in pronunciation
Proposed name of subdivision                                           with the name of any other recorded subdivision, unless it is an extension of or
                                                                       adjoining to an existing subdivision.
The names of all adjoining subdivisions with adjoining unplatted       Showing connectivity with lot and block lines, easements, and rights-of-way.
property shall be labeled as such
                                                                       Comply with §§
Lot and block layout                                                   157.095 through
                                                                       157.098.
Vicinity map to scale showing location of preliminary subdivision plan Includes other property between 660-1,320' in every direction.
Proposed zoning districts                                              Sufficient to allow for staff review of residential densities and nonresidential
                                                                       structure size.
Area, legal description and notations stating acreage, scale, and      Determine if plan boundaries meet stated ownership; adjacent property
north arrow                                                            notification, if required; measurement and review of plans.
The location of existing blocks, lots, building lines, water courses,  Will not place any existing lot or building in violation of any applicable
drainageways, bridges, culverts, wells, cell towers, septic systems,   ordinance, code, regulation, law including, but not limited to, zoning,
on-site wastewater systems, present structures, any fixtures, and any  building, subdivision, and flood prevention and comply with the parks/open space
pertinent natural features in the area affected, with principal        needs identified within the growth management plan and §§
dimensions and all significant information in regard to property,      157.190 and
immediately adjacent on all sides                                      157.191.
Existing contours referenced to city datum with intervals sufficient   Utility coordination and comply with water, sewer, grading/drainage plans.
to determine the character and topography of the land to be subdivided
Boundary lines of floodways and 100-year flood zones delineated on the To ensure buildable lots.
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM)
                                                                       Per annexation resolution and for purposes of identifying final utility plan
Phasing and timelines                                                  parcels (based on watershed boundaries); construction planning for private and
                                                                       public entities.
Proposed city reimbursements                                           Coordination with CIP and city disbursements.
Other data consistent with or required within the developers/          Only data as required within an annexation, preannexation.
preannexation agreement
Preliminary drainage plan                                              Comply with EDS Ch. 13.2.2
Preliminary sanitary sewer plan                                        Comply with EDS Ch. 13.2.2
Preliminary street lighting plan                                       Comply with EDS Ch. 13.2.2
Preliminary street plan                                                Comply with EDS Ch. 13.2.2
Preliminary water plan                                                 Comply with EDS Ch. 13.2.2
 
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.04.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 94-16,
passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.053 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
   (a)   Any preliminary subdivision plan which has not received development
engineering plan approval for all or a portion of the preliminary subdivision
plan area within a period of three years would require resubmittal of a new
plan for approval subject to any new subdivision regulations unless a waiver
from the city director of planning and development services is approved.
   (b)   Upon written request to the city director of planning and development
services and prior to the preliminary plan expiration date, a one-year time
extension for the preliminary plan may be granted by the city’s director of
planning and development services, subject to the following condition that the
land uses for land within the preliminary subdivision plan area have not
significantly been altered since the original approval date for the preliminary
subdivision plan.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.04.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.054 REVISIONS TO PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN.
   (a)   (1)   Amendments to an approved preliminary subdivision plan may be
requested by the developer.
      (2)   The city engineer and city director of planning and development
services may request an updated preliminary subdivision plan for review and
approval when changes to the plan are proposed.
   (b)   Amendments to a preliminary plan shall consist of external impacts,
including changes in major (collectors) street pattern, change of zones,
drainage facility location, other public open space location or perimeter
boundaries.
      (1)   Amendments to an approved preliminary subdivision plan shall follow
the procedures for approval of a preliminary subdivision plan as required in
this section.
      (2)   The approved plan, and any amendments, shall be kept on file with
the city engineer and planning director.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.04.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLANS
§ 157.065 THE DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLANS.
   (a)   The development engineering plan is a process designed to assist the
developer and the city with the efficient and timely development of utilities
and final lot and block layout to and throughout a development. Plans will be
evaluated for compliance with the Engineering Design Standards and the capital
improvement program. The development engineering plan approval will be based
upon the engineering feasibility of the development including the determination
of more precise locations of all lots, blocks, and streets.
   (b)   Following the approval of the preliminary subdivision plan, if the
developer wishes to proceed, an electronic copy of the development engineering
plans shall be submitted to the online plan review at the city of Sioux Falls
website for review and acceptance by the city engineering office. The
development engineering plans shall encompass all land included in a phase as
shown on the preliminary subdivision plan, be in compliance with conditions and
approval criteria of the preliminary subdivision plan and existing and proposed
easements shown and dimensioned from property lines and utilities.
   (c)   The development engineering plans shall comply with the respective
chapters within the adopted Engineering Design Standards and with criteria
within this chapter. All development utility plans shall be approved or
disapproved within 15 working days after submittal to the city engineer. In
addition, a development lot and block layout shall be approved by the city
engineer. All development engineering plans are required to have all elements
and approval criteria listed in Table 2. If these plans are approved, the
developer may then submit the plat(s) and subdivision construction agreement(s)
for approval.
Table 2 Development Engineering Plan Element and Approval Criteria
Elements Criteria
Table 2 Development Engineering Plan Element and Approval Criteria
Elements      Criteria
Lots and
blocks
including a   Ability to reference areas and review plans; consistent with §§
systematic    157.095 through
lot and block 157.098 and §§
numbering     157.112 through
pattern, lot  157.117
lines and
zoning
districts
Location and
widths of all Utility coordination; consistent with §
existing and  157.117 and EDS
proposed
easements
Location of   Consistency with major street plan and §§
all street    157.095 through
right-of-way  157.098 and §§
including     157.112 through
width and     157.117
street names
The location
of existing
blocks, lots,
building
lines, water
courses,
drainageways,
bridges,
culverts,
wells, septic
systems or
other on-site
wastewater
systems, cell
towers,
septic        Will not place any existing lot or building in violation of any applicable
systems or    ordinance, code, regulation, law including, but not limited to, zoning,
other present building, subdivision, and flood prevention and consistent with the needs
structures,   identified within Chapter VII and IX of the growth management plan and §§
and any       157.190 and
pertinent     157.191
natural
features in
the area
affected,
with
principal
dimensions
and all
significant
information
in regard to
property,
immediately
adjacent on
all sides
Boundary
lines of
floodways and
100-year
flood zones   To ensure buildable lots
delineated on
the Flood
Insurance
Rate Maps
(FIRM)
Drainage      §
Development   157.160 et al and EDS 13.2.3
Utility Plans
Grading
Development   EDS Chapter 7
Utility Plans
Water         §
Development   157.130 et al and EDS 13.2.3
Utility Plans
Sanitary
Sewer         §
Development   157.145 et al and EDS 13.2.3
Utility Plans
Erosion and
Sediment      §
Control       157.175 et al and EDS 13.2.3
Development
Utility Plans
 
   (d)   Amendments to development engineering plan lot and block layout.
      (1)   The city engineer and city director of planning and development
services may request an updated development engineering plan for review and
approval when changes to the plan are proposed or when a proposed plat is not
consistent with the development engineering plan. The proposed amendment may
include the submission of an updated preliminary subdivision plan to the
planning office.
      (2)   Amendments shall be done administratively with signed approval by
the city director of planning and development services and city engineer and
coincide with the development engineering plans.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.05.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 11-09,
passed 1-12-2009; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
THE PLAT
§ 157.066 THE PLAT.
   Platting is a process designed to assist the developer and the city to
approve the appropriate features of a proposed subdivision and place them on
file with the county register of deeds. Platting is required when land is
divided into tracts for purpose of sale, transfer of ownership or in creating a
new building site prior to issuance of a building permit, or connecting to city
utilities.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.05.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.067 PLAT SUBMISSION.
   (a)   For plats within the city, one signed mylar plat, two paper copies,
one reduced eight and one-half by 11 copy and an electronic PDF and DWG shall
be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. For plats within the
joint jurisdictional boundary, the signed mylar plat shall be submitted to the
county. Additional paper copies may be required for county submittal according
to county standards. All copies shall be signed, sealed and notarized.
   (b)   The plat should be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch from an
accurate survey and on one or more sheets whose dimensions are as required by
state law. If more than two sheets are required, an index sheet of the same
dimension shall be attached and filed.
   (c)   The plat shall show the following information:
      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate,
be the same in spelling, or alike in pronunciation with the name of any other
recorded subdivision, unless it is an extension of or adjacent to the
subdivision;
      (2)   All lot and block lines, type of easements and rights-of-way such
as drainage facilities, pedestrian and utilities should be consistent with the
development engineer plan. Adjoining unplatted property shall be labeled as
such;
      (3)   A systematic lot and block numbering pattern, lot lines and street
names, and the square footage of all lots;
      (4)   The location and width of all proposed and existing rights-of-way,
alleys and easements;
      (5)   The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate
angles or bearings and distances tying the perimeter boundaries to the nearest
established street line, section corner, other previously described
subdivision, or other recognized permanent monuments which shall be accurately
described on the plat as required by SDCL 43-18, 43-20 and 43-21;
      (6)   Location of all monuments and permanent control points, and all
survey pins, either set or located as required by SDCL 43-18, 43-20 and 43-21;
      (7)   The identification and delineations of any portions of the property
intended to be dedicated or granted for public use such as drainage facilities,
schools or park land;
      (8)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the
boundaries of the subdivision lots, streets/roads, alleys, easements and other
areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the
nearest one- hundredth of a foot;
      (9)   The radii, chords, length of curve, point of tangency and central
angles for all curvilinear streets/roads and radii for rounded corners;
      (10)   The certificate of the surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the
survey and the correct location of all pins and monuments shown as required by
SDCL 43-18, 43-20 and 43-21;
      (11)   Acknowledgment of the owner or owners of the plat of any
restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets/roads, alleys,
parks or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of easements
required, as well as the use of any required common areas;
      (12)   All formal irrevocable offers of dedication for all streets/roads,
alleys, parks, drainage facilities, pedestrian paths and other uses as
required;
      (13)   Approved subdivision construction agreement or proof that the same
is not required;
      (14)   Certificates of approval for endorsement by the city engineer,
city director of planning and development services, and city finance officer;
      (15)   The boundary lines of the floodway and special flood hazard zones,
the community map number and the base flood elevation on each lot as delineated
on the adopted Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM);
      (16)   On a separate exhibit, to be retained by the city, a drawing or
survey of the existing structure outlines [as shown on the original real
property surveyed, as indicated in the Surveyor’s Certificate] to verify
setbacks and lot area requirements and ensure that current and proposed
easements are clear of obstructions; and
      (17)   A note identifying the zoning classification in effect at the time
of plat or replat submittal.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.05.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 92-12,
passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.068 PLAT APPROVAL.
   (a)   Once the developer submits an electronic copy of the plat to the
online plan review at the city of Sioux Falls website and pays all applicable
plat fees, the engineering office shall determine if the plat contains all
elements as required by §
157.067. Comments shall be provided by the engineering office to the developer.
Once all comments are incorporated into the plat, the developer shall submit
assurances for the plat. The plat shall provide the information indicated in §
157.067 and shall require the review and approval of the city engineer and the
planning director. The plat and subdivision construction agreement shall be in
conformance with the development engineering plan. Either all or a portion of
the development engineering plan may be platted.
   (b)   The plat shall be considered for approval only after the mayor has
approved subdivision construction agreement as required by §
157.225 from the developer accepting responsibility for the required
improvements, or any revision thereof and all platting fees, assessments, and
cost recoveries have been paid. Once the subdivision construction agreement has
been signed by the mayor and all platting fees, assessments, and cost
recoveries have been paid, the plat shall be approved or disapproved within 15
days.
   (c)   Within the joint jurisdiction area, the Minnehaha County and Lincoln
County board of county commissioners have designated the county planning
director to review and approve plats in lieu of the review and approval by the
county planning commission as allowed by SDCL 11-6-26.1. The county planning
director shall review and approve the plat within 45 days of the plat submitted
to the county. The plat may not be filed or recorded until the plats have been
signed by the county planning director. If the county planning director denies
any such plat, a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council
is required to override the county planning director and approve the plat.
   (d)   If it appears that the system of streets set forth therein conforms to
the system of streets of the existing plats of the municipality, that all
provisions of any subdivision regulations have been complied with, that all
taxes, platting fees, cost recoveries, and special assessments upon the tract
or subdivision have been fully paid, and that such plat and the survey thereof
have been executed according to law, the city engineer and director of planning
and development services shall approve the plat (SDCL 11-3-6). Approval of any
plat shall be contingent upon the plat being recorded within 120 days after the
certificate of approval is signed by the city finance officer. Developers’
failure to adhere to the approved plat and subdivision construction agreement
when developing property constitutes a violation of city ordinance.
   (e)   If the city engineer or director of planning and development services
denies the plat, the person requesting the plat may appeal to the city council
by scheduling a hearing with the city council within 15 days of receiving a
written denial notice.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.05.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
SUBDIVISION PROCESS EXEMPTIONS
§ 157.080 SUBDIVISION PLAN EXEMPTIONS; MINOR PLAT, TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP PLAT
AND REPLAT.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the timely
review of minor plats, transfer of ownership plat, and replats that do not
discernibly impact surrounding properties, environmental resources or public
facilities. No concept plan, preliminary plan or development engineering plans
are required. Minor plats, transfer of ownership plats, and replats are
administratively approved by the city engineer and city director of planning
and development services and must comply with all requirements of a plat in §
157.067. Any request for new or additional public infrastructure or facility
services after the land has platted may be required to comply with §§
157.065 through
157.068 at the request of the city engineer.
   (b)   Minor plats requirements.
      (1)   Not more than three lots. A minor plat is a plat containing not
more than three lots fronting on an existing street and meet all of the
following requirements:
         A.   Does not require the dedication of right-of-way or construction
of new streets, except that arterial roadways identified on the major street
plan will be required to dedicate the necessary right-of-way;
         B.   Does not create any public improvements other than sidewalks;
         C.   Does not landlock or otherwise impair convenient ingress or
egress to or from the rear side of the subject tract or any adjacent property;
         D.   Does not change the grades from the grading plan which was
submitted and approved with the original plat or, if the grades are going to be
changed, then a grading plan shall be submitted and approved for the minor plat
or replat;
         E.   Does not significantly change any plans that have been prepared
for the placement of any other utilities in the subdivision;
         F.   Does not adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property; and
         G.   Does not conflict with any provision or portion of the growth
management plan, official map, zoning ordinance, or these subdivision
regulations.
         H.   Platting fees may be paid on a replat when required by any
applicable city platting fee ordinance.
      (2)   Transfer of Ownership Plat. A transfer of ownership plat is only
for the purpose to subdivide one larger piece of land to transfer from one
owner to another. The transfer is not at a point in which it is ready for
building permit and the entire development process (zoning, preliminary plan,
development engineering plans) is still required before a building permit will
be allowed. The transfer of ownership plat shall meet all the requirements of a
minor plat and the following:
         A.   Does not require the creation of public easements.
         B.   The property being platted must be at least 20 acres in size
unless the city engineer determines that a somewhat small plat meets the intent
of a transfer of ownership.
         C.   An updated plat is required before any building permits are
allowed.
         D.   Platting fees are deferred until an updated plat is approved.
      (3)   Replat. A replat includes all the requirements of a minor plat and
shall also include the minor vacation of existing platted lines to achieve
either a reconfiguration of the existing recorded plat or change the number of
recorded lots in the subdivision only where the perimeter of the tract being
replatted is not altered by the replat. Platting fees may need to be paid on a
replat when required by any applicable city platting fee ordinance. Also, a
replat shall certify that the platting vacates the existing plat.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.06.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.081 PLAT EXEMPTIONS.
   The purpose of this section is to exempt the city platting rules and
regulations from the following situations. However, the exemption of city
platting rules and regulations does not exempt the platting requirements of the
register of deeds, title company and state law.
   (a)   Cemetery gravesite plats.
      (1)   Cemetery gravesite plats or plots do not have to meet any
requirements of this subdivision ordinance as long as land is surveyed, mapped
or diagramed and subdivided into sections, blocks, lots, individual grave
spaces, avenues, walks and streets, thereby platting or making a map which
shall be filed and maintained as a permanent cemetery record.
      (2)   However, all platting requirements of the county register of deeds
and state law are still applicable.
   (b)   Government-owned parcels. In order to facilitate the transfer of
ownership from one owner to a government entity for the use of a public land or
facility (e.g., school, park, drainageway, H lots), city platting rules may be
exempted by the city engineer and city director of planning and development
services.
   (c)   Add-on agreement of existing lots or tracts.
      (1)   The purpose of an add-on agreement is to allow existing contiguous
legal lots, tracts, and plats to be recognized as one parcel for building code
and zoning regulations when the contiguous legal lots, tracts, parcels, and
plats are owned by the same landowner.
      (2)   An add-on agreement must not place any existing or planned
buildings in violation of zoning regulations or building codes.
      (3)   An add-on agreement will be recognized by the city planning and
development services office after tax parcels stated therein have been combined
by the county equalization office. The combined parcel known as the new lot of
record shall include the recorded legal descriptions.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.06.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN LOT, BLOCK, AND STREET LAYOUT CRITERIA
§ 157.095 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN INTENT.
   When applications are submitted for a preliminary subdivision plan,
developers shall comply with the following lot, block, and street layout
criteria.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.07.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.096 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN BLOCKS.
   (a)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with
regard to:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   The need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
traffic and utilities; and
      (3)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (b)   Blocks shall normally be wide enough to allow two tiers of residential
lots of an appropriate depth.
   (c)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320'. Block lengths on arterial
streets may be longer, but in such situations that pedestrian and bicycle
connections must be made as required by §
157.099.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.07.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.097 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN LOTS.
   (a)   Lots should be in conformance with the zoning regulations of
Chapter 160 of this Code.
   (b)   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setbacks from both sides.
   (c)   Each lot shall abut a dedicated right-of-way or shall include an
approved private street.
   Exception: When there is no building or structure on the lot, a mutual
access easement may be provided instead of the requirements of §
157.097(c) only when the parcel is zoned CN Conservation.
   (d)   Depth and width of properties proposed for commercial and industrial
users shall provide off-street parking per
Chapter 160 - Shape Places Zoning Ordinance.
   (e)   All interior lot lines between two lots are a straight line or a
series of straight lines. Curved interior lot lines shall be prohibited.
   (f)   In undeveloped or vacant areas, streets shall be identified and
classified through the transportation planning process. The location of major
streets shall conform to the official major street plan.
   (g)   Flag pole lots.
      (1)   Maximum lot size of flag pole lot. The pole lot shall be limited to
not exceed, in length, twice the width of the lot or twice the length of the
lot, whichever dimension is lesser.
      (2)   Minimum lot width of pole section of lot. The minimum lot width of
the pole section of the flag pole lot shall be a minimum of 28' and include a
mutual access easement or private drive that provide access to the flag section
of the lot and provides frontage to an approved private drive or public street.
No parking shall be allowed on the access easement or private drive.
      (3)   Limit of number of flag pole lots and length of lots. There shall
be only one flag lot within each subdivision and only one pole per flag lot.
The pole is limited to not exceed in length twice the width of the lot or twice
the length of the lot, whichever dimension is lesser.
      (4)   Designation of property lines. The following requirements determine
the location of the front, side, and rear property lines of a flag lot:
         A.   Front yard. The front yard shall be the yard that most nearly
parallels the public or private street providing access to the lot, and which
abuts the end of the pole, but does not include the pole.
         B.   Side and rear yards.
            1.   The side yard shall be any yard that is not a front or rear
yard, exclusive of the pole portion of the lot.
            2.   The rear yard shall be the lot boundary opposite the front
yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7336.jpg]
 
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.07.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.098 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN STREET SYSTEM.
   (a)   Arrangement and extension.
      (1)   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall conform to the
major street plan and shall make provisions for the continuation of existing
streets in adjoining areas or their proper projection where adjoining land is
not subdivided.
      (2)   The arrangement of all streets and alleys shall be such as not to
cause a hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land
and seek to provide for convenient access to it.
   (b)   Circulation plan. In general, streets within subdivisions shall be
designed to incorporate and tie
into existing or proposed pedestrian pathways and roadways, and to take into
account design restrictions on abutting parcels caused by the surrounding
topography, parcel lines, or other features. Other criteria in the street
circulation plan shall include the following:
      (1)   Provisions should be made for a collector street every quarter
mile, and there should be a street connecting adjacent subdivisions at
intervals not less than a quarter mile where environmental constraints and land
use considerations permit. In cases where the connectivity of collector streets
are not feasible because of environmental constraints and land use
considerations, provisions shall instead be made for a walkway or bike trail to
connect the adjacent subdivisions through the shortest and most reasonable
method possible. The developer may need to negotiate with adjacent landowners
or government entities to determine if the connection is feasible.
      (2)   Streets should be designed to convey residents conveniently
throughout the neighborhood, and to the parks, schools, and shopping areas of
the neighborhood and to adjacent neighborhoods. When a subdivision is designed
or constructed in conjunction with another use (such as retail, office,
apartments, park, or school) of a neighborhood scale, the local and/or
collector road system should be designed to provide roadway connections between
the various uses.
   (c)   Arterial streets. In order to maintain the traffic carrying capacity
of the arterial streets by limiting access to it from individual lots, and in
order to protect the residents of property adjacent to arterial streets from
the high traffic volumes associated with the street, property along the
arterials shall be subdivided in the manner set forth below.
      (1)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall only be used where
necessary to provide separation of residential development from through traffic
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Where
double frontage lots are used for residential development, additional lot depth
or width consistent with the zoning ordinance for rear yard setback shall be
required to provide for an extra setback to offset the impact of high traffic
volume. All required public improvements within the adjoining local/collector
street right-of-way or easement areas, whether proposed or existing, shall be
complete and accepted by the city engineer prior to approval of the plat. The
city engineer may determine that immediate completion of the public
improvements is not feasible, and in lieu of completion of the required public
improvements prior to plat approval the developer shall be required to meet one
or more of the following:
         A.   Financially securitize all uncompleted public improvements, which
are the responsibility of the developer seeking plat approval.
         B.   Provide other assurances as approved by the city engineer.
      (2)   Tracts onto arterial streets. In order to avoid private access from
individual lots onto arterial streets, lots should be arranged on blocks so
that their side or rear yards are adjacent to the arterial street. Lots
adjacent to an arterial street shall have an additional width to provide for an
extra setback to offset the impact of high traffic volume. This design will be
accepted only for a limited distance due to the number of streets that would
intersect with the arterial.
      (3)   Access roads. Access roads may be used as the city grows into the
areas in the county where they have been required. Under some circumstances,
they would also be appropriate for commercial and industrial development.
Access roads shall be constructed to city standards with a right-of- way width
of 50'.
      (4)   Rear access roads. Rear access roads are recommended for commercial
developments. In this way, the access can serve two tiers of lots and alleviate
the dangerous turning movements onto and off of arterial streets.
      (5)   Nonresidential land uses. Nonresidential land uses and higher
density residential land uses including multiple-family units and townhouses
are particularly suitable for the intersection of two arterial streets. Any
development of this type should have limited access to the arterial street.
      (6)   Lots adjacent to railroad right-of-way. Lots for residential
development adjacent to functioning railroad rights-of-way shall provide extra
lot depth or width consistent with the zoning ordinance for rear yard setback
to provide for an extra setback to offset the impact of the railroad traffic.
   (d)   Collector street development.
      (1)   Collectors shall be used to collect traffic from other local roads
and collectors to arterial roadways. They should generally run three miles in
length.
      (2)   Based upon increased speeds and volumes, lot sizes and land uses
may be increased along collectors to be consistent with the proposed zoning and
transitions.
      (3)   Collectors shall be developed along or between property lines so
that both landowners can share in the cost as well as having access to the
collector.
      (4)   In agricultural and transitional areas, collector streets shall be
identified and located through the Engineering Design Standards.
   (e)   Right-of-way widths. The developer shall be required to dedicate
street right-of-way widths according to the major street plan and not less than
as follows:
      Street Type Right-of-Way (in feet)
      Access roads: 50
      Alleys: 20
      Arterials: 100
      Collectors: 66-80
      Cul-de-sacs (55 radius for turnarounds and eyebrows): 50
      Expressway/principals: 100
      Locals: 60*
      Rural subdivisions: 66
      * 66' in multifamily, commercial, and industrial zoned areas
   (f)   Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs will be allowed where they are necessary for
the reasonable development of a subdivision.
      (1)   The maximum length of a cul- de-sac shall be 500' measured along
the centerline, between the radius point of the turnaround and the right-of-way
line of the abutting street. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac may be extended
where no other practical alternative is available for the reasonable
development of a subdivision.
      (2)   Temporary turnarounds may also be required by the city engineer on
dead-end streets that will eventually be continued.
      (3)   Emergency access may be required by the fire chief on cul-de-sac
streets to allow for emergency service response.
   (g)   Private streets or roads. Private streets may be allowed when serving
a limited number of parcels if right-of-way constraints exist and when all
maintenance responsibilities are detailed within the easement. The following
standards must be met:
      (1)   A private street must have a minimum of 28' of paved drivable
surface and shall meet Engineering Design Standards for a private street.
      (2)   A private street easement may share the public utility easement
required within §
157.117.
      (3)   All private streets must be platted as a private street easement
that shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. The private street
easement shall not be included as part of any required lot area or setback for
purposes of the zoning ordinance.
      (4)   Any nonresidential development that proposes private streets shall
include sidewalks on both sides of the street, curb and gutter, streetlights,
and driveways all to city Engineering Design Standards.
      (5)   Any nonresidential development that proposes private streets and
that is required to do a traffic study shall include any additional design
recommendations into the developer’s engineering plan.
      (6)   An alternative pedestrian plan may be proposed for approval by the
planning director and city engineer to allow alternative sidewalk connections
that still provide the same pedestrian connections to proposed buildings in the
development.
      (7)   The plat shall have the owner’s certificate regarding the private
street easement’s private maintenance of facilities and shall have a
maintenance agreement as required within §
157.116.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.07.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 8-13,
passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.099 PRELIMINARY PLAN SHARED USE PATHS.
   Shared use path easements shall be required to be dedicated - in order to
increase access to current or future schools, playgrounds, employment centers,
commercial areas, bus stops, bike trails, and other community facilities -
through blocks greater than 1,320 feet when needed to reduce pedestrian
distances. Shared use path easements may also be required to provide access to
parks, open space, recreation areas, greenways, and common areas.
   (a)   The shared use path - walkways shall be included within a ten-foot
easement or other acceptable area as approved by the city engineer and
maintained by the adjacent property owners or other acceptable landowner as
approved by the city engineer. The shared use path - walkways shall be paved at
least six feet in width and shall be constructed before a certificate of
occupancy is approved.
   (b)   Shared use path trails shall be included within a 20 foot easement
when identified as a part of the City of Sioux Falls Bicycle Plan. The shared
use path - trail shall be paved at least 12 feet in width; the shared use path
- trail easement shall include language that allows for the city or developer
to construct a single-track, grass, gravel, or paved path within the easement.
(Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018; Ord. 97-22, passed 8-16-2022)
DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN CRITERIA
§ 157.112 DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN LOTS, BLOCKS, AND STREETS.
   All lot and block requirements approved with the preliminary subdivision
plan shall be included within the development engineering plan.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.08.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.113 DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN STREETS SYSTEM.
   (a)   Street design standards.
      (1)   Generally. All public street improvements and facilities, including
pavement width, street grades, alignment and visibility, and intersections
shall be designed in compliance with the Engineering Design Standards manual
and are subject to the approval of the city engineer.
      (2)   Half streets. Whenever an existing half street is adjacent to a
tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
the subdivision. Completion of the required public improvements within said
half street shall be in accordance with the provisions for new half street
right-of-way dedications detailed below, prior to plat approval. New half
street right-of-way dedications shall only be allowed at the discretion of the
city engineer and if the city engineer determines the developer has made all
reasonable attempts to coordinate right-of-way dedication and completion of the
required public improvements with the adjoining landowner. In lieu of
completion of the required public improvements prior to plat approval, the
developer shall be required to meet one or more of the following:
         A.   Financially securitize all uncompleted public improvements, which
are the responsibility of the developer seeking plat approval.
         B.   Provide other assurances as approved by the city engineer.
   (b)   Traffic calming. Improving traffic flow into and through subdivisions
also needs to take into consideration traffic volumes and speeds. Traffic
calming is the process by which vehicular speeds and volumes on local streets
are reduced to acceptable levels. This is achieved through the installation of
approved devices such as traffic circles, flares, and center islands. Traffic
calming serves the purpose of reducing cut-through traffic, truck traffic,
excessive speeding, noise, vibration, air pollution, and accidents in an
attempt to provide a safer environment for motorists and pedestrians.
      (1)   Approved devices shall be spaced within the right-of-way along
major collectors through residential subdivisions, based upon Engineering
Design Standards.
      (2)   Traffic calming devices may be required by the city engineer, based
upon the review of a traffic impact study.
   (c)   Right-of-way widths. The developer shall be required to dedicate
street right-of-way widths according to the approved preliminary subdivision
plan requirements:
   (d)   Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs will be allowed as required by the
preliminary subdivision requirements.
   (e)   Access control. Access control standards shall follow the provisions
within the access control section of the Engineering Design Standards.
   (f)   A traffic study or traffic report shall be provided when required by
the city engineer and such study shall meet the standards in chapter 5 of the
Engineering Design Standards. The traffic study or report, when required, helps
the city to adequately assess the impact of a proposal on the existing and/or
planned street system. If required, a preliminary plan shall not move forward
to planning commission until the study or report is complete.
   (g)   Mutual access easements. When the traffic impact of one or more
proposed property developments indicates that the public safety can be better
served by the use of mutual access easements, the following requirements shall
be observed:
      (1)   Any mutual access easement accepted by the city must provide for
perpetual unobstructed access to the area it serves and prohibit the erection
of any structure within or adjacent to the access area that would interfere
with the use of the mutual access easement by the public or any governmental
agency.
      (2)   Mutual access easements shall be indicated on the plat.
      (3)   Any plat presented for city approval that shows a mutual access
easement as a means of access shall provide language in the owner’s certificate
(see Appendix B) reserving the mutual access easement as a perpetual
unobstructed access easement.
      (4)   Mutual access easement areas shall be paved by the developer and
maintained in passable condition. Designs for mutual access easements must be
approved by the city engineer.
      (5)   An easement area maintenance agreement among property owners who
will depend on the mutual access easement for access shall be filed with the
plat as required in §
157.116. It shall describe the legal responsibilities for the repair and
maintenance of the easement area and the required signs. See division (g)(6)
below.
      (6)   The developer may be required to place traffic control signs on
mutual access easements or to pay the city to place traffic control signs for
mutual access easements at the locations the city engineer deems necessary for
the safety and convenience of the public. Traffic control signs shall be
approved by the city engineer.
   (h)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys are permitted in commercial and industrial districts, except
where provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with the requirement set forth in chapter 160
of this Code.
      (2)   Alleys are permitted in residential districts when design standards
and conditions warrant an alternative means of access.
   (i)   Continuation of street names. Streets generally in alignment with
existing streets shall bear the names of those streets. When, due to
topography, offsets caused by rectangular surveys, or other physical features,
streets become interrupted, quarter line and section line streets shall retain
the same name on either side of the irregularities.
   (j)   Street naming criteria. No street names shall be used that will
duplicate, be the same in spelling or alike in pronunciation with any other
existing streets. All street names should be kept as short as possible to
permit signs to be no longer than 36". All street names shall indicate
directions either north, south, east, or west. Street name suffixes shall be
applied as follows:
Avenue    A road generally running north and south
Boulevard A minor street divided by a median
Circle    All cul-de-sacs
Court     A road with two openings which enters and exits on the same street
Drive     A road running northwest to southeast
Lane      A road running northeast to southwest
Parkway   Limited access roads such as major streets which are divided by a
          median
Place     All private streets/roads
Road      A road running both east and west or north and south for significant
          lengths; the names may only be assigned to major rights-of-way
Street    A road generally running east and west
Trail     A road which wanders in different directions
 
   (k)   Prohibition on certain street name suffixes. No development
engineering plans shall be approved which use the names of square, ridge, pass,
way, or terrace as a suffix for a street name.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.08.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 11-09,
passed 1-12-2009; Ord. 8-13, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.114 SHARED USE PATHS.
   Shared use paths of an appropriate width (as determined by the city engineer
or parks director) shall be required where deemed necessary to provide
circulation or access to open space, recreation areas, schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, bus stops, and other community facilities.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.08.050) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 97-22,
passed 8-16-2022)
§ 157.115 DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN MINIMUM SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   When development engineering plans are approved and plats within the
development engineering plan are platted, drainage, utilities, and streets will
be required to be extended to the edge of adjacent platted land and all such
improvements must comply with this Code of Ordinances and the city’s
Engineering Design Standards. In addition, street access for residential
subdivision development is required as follows:
   (a)   Street secondary access.
      1.   Residential developments served by only one street access, or a
mutual access easement shall provide a second street access, or mutual access
easement, prior to reaching a level of service B (LOS B) of 980 vehicles per
day based on serving up to 103 single-family units or up to 147 multi-family
units, or a combination of units, using trip generation rates of 9.52 trips per
day for a single-family unit and 6.65 trips per day for a multi-family unit, as
provided by the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation, 9th ed.,
2012. The second street access or mutual access easement shall be a minimum of
24' wide, gravel surface maintained with dust control, or paved surface, as
approved by the city engineer. All existing units served by the one paved
access shall apply toward total, regardless of the number of owners or
subdivisions served by the access.
      2.   The city director of planning and development services and city
engineer are hereby authorized and directed to interpret, enforce, and grant
waivers from the street access requirement. Such waivers may be granted only
when compliance is unnecessary and impractical and a waiver would not adversely
impair public access.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.08.070) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 07-17,
passed 1-3-2017; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.116 PRIVATE MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR AGREEMENTS.
   Where the subdivision contains sanitary sewer collection systems, water
supply systems, park areas, storm drainage systems, road systems including
private streets, or other facilities or services which are necessary to or
desirable for the area, and which are of common use or benefit and which are
not accepted for maintenance by an existing public agency, provisions shall be
made by the developer for the proper, perpetual, and continuous maintenance,
repair, and supervision of such common facilities. Such provision will consist
of an agreement among the users of such services or in any other recordable
document showing the parties have consented.
   A copy of the agreement shall be provided to the city engineer for review
and comment prior to approval of any plat. Such agreement shall include all
applicable information below and must be recorded against all properties
affected. Proof of filing must be provided prior to connection. Compliance with
the terms of the maintenance agreement is enforceable between the parties to
the agreement.
   (a)   Funding. Explanation of the means to fund maintenance, repair, and
supervision of any common facilities not accepted for maintenance by a public
agency (e.g., homeowner association dues, etc.).
   (b)   Supervision. Explanation of who will operate the facilities.
   (c)   Inspection. Consent for inspection of common facilities by the city.
The city is not required to conduct routine inspections on private sewer and
water facilities, but may inspect periodically to determine any impacts the
facilities may have on the city’s public wastewater or water system and other
similar matters.
   (d)   As-built plans. Provision for maintenance of as-built plans following
initial construction and any changes thereafter. Such plans shall be maintained
by the operator, owner, or other person listed in the agreement.
   (e)   Service log. Providing for a service log to be maintained by the
operator, owner, or other person listed in the agreement. The service log
should, for example, show the date and person(s) conducting maintenance and
repairs of items covered by the agreement.
   (f)   Water maintenance and repair.
      1.   Acknowledgment the water supplied by items covered by the agreement
will comply with the state Safe Drinking Water Act, including sampling and
testing if required by state law.
      2.   Annual flushing and inspection of hydrants to ensure they are in
working order.
   (g)   Sanitary sewer maintenance and repair.
      1.   Televising the sanitary sewer lines periodically at least every ten
years to review and correct deficiencies and undertake repairs.
      2.   Jetting out the sanitary sewer lines at least once every five years.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.08.080) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.117 EASEMENTS.
   (a)    Easements shall be provided and dedicated where necessary for wires,
cables, conduits, fixtures, and equipment for distribution of electric power,
wastewater collectors, storm drains, overland storm water flow routes,
sidewalks, shared use paths, private roadways, and water mains at those
locations and widths as determined by the city. The width of easements required
for public wastewater collectors, storm drains and/or water mains shall be as
specified in the engineering design standards for the particular improvement
adopted by the city. It is the policy of the city to locate all necessary
utilities in the right-of-way or in easements abutting rear or side lot lines,
except on double frontage lots. Deviations from this policy may be made when it
is demonstrated that the utility is necessary and no practical alternative
locations exist.
   (b)   In any dedication of an easement, the city may prohibit or restrict
building, fences, driveways, and other improvements; may enter for
construction, reconstruction, replacement, repair, operation and maintenance
purposes; and will be held harmless for the cost of replacement or damage to
any improvement or vegetation within the easement and may make any other
appropriate or necessary requirements.
      (1)   All easements for municipal utilities shall be shown on the plat.
When constructed outside of the typical street right- of-way limits or anytime
on private property, utility easements must be included on the plat consistent
with Engineering Design Standards and with §
157.116.
      (2)   There shall be a ten-foot utility easement for municipal utilities
along all right-of-way frontages; except when the setback is equal to or less
than 20 feet, then the utility easement shall be equal to half the distance of
the required setback per the zoning district.
      (3)   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for
utilities, drainage, and shared use paths where necessary and shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in total width unless otherwise required by the city
engineer.
      (4)   Where topographical or other conditions warrant side yard easements
and easements across lots, easements at least ten feet in total width shall be
provided.
      (5)   Lots and easements shall be arranged in a manner as to eliminate
unnecessary jogs or offsets and to facilitate the use of easements for power
distribution, telephone service, drainage, water and sewer services.
      (6)   The property owner whose property is subject to those easements
shall be responsible for its maintenance. The property owners shall keep the
easement clear of any structure, debris, trees, shrubs or landscaping
whatsoever except that lawn grass, which shall be regularly mowed and annual
vegetation may be grown thereon.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.08.090) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018; Ord. 97-22, passed 8-16-2022)
WATER FACILITIES
§ 157.130 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a
water supply district for the purpose of providing a water supply system
capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection.
   (b)   Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install
adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the
specifications of the city utilities department as shown on the final utility
plan required in §
157.065.
   (c)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the city utilities
department. If the water main is extended adjacent to property that will not
participate in the initial construction cost of the water main, the developer
shall submit to the city water department a cost recovery study based upon the
actual construction costs showing the amount due from each property when a
connection is made to the extended water main.
   (d)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water
supply improvements and the boundary lines of proposed districts shall be shown
on the preliminary water and sewer plan.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.09.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.131 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.
   Land which is located over or adjacent to a water bearing stratum or water
supply reservoir and which is designated as an area providing or supplementing
a municipal water supply shall not be developed or subdivided for residential,
recreational, commercial or industrial purposes except when public water and
sewer systems are provided.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.09.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.132 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All water facilities including water mains, valves, fire hydrants, storage
facilities and pumping stations shall be designed in accordance with
engineering design standards and are subject to the approval of the city
engineer. All water facilities shall be designed in compliance with the
engineering design standards.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.09.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
SANITARY SEWERS
§ 157.145 PROVIDED FOR EACH LOT.
   Each lot within a subdivision area shall be provided with a connection to an
approved public sanitary sewer.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.10.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.146 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   In areas where a public sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible,
but where plans, including the comprehensive plan, a facilities plan or any
other approved plan for the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of
the subdivision has been prepared, the subdivider shall install sewers in
conformity to plans approved by the city engineer.
   (b)   In cases where a connection to an existing public sanitary sewer may
not be immediately practical, a connection may be made to the gravity sewer
system by the use of a lift station, constructed in accordance with the
regulations and requirement set forth by the city engineer.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.10.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.147 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   All sanitary sewer facilities including gravity sewers, manholes, lift
stations and force mains shall be designed in accordance with standard accepted
engineering practice and are subject to the approval of the city engineer.
   (b)   All sewer facilities shall be designed in compliance with the
engineering design standards.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.10.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
GRADING AND DRAINAGE
§ 157.160 GRADING PLAN.
   The final grading plan for the subdivision shall be submitted to and
approved by the city engineer. The grading plan shall, as much as possible, be
laid out to conform to the natural contour of the land.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.11.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.161 DRAINAGE PLAN.
   The final drainage plan for the subdivision shall conform to the city-
approved master drainage plan. If a master drainage plan is not available for a
proposed subdivision location and if the city deems it necessary, one will be
conducted by the city on the drainage basin of which the proposed subdivision
is part. No subdivision plans will be approved prior to completion and
acceptance of the master drainage plan.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.11.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.162 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All drainage facilities including storm sewers, on-site detention,
drainageways, detention ponds and drainage channels shall be designed in
compliance with the currently approved engineering design standards and are
subject to approval of the city engineer.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.11.050) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
EROSION
§ 157.175 SPECIFICATIONS.
   Measures used to control erosion on a development site shall meet the
requirements of the engineering design standards. Stripping of vegetation,
regrading and cut and fill operations should be kept to a minimum, as should
the amount of land and the duration of exposure. Whenever feasible, development
plans should be made in conformance with topography in order to create the
least erosion potential. Similarly, as much as possible, natural vegetation
shall be retained, protected and supplemented. The city engineer shall require
any further measures as necessary to prevent erosion on building sites and
developments from depositing wastes or sediments on public streets or other
property. Every effort shall be made to retain the natural vegetation on all
ditches and drainageways. Ditches and drainageways will not be disturbed
without the approval of the city engineer’s office.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.12.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.176 SUBDIVISIONS AND INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Land disturbing activities of one acre or more shall comply with
chapter 12 of the city’s engineering design standards.
      (2)   Individual lots within an approved subdivision or larger common
plan of development or sale that have land disturbing activities of less than
one acre shall comply with chapter 12 of the engineering design standards until
they are classified as a minor impact construction site by this chapter.
   (b)   Minor impact construction site.
      (1)   Individual lots involving less than one acre of disturbed area in
an approved subdivision or larger common plan of development or sale shall not
be considered a separate construction project, but rather as a part of the
subdivision development as a whole. The lots will be classified as minor impact
construction sites if all the following conditions are met:
         A.   The subdivision or larger common plan of development or sale has
been approved pursuant to this chapter;
         B.   A notice of intent has been submitted and the subdivision has
coverage under a state general permit for storm water discharges associated
with construction activity;
         C.   A state storm water permit for the approved subdivision is
maintained for the subdivision until all of the following are met:
            1.   Substantial build-out of the property has been completed. The
subdivision owner and developer shall determine whether to build-out the
property by phase or entire subdivision. The subdivision owner and developer
shall determine whether to meet the 90% build-out standard by lot or acreage.
The subdivision owner and developer shall maintain documentation verifying how
this build-out standard has been met prior to submitting a notice of
termination of the general permit for storm water discharges associated with
construction activity to the state department of environment and natural
resources; and
            2.   Areas not build-out have been permanently stabilized.
         D.   The subdivision owner and developer has received approval of an
erosion sediment control plan from the city;
         E.   The individual lot has been sold or transferred to a new owner;
and
         F.   The property owner has executed the city’s notice of
stabilization form or an approved alternate.
      (2)   A minor impact construction site shall comply with §§ 12.1.3.3,
12.1.3.3.1. and 12.1.3.3.2 of the city’s engineering design standards for
public improvements. Any minor impact construction site in compliance with
these three sections is exempt from all other provisions of chapter 12 of the
engineering design standards for public improvements.
   (c)   Erosion and sediment control responsibilities.
      (1)   Throughout build-out, a subdivision owner and developer shall
implement and maintain best management practices (BMP) and conditions of the
approved erosion and sediment control plan to control erosion and sediment
problems on all property that has not been sold to another party or does not
meet the specific conditions listed in this section.
      (2)   Throughout build-out, a minor impact construction site owner and
contractor shall implement and maintain the subdivision and individual lot BMP
and conditions of the approved erosion and sediment control plan to control
erosion and sediment problems on the individual lot that they own or upon which
they build.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.12.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES
§ 157.190 EXISTING FEATURES.
   Existing natural features which would add value to residential development
or to the community as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and similar
irreplaceable assets, should be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.13.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.191 SENSITIVE NATURAL AREAS.
   Critical open space and environmental assets as shown on the comprehensive
plan shall be reviewed with regard to the special character of the area taking
into consideration harmonious design, environmental protection and
topographical restraints.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.13.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
RURAL SUBDIVISIONS
§ 157.205 IN GENERAL.
   (a)   Premature subdivision of land is to be discouraged, due to
unavailability of urban services, higher energy consumption, premature and
excessive loss of agricultural land and inefficient delivery of basic
government services.
   (b)   Where rural subdivisions are allowed in the joint jurisdictional
boundary, their design standard and minimum improvements are the same as those
required within the city limits except for the following exceptions listed
below.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.14.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.206 ROADS.
   (a)   Specifications for roads shall be in accordance with the Sioux Falls
Engineering Design Standards Manual.
   (b)   Roads shall be designated on the plat as dedicated right-of-way or as
a private roadway easement. The responsibility for maintenance of all rural
subdivision roads shall be certified on the plat or spelled out in a
maintenance agreement to be filed with the plat.
   (c)   All roads shall comply with other right-of-way and street naming
requirements outlined in this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.14.020) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 87-18,
passed 10-2-2018)
§ 157.207 LOTS AND BLOCKS.
   (a)   Whenever a plat or preliminary plan is proposed having lots which are
one acre or larger in size, the planning commission may require that the plat
or plan shall show how those lots can be resubdivided into urban sized lots in
the event the area is ever annexed into the city.
   (b)   Lots fronting along an arterial road or a federal, state or county
highway shall be discouraged. Where they are allowed, shared drives may be
required, or dedication of a frontage road between the arterial or highway and
the lot shall be provided. The road shall provide direct access to the
adjoining property while limiting curb cuts along the major road. Approval
shall be certified by the appropriate public entity for access onto all
dedicated roads.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.14.030) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.208 GRADING AND DRAINAGE.
   Driveways and drainage culverts shall be installed by the lot owner in
accordance with the engineering design standards and approved by an applicable
township, county or state agency.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.14.040) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.209 WATER SUPPLY.
   (a)   If a public water system is not available, individual wells may be
used, or a central water system provided in a manner that an adequate supply of
potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision.
   (b)   All subdivisions shall require proof of an adequate water supply prior
to issuance of any building permits.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.14.050) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 157.210 SANITARY SEWERS.
   In areas where public sanitary sewers are not accessible and no plans for
public sewers have been prepared, or where the connection to public sanitary
sewer is impractical, individual sewer systems will be permitted provided they
comply with the regulations set forth for septic systems by the appropriate
state agency and any additional county requirements.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.14.060) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
ASSURANCES FOR THE COMPLETION OF MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS
§ 157.225 ASSURANCES REQUIRED.
   (a)   Assurances for subdivisions within the city limits. No plats or
construction permit of any subdivision shall be approved unless owner or the
developer has signed a subdivision construction agreement as the responsible
party to establish the responsibility and security for the construction and
warranting of the public improvements required by this chapter in a
satisfactory manner and within a period specified by the city engineer, such
period not to exceed two years. An extension to that two-year period may be
granted at the discretion of the city engineer.
   (b)   Assurances for rural subdivisions. No plat of any rural subdivision
shall be approved unless the improvements required by this chapter have been
installed prior to the approval, or unless the owner or developer has posted a
surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit or acceptable cash deposit assuring
completion of all required improvements.
   (c)   Issuance. No building permits shall be issued until assurances, or
subdivision construction agreements as applicable, have been filed or signed as
applicable or all required road improvements have been completed.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.15.010) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 92-12,
passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 08-17, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter shall be punished under §
10.999 of this Code of Ordinances.
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A.01.070) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008)
APPENDIX A: CERTIFICATES FOR PRELIMINARY PLANS
   CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL
   Be it resolved by the City Council of the City of Sioux Falls, that the
preliminary plan of (Subdivision Name) to the City of Sioux Falls is hereby
approved by resolution (resolution number).
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL
   The City Planning Commission of the City of Sioux Falls approves the
preliminary plan of (Subdivision Name) to the City of Sioux Falls and the same
has been recommended to the City.
   If the preliminary plan is within the joint platting jurisdiction, the
following certificates shall also be included.
   COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
   APPROVAL
   The County Planning Commission of ________ County, approves the preliminary
plan of (Subdivision Name) and that the same has been recommended for approval
on (date approved).
   COUNTY COMMISSION APPROVAL 
   Be it resolved by the Board of Commissioners of ________ County, that the
preliminary plan of (Subdivision name), ________ County, is hereby approved by
resolution (resolution number).
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A, App. 1) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 22-14,
passed 4-1-2014)
APPENDIX B: CERTIFICATES FOR PLATS AND REPLATS
   SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I, (Name), a Registered Land Surveyor of the State of South Dakota, do hereby
certify that I did on or before (Date) , survey that parcel of land described
as (Legal description) containing (Size) [and it is in all respects correct].
      ______________________________
      Registered Land Surveyor
   OWNER’S CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
I, (Name), do hereby certify that I am the owner of all land included in the
above plat and that the plat has been made at my request and in accordance with
my instructions for the purposes (Indicated herein) , and that the development
of this land shall conform to all existing applicable zoning, subdivision, and
erosion and sediment control laws, ordinances, and regulations. At this time,
the zoning of the lots platted herein is as listed below and is subject to the
Arterial Street Platting Fee where applicable. The applicable Arterial Street
Platting Fee has been paid based on this zoning. Any future rezoning of these
lots, which results in the lot or lots having a zoning classification with a
higher per acre trip generator, will result in additional Arterial Street
Platting Fees pursuant to City ordinance.
   DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE
I hereby dedicate to the public for public use forever the streets, roads and
alleys, parks, and public grounds, if any, as shown on the plat, including all
sewers, culverts, bridges, water distribution lines, sidewalks, and other
improvements on or under the streets, alleys, parks, and public grounds whether
the improvements are shown or not. I also hereby grant easements to run with
the land for water, drainage, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, or other public
utility lines or services under, on, or over those strips of land designated
hereon as easements.
I hereby waive any rights of protest to any special assessment program which
may be initiated for the purpose of installation of improvements required by
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Sioux Falls.
   OWNER’S CERTIFICATE FOR PRIVATE MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES
I, (Name), also certify that ownership and maintenance of streets, roads and
alleys, bike trails, parks and other open space, private drainage easements,
drainageways, and detention areas, if any, as shown on the plat, and any
improvements thereto, shall be consistent with the agreement per the
requirements within §
157.116 except those areas, improvements, or facilities with respect to which
an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the appropriate
public authority. I also hereby grant easements to the public to run with the
land for water, drainage, sewer, gas, electric, mutual access easements,
telephone, or other public utility lines, or services under, on, or over those
strips of land designated hereon as easements.
(Plat Certificate for Private Streets)
If private streets are shown, include:
I further grant and certify that the roadway shown as (Name of private road) is
a private roadway easement which is hereby reserved as a permanent unobstructed
access. The street or road is for vehicular and pedestrian travel for the
purpose of access to the abutting property. It is understood that the owner,
their lessees and assignees, have the responsibility with respect to
maintaining the private street or road consistent with the agreement per the
requirements within §
157.116. The grant is to run with the land. The owners, their lessees and
assignees, of the property platted as (Name of subdivision) shall at their own
cost and expense keep and preserve the private street at all times in a good
condition of repair and maintenance, and clear of snow and other obstructions
and neither erect nor permit erection of any improvements of any kind within
the private street which might interfere in any way with the property
maintenance, use, repair, reconstruction, and patrolling of the private street
or road.
If mutual access easements are shown, include:
I further grant and certify that the roadway is a mutual access easement which
is hereby created as a perpetual common unobstructed access in favor of the
lots abutting on it. The easement is for vehicular and pedestrian travel over
the roadway for the purpose of access to the abutting property. The owner,
their lessees and assignees, shall maintain the easement area. They shall, at
their own expense, keep the easement area in good repair and maintenance and
clear of snow and other obstructions. No improvements of any kind may be
erected within the easement area which might interfere in any way with the
proper maintenance, use, repair, reconstruction, and patrolling of the mutual
access easement. This covenant shall run with the land.
If the plat is a condominium or includes common ownership, include:
We hereby set aside Tract x as a common area for the purpose of access to a
public way and for parking and loading for Tracts a through z. We further
certify that the common areas shall be owned by the owners of Tracts a through
z inclusive as tenants in common; and that Tracts a through z shall not be
sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed unless the instrument of conveyance
for the Tract being transferred and conveyed also transfers and conveys all of
that Tract owner’s interest in Tract x.
If the plat is a replat, include:
I, (Name) , do hereby certify that this replat will not place any existing lot
or building in violation of any applicable ordinance, code, regulation, law
including but not limited to zoning, building, subdivision, and flood
prevention.
I further certify that this platting of the described (New Subdivision Name)
does hereby vacate the following platting:
(Legal description of old plat) on file at the Register of Deeds office in Book
________, page ________, the plat, hereby vacated, being situated within
described (New Subdivision Name) as surveyed.
Dated this ________ day of ________, 20_____.
      ______________________________
      Name
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA   )
                  : SS
COUNTY OF ________      )
On this ________ day of ________, 20_____, before me, the undersigned officer,
appeared (Name), known to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within
instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she executed the same for the
purposes therein contained.
In witness thereof, I have hereunto set my hand and official seal this ________
day of ________, 20_____.
My commission expires: ________
__________________
Notary Public, ________ County, South Dakota
   CITY ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATE - Inside City Limits
I, (Name), City Engineer of the City of Sioux Falls, do hereby certify that
this plat has been reviewed by me or my authorized agent and that this plat is
recommended for approval. To the extent the platted property lies within the
boundaries of the city of Sioux Falls, I hereby verify that access to city
streets (direct access or through access easement or agreements) has been
approved as provided by city ordinance; this does not constitute approval of
the specific design or precise location or such access, and further, does not
constitute approval of access to private streets, state or county roads or
highways, or any areas outside the boundaries of the city of Sioux Falls.
Signed on this            day of  , 20 .
                                                            
         City Engineer
         City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota
   CITY ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATE - Outside City Limits
I, (Name), City Engineer of the City of Sioux Falls, do hereby certify that
this plat has been reviewed by me or my authorized agent and that this plat is
recommended for approval by the city council. Signed on this ________ day of
________, 20_____.
         ______________________________
         City Engineer
         City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota
   ROAD AUTHORITY CERTIFICATE - Outside City Limits
I, (Name),               ,                          (Title) of the
                      (Agency) do hereby certify that this plat and access
location has been reviewed by me or my authorized agent and that this plat is
recommended for approval.
Signed on this             day of  , 20      .
By:                                            
Title:                                          
   CITY DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES CERTIFICATE
I, (Name), City Director of Planning and Development Services of the City of
Sioux Falls, do hereby certify that the current zoning is as listed below and
that this plat has been reviewed by me or my authorized agent and that this
plat is recommended for approval.
 
Current Zoning Classification Acres
 
   _______________________________________
   City Director of Planning and Development Services
   City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota
   CITY FINANCE OFFICER’S CERTIFICATE
I, (Name), the duly appointed, qualified, and acting City Finance Officer of
the City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, hereby certify that the certificates of
approval are true and correct including the signature thereon, and that any
special assessments which are liens upon the land shown in the above plat, as
shown by the records in my office, on this ________ day of ________, 20_____,
have been paid in full.
         _____________________________
         City Finance Officer
         Sioux Falls, South Dakota
   COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATE
I, Treasurer of ________ County, South Dakota, do hereby certify that all taxes
which are liens upon any land included in the above (and the foregoing) plats,
as shown by the records of my office, have been fully paid.
   Dated this ________ day of ________, 20______.
      _____________________________
      Treasurer of _____________ County,
      South Dakota
   DIRECTOR OF EQUALIZATION
I, Director of Equalization of ________ County, South Dakota, do hereby certify
that a copy of the above plat has been filed at my office.
      _____________________________
      Director of Equalization,
      ___________ County, South Dakota
   REGISTER OF DEEDS
Filed for record this ________ day of ________, 20______, at ________ o’clock
________.m., and recorded in Book ________ of Plats on page ________.
_____________________________
Register of Deeds, __________ County,
      South Dakota
   COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION
*   If the final plat or replat is within the joint platting jurisdiction of
Lincoln County, the following certificate shall also be included:
   LINCOLN COUNTY PLANNING
   DIRECTOR'S CERTIFICATION
   I, Planning Director of Lincoln County, do hereby certify that this plat has
been reviewed by me or my authorized agent and has been approved.
Approved this _______ day of ____________ 20_____.
_____________________________
Planning Director
*   If the final plat or replat is within the extraterritorial platting
jurisdiction of Minnehaha County, the following certificate shall also be
included:
   MINNEHAHA COUNTY PLANNING
   DIRECTOR’S CERTIFICATE
I, Director of Planning of Minnehaha County, do hereby certify that this plat
has been reviewed by me or my authorized agent and has been approved.
   Approved this ________ day of ________ 20_____.
   ______________________________________
   Director of Planning
   Minnehaha County, South Dakota
I do hereby certify that the above certificate of approval is true and correct
including the signature thereon.
   Dated this ________ day of ________ 20______.
   _____________________________
   County Auditor
   Minnehaha County, South Dakota
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A, App. 2) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 11-09,
passed 1-12-2009; Ord. 22-14, passed 4-1-2014; Ord. 87-18, passed 10-2-2018)
APPENDIX C: SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENT
The requirements contained herein shall apply to Public Improvements for
subdivisions or for connection to subdivisions built privately and to be
dedicated to the City of Sioux Falls ("City"). The intent of these requirements
is to set forth the security to be provided relative to the construction of
Public Improvements. Any capitalized terms not defined herein, but defined in
City Ordinance, shall have the meaning as defined in said Ordinance.
THIS AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is made between the City of Sioux Falls, South
Dakota (hereinafter referred to as "City") and
___________________________________________ __, its heirs, executors,
administrators, successors, transferees, and assigns jointly and severally
(hereinafter referred to as "Responsible Party") and is effective upon
signature of the Mayor of the City of Sioux Falls.
   Declarations
WHEREAS, _________________________________ is the Owner or Developer of certain
lands subject to the jurisdiction of the City (hereinafter referred to as
"Owner" or "Developer"); and
WHEREAS, the City wishes to prevent the use of public funds to complete private
developments; and
WHEREAS, the City requires the execution of this Agreement as a prerequisite to
approval of the final plat of the subdivision or the issuance of a Construction
Permit authorizing the commencement of construction activities; and
(Check one)
WHEREAS, the Responsible Party wishes to proceed with construction of the
required Public Improvements before platting and has submitted, and the City
has approved, construction plans for the subdivision identified as
__________________________________________ Addition Phase _______________,
which are hereby attached to and made part of this Agreement. Also attached and
hereby made part of this Agreement is a preliminary plat including LEGAL
DESCRIPTION OF LOTS; or
WHEREAS, the Responsible Party wishes to proceed with platting of (Legal
Description)
prior to installation of the required Public Improvements of which the
associated plat(s) are hereby attached to and made part of this Agreement. The
Responsible Party has submitted and the City has approved Development
Engineering or construction plans identified as
________________________________ Addition Phase ________, which are hereby
attached to and made part of this Agreement. The Responsible Party will have
approved construction plans prior to issuance of the Construction Permit.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the above, the City and Responsible Party
hereby agree as follows:
1.   Definitions—The Definitions Set Forth Herein Shall Apply Solely To This
Agreement.
   a.   City Engineer—The City Engineer for the City of Sioux Falls or his or
her authorized representative.
   b.   City Ordinance—Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, as
adopted and as amended from time to time.
   c.   Construction Permit—The permit required prior to the installation of
Public Improvements; including, but not limited to, street grading, roadway
base, curb and gutter, asphalt or concrete surfacing, drainage and flood
control, water and sanitary sewer, sump pump collection, or other such
improvements in proposed subdivisions or which connect proposed subdivisions.
   d.   Developer—The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its authorized
agent who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner.
Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
   e.   Final Acceptance—The written notice from the City Engineer verifying
that all required Public Improvements are complete according to the approved
plans, specifications, and standards.
   f.   Final Plat—The plat approved by the City pursuant to Section 157.068 of
the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
   g.   Performance Security—The financial security as provided for herein to
ensure that all Public Improvements are completed by the Responsible Party or
as provided herein.
   h.   Public Improvements—Are those improvements which will be accepted for
operation and maintenance by the City of Sioux Falls and shall include, but not
be limited to, street grading, roadway base, curb and gutter, asphalt or
concrete surfacing, drainage and flood control, water and sanitary sewer, sump
pump collection, roadway lighting, or other such improvements in proposed
subdivisions.
   i.   Responsible Party—A responsible party means any person seeking to plat
a subdivision, including but not limited to (a) owners holding the land for
investment purposes, who are not engaged in construction and not holding
themselves out as real estate developers, and (b) any developer who is holding
or purchasing the land primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course
of business and who is seeking to subdivide property or obtaining a
construction permit authorizing the commencement of construction activities for
a subdivision. A responsible party must file and comply with subdivision plans
and other requirements under this chapter (including entering into a
Subdivision Construction Agreement and posting a suitable Performance Security
and/or Warranty Security, as applicable), regardless of whether such
requirements refer to an "Owner" or "Developer" or both.
   j.   Warranty Period(s)—The One (1) or Two (2) year period(s) from the date
of written notice granting final acceptance, utility acceptance, or delayed
acceptance from the City Engineer as set forth in Section 6 hereof.
   k.   Warranty Security—The financial security as provided for herein to
warrant all Public Improvements as more fully provided for herein by the
Responsible Party or a security provider as set forth herein.
2.   Time Period for Construction.
The Responsible Party shall complete construction of all Public Improvements in
accordance with the approved plans, specifications and standards within Two (2)
years of the date of this Agreement. At the Responsible Party's request, the
City Engineer may extend the time period in which to complete the construction
for one additional year if the City Engineer determines that such an extension
is justified. The City Engineer may allow for an additional extension in cases
of extreme hardship as set forth in Section 6 herein.
3.   Construction Permit.
Prior to the start of work, the Responsible Party shall obtain a Construction
Permit from the City Engineer's Office allowing the Responsible Party to begin
construction within the specified subdivision. The Responsible Party shall
ensure the Construction Permit is kept valid for the term and any extension of
this Agreement. Should the Construction Permit terminate for any reason before
continuing work, the Responsible Party will be required to revise the plans to
meet the current standards and obtain a new Construction Permit.
4.   Performance Security.
The Responsible Party understands and agrees that the City will not approve any
Final Plat within the identified subdivision until all Public Improvements are
completed and accepted in accordance with this Agreement, unless prior to any
Final Plat, the Responsible Party executes a Performance Security in favor of
the City in the amount of One Hundred percent (100%) of the Engineer's Estimate
to construct the Public Improvements not yet installed and accepted by the
Engineer. In no event shall the Performance Security be less than Ten percent
(10%) of the Engineer's Estimate to construct all Public Improvements. This
minimum of Ten percent (10%) shall be maintained until all Public Improvements
are completed, accepted by the Engineer, and the Responsible Party has
furnished to the City the required Warranty Security.
The Responsible Party shall use the Performance Security form and/or criteria
approved by the City Attorney. The Performance Security shall be secured in
favor of the City by any one of the following methods:
   a.   Escrow account.
   b.   A bond issued by a Corporate surety licensed and authorized to do
business in the state of South Dakota as surety and subject to written approval
by the City Engineer, which approval shall be at its sole discretion.
   c.   Irrevocable letter of credit.
Any streetlighting that will be or has been furnished and installed by the City
and has not been paid for must also be included in the Engineer's Estimate and
Performance Security prior to final platting.
The Responsible Party shall utilize the form provided by the City relative to
the escrow account, irrevocable letter of credit, or bond methods of security.
Said agreement(s) must be elected and signed at the inception of this
Agreement.
5.   Performance Security Reductions.
A Performance Security may be reduced prior to Final Acceptance of all required
Public Improvements. To qualify for a Performance Security reduction, the
Responsible Party must complete the Public Improvements in compliance with the
approved plans, specifications, and standards as determined by the City
Engineer.
Each reduction allowed will be in the amount of the estimated cost, prepared
and certified by the Responsible Party's engineer, of the part of the
subdivision improvements accepted in writing by the City Engineer. In no event
shall the Performance Security be reduced to less than Ten percent (10%) of the
Engineer's Estimate for all subdivision improvements until all Public
Improvements are completed, accepted by the City Engineer, and the Warranty
Security is in place.
A request for reduction in the Performance Security may be made no more
frequently than every Thirty (30) days. Upon receipt of a reduction request,
the City Engineer will respond to the Responsible Party within Seven (7)
working days and either approve or deny the request.
6.   Utility and Final Acceptance and Warranty of Improvements.
   a.   Acceptance of the required Public Improvements will be completed in two
stages: Utility Acceptance which includes the water main system, sanitary sewer
system, storm sewer system, and sump pump collections systems; and Final
Acceptance which shall consist of all other Public Improvements including, but
not limited to, grading, crushed base, valley gutters, fillet sections, curb
and gutter, and surfacing.
      When all required Public Improvements are complete, as defined above, the
Responsible Party shall submit a written request for a Utility Acceptance
inspection or Final Acceptance inspection. Within Seven (7) working days of the
request, the City Engineer will complete an inspection. If after that
inspection the City Engineer finds that all required Public Improvements for
the respective inspection, including punch list items, are complete according
to the approved plans, specifications, and standards, the City Engineer shall
provide written notice granting acceptance of those Public Improvements.
      Warranty of the Public Improvements shall be as follows:
      (1)    Utility Acceptance and Warranty
         The Responsible Party shall warrant all water main systems, sanitary
sewer systems, storm sewer systems, and sump pump collections systems free from
defects for a time period of Two (2) years from the date of written notice from
the City Engineer granting Utility Acceptance.
      (2)   Final Acceptance and Warranty
         The Responsible Party shall warrant all other Public Improvements free
from defects for a time period of One (1) year from the date of written notice
from the City Engineer granting Final Acceptance.
   b.   Exceptions for Extreme Hardship:
      (1)   Extreme Hardship
         The Responsible Party may submit a written request to the City
Engineer requesting an exception to the installation of the required Public
Improvements within the specified time frame if installation of said
improvements will create an extreme hardship for the Responsible Party. The
City Engineer will have sole discretion in determining if an extreme hardship
exists. If the City Engineer determines an extreme hardship exists, the City
Engineer will determine the length of time the installation of the improvements
will be allowed to be delayed up to a maximum of Five (5) years from the date
of such determination. The City Engineer may require a Performance Security be
provided for an amount of up to One Hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the
improvements not completed plus projected inflationary costs for said Public
Improvements.
      (2)   Extension of Warranty Periods
         Warranty periods will begin upon the completion and Final Approval of
the delayed installation of Public Improvements. The Warranty Security in the
amount of Ten percent (10%) of the original Engineer's Estimate for all the
work will be required to remain in place until all warranty periods, including
delayed installation improvements, have been completed with the following
exception: if the original Warranty Periods have expired and the cost of the
delayed installation improvements are less than the warranty security, then the
Warranty Security for the delayed installation warranty improvement security
may be reduced to One Hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the delayed
installation improvements.
7.   Warranty Security.
The Responsible Party understands and agrees that the City will not approve any
Final Plat within the identified Subdivision until it has been determined all
required Public Improvements have been accepted and found free of defects for
the required Warranty Period(s), unless prior to any final platting the
Responsible Party executes a Warranty Security in favor of the City for Ten
percent (10%) of the Engineer's Estimate for the duration of the Warranty
Period(s). The Responsible Party shall use the Warranty Security form approved
by the City Attorney. Each Warranty Security required by this Agreement shall
be secured in favor of the City by one of the following methods:
   a.   Escrow account.
   b.   A bond from a Corporate surety licensed and authorized to do business
in the state of South Dakota as surety and subject to written approval by the
City Engineer which approval shall be at its sole discretion.
   c.   Irrevocable letter of credit.
The Responsible Party is not required to provide a warranty for the
streetlighting furnished and installed by the City. However, the cost of
furnishing and installing such street lighting will be used for purposes of
calculating the Ten percent (10%) Warranty Security as set forth herein.
8.   Warranty Inspections.
A minimum of Forty-Five (45) days prior to the end of the Warranty Period, the
City Engineer will conduct a warranty inspection. A written list of warranty
repairs will be prepared and presented to the Responsible Party. The
Responsible Party will be responsible for notifying the City Engineer in
writing when the warranty repairs have been completed and the City Engineer
shall inspect the same within Ten (10) business days of such notice. The
Warranty Security will remain until all warranty repairs have been completed
and accepted by the City Engineer. The City Engineer will verify the warranty
repairs have been completed and provide written correspondence acknowledging
acceptance of the warranty repairs and release of the Warranty Security.
9.   Engineer's Estimate.
The engineer retained by the Responsible Party ("Responsible Party's Engineer")
shall prepare and provide an itemized estimate ("Engineer's Estimate") to
construct the Public Improvements. The Responsible Party's Engineer shall be a
professional engineer, P.E., licensed to work in the state of South Dakota.
Each line item used to create the estimate shall either be a City standard bid
item or a similar line item that clearly defines the scope of work. Each line
item shall include a description, quantity, unit price, and total price. The
total sum of all line items shall be included at the bottom of the Engineer's
Estimate. Proof of actual costs may be utilized to develop the Engineer's
Estimate. The Engineer's Estimate will be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. In the event there will be oversizing or material reimbursement
payments made by the City to the Responsible Party, said payment may be shown
as a credit in arriving at the Engineer's Estimate.
10.   Streetlighting.
The Engineer's Estimate shall include, in addition to the cost of all Public
Improvements, the cost for streetlighting to be furnished and installed by the
City. The City will provide the streetlighting design and cost estimate to the
Responsible Party's Engineer upon request. Requirements shall meet the
Engineering Design Standards for Street Lights. The Responsible Party shall
incur all costs associated with the installation of the street lights
including, but not limited to, material, labor, and wire charges from the
respective energy company.
11.   Authority of the City Engineer.
As the representative of the City, the City Engineer is in charge of
engineering details and administration of the Public Improvements. Work shall
be performed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The City Engineer will
decide questions which may arise as to the quality and acceptability of
materials furnished, work performed, all questions which may arise as to the
interpretation of documents, and all questions as to the acceptable fulfillment
of this Agreement on the part of the Responsible Party. The City Engineer has
the authority to reject defective material and work.
The City Engineer will have the authority to, by written suspension order,
suspend the work wholly or in part, for failure to carry out conditions of this
Agreement, for failure to carry out orders, for conditions considered
unsuitable for the prosecution of the work, or for other conditions or reasons
determined by the City to be in the public interest.
The City Engineer's decision, while final, shall be subject to appeal pursuant
to Sections 30.040 through 30.046 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls,
South Dakota.
12.   Coordination of Documents.
The City's current edition of the Supplemental Standard Specifications are
hereby made a part of this Agreement in their entirety unless otherwise
revised, deleted, or supplemented herein. Division II—Construction Details and
Division III—Materials Details of the current edition of the South Dakota
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges and
the current version of the South Dakota Department of Transportation
Supplemental Specifications and Errata related to Division II and Division III
are hereby made a part of this Agreement in their entirety unless otherwise
revised, deleted, or supplemented herein.
The coordination of these documents is an essential part of the Agreement. A
requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all. They are
intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work.
For discrepancies, the items shall prevail, or govern, in the following
descending order:
   a.    Subdivision Construction Agreement.
   b.   Plans.
   c.    Standard Specifications (a.k.a. Supplemental Standard Specifications).
   d.   South Dakota Department of Transportation Supplemental Specifications
and Errata related to Division II and Division III of said document.
   e.   Division II (Construction Details) and Division III (Materials Details)
of the South Dakota Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Roads and Bridges.
Nothing contained herein shall relieve the Responsible Party of complying with
other requirements imposed by Sioux Falls City Ordinance or as otherwise
legally or contractually required.
13.    Cooperation by Responsible Party.
The Responsible Party shall give the work the constant attention necessary to
facilitate progress towards completion and shall cooperate with the City
Engineer and City Inspectors ("Inspector(s)"). The Responsible Party shall not
take advantage of apparent errors or omissions in the plans and specifications.
If the Responsible Party discovers an error or omission, in the plans or
specifications, the Responsible Party will immediately notify the City Engineer
in writing or via email. The City Engineer will make corrections and
interpretations as necessary to fulfill the intent of the plans and
specifications.
14.    Duties of the Inspector.
Inspectors employed by the City are authorized to inspect work and materials
furnished by the Responsible Party. Inspection may extend to any part of the
work, preparation, fabrication, or manufacture of the materials to be used. The
Inspector is not authorized to alter or waive the conditions of this Agreement.
The Inspector is not authorized to issue instructions contrary to the plans and
specifications or to act in a supervisory capacity for the Responsible Party.
The Inspector will have the authority to reject work or materials until any
questions at issue can be referred to and decided by the City Engineer.
Neither the City's authority to inspect all work nor any actual inspections
performed by the City during the course of construction shall constitute an
acceptance of work performed or operate to relieve the Responsible Party and/or
Contractor's obligation to construct the project in compliance with the plans
and specifications.
15.    Inspection of Work.
Materials and details of the work shall be subject to inspection by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall be allowed to enter upon Responsible Party's
property and have access to the work site to inspect during regular business
hours and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the
Responsible Party as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection.
16.    Materials.
All materials and equipment furnished under this Agreement shall be new unless
approved in writing by the City Engineer. Materials used shall conform to
requirements of the approved plans, specifications, and standards. The City
retains the right to perform any and all record testing which may be deemed
necessary or advisable by the City Engineer. To expedite the inspection and
testing of materials, the Responsible Party may notify the City Engineer of
proposed sources of materials prior to delivery. Work in which unapproved
materials are used shall be performed at the Responsible Party's risk and are
subject to inspection, testing, or rejection. Copies of tests will be furnished
to the Responsible Party's representative when requested.
Samples taken and tests made will be in accordance with the most recent
standard or tentative standard methods of City of Sioux Falls Minimum Testing
Requirements Policy, AASHTO, ASTM, and the "South Dakota Department of
Transportation, Materials Manual—Sampling and Testing Procedures." Samples will
be taken and tests made by a representative of the City and at the City's
expense except as otherwise stipulated.
If a discrepancy exists, the order of precedence is as follows:
   a.   City of Sioux Falls Minimum Testing Requirements Policy.
   b.   Department's Materials Manual.
   c.   AASHTO.
   d.   ASTM.
17.    Conformity with Plans and/or Specifications.
Work performed and materials furnished shall conform to the lines, grades,
cross sections, dimensions, and material requirements, including tolerances,
shown on the plans, specifications, or other documents.
If the City Engineer finds the materials furnished, work performed, or the
finished product is not in full conformity with the plans and specifications,
resulting in an inferior or unsatisfactory product, the Responsible Party will
remove and replace or correct the work or materials at its own expense.
If the City Engineer finds the materials furnished, work performed, or the
finished product is not in full conformity with the plans and specifications
but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced, he shall then determine
if the work shall be accepted and remain in place. If acceptable, the City
Engineer will document the basis of acceptance and provide an amount of
compensation to become due to the City for allowing the work to remain in place
and the same shall be signed by the Responsible Party and may be taken from the
Performance Security. Should the Responsible Party not agree, the Responsible
Party will remove and replace or correct the work or materials at its own
expense. Items of work that may have an impact on public use or public safety
that are accomplished contrary to specifications shall be corrected
immediately.
18.    Remedies for Substandard Work and/or Materials.
Work which does not conform to the requirements of the plans and specifications
will be considered as unacceptable, unless otherwise determined acceptable
under the provisions of Section 17. Unacceptable work, whether the result of
poor workmanship, use of defective materials, or damage through carelessness or
other cause, shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner.
19.    Acceptance Limitation.
The acceptance of a Public Improvement shall in no way constitute an assumption
by the City of liability for defects in the improvement. By accepting the
improvement, the City does not warrant or guarantee the Public Improvement has
been properly designed or constructed, or waive any claims relating thereto.
Any errors or omission of the Responsible Party, its engineer, or the
Contractor shall not be the responsibility of the City.
20.    Revisions to the Approved Construction Plans.
The Responsible Party may revise the approved construction plans as necessary
to complete the subdivision improvements, provided the changes are reviewed and
approved per the City's standard processes. If the revisions result in
increased liability to the City, the City Engineer may withhold performance
security reductions or require increases in the Performance Security until the
Responsible Party completes such work and that work is accepted by the City. If
the revisions result in a liability decrease, the Performance Security may be
reduced in accordance with Section 5 of this Agreement.
21.    Responsible Party and/or Contractor Employees, Methods, and Equipment.
   a.   Workers:
      All workers shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform
properly the work assigned to them. Any person employed by the Responsible
Party and/or by any Contractor who does not perform assigned work in a proper
and skillful manner, or who is intemperate or disorderly, shall be removed from
the project forthwith by the Responsible Party upon written order of the City
Engineer and shall not be employed again on any portion of the work without the
City Engineer's consent. Should the Responsible Party fail to remove such
person, or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper
prosecution of the work, the City Engineer may suspend the work until the
Responsible Party has complied with the order(s).
   b.    Methods and Equipment:
      (1)   The methods and equipment used by the Responsible Party and/or
Contractor shall produce a satisfactory quality of work. Equipment used on any
portion of the project shall be such, and its use so regulated, that no serious
or irreparable damage to the roadway, adjacent property, or other streets or
highways will result from its use. If damage does occur to these areas,
suitable repairs shall be made at the Responsible Party's expense.
      (2)   When the methods and equipment to be used by the Responsible Party
and/or Contractor in accomplishing the construction are not prescribed in the
plans, specifications, or standards, the Responsible Party and/or Contractor is
free to use any methods or equipment that will accomplish the work in full
conformity with the requirements of the approved plans, specifications, and
standards, as demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
22.    Protection of Valley Gutters and Fillets.
All fillets and valley gutters shall be protected during paving operations and
between placement of lifts to prevent damage. A gravel crossing or other means
of ramping shall be placed over all valley gutters during base course placement
and shaping operations. All valley gutters shall be protected during asphalt
paving operations with gravel, asphalt, wooden plank ramp, or other approved
ramping methods.
When the top lift of asphalt is not placed the same construction season as
bottom lift or if the top lift is not placed within Two (2) weeks of bottom
lift, all valley gutters and fillets shall be ramped with asphalt to protect
them from snowplow and other vehicle damage. Any damage to curb and gutter,
valley gutters, and/or fillets caused by the lack of adequate ramping shall be
repaired at the expense of the Responsible Party and the same shall be a
condition of Final Acceptance.
23.    Maintenance of Traffic and the Premises.
Unless otherwise specified, the Responsible Party shall be solely responsible
for maintaining the premises being subdivided in a safe condition and for
keeping the project secured from public use until the bottom lift of asphalt
concrete is placed. Measures to adequately restrict public access must be used
and maintained by the Responsible Party. If the requirements call for public
access, the Responsible Party shall install and maintain appropriate controls
as required. The Responsible Party shall be responsible for installation and
maintenance of any barricades or warning signs required until Final Acceptance
is granted and permanent signage is in place. The Responsible Party shall
notify the City Engineer (Ten) 10 business days prior to the need for permanent
signage.
Until Final Acceptance is granted, the Responsible Party shall be responsible
for maintaining traffic throughout the subdivision. This may include, but is
not limited to:
   a.   Placement of asphalt concrete to create ramps at fillets, valley
gutters, and lift transitions.
   b.   Placement of traffic control barriers to indicate the termination of
roads.
24.    Roadway Maintenance Responsibilities.
The City will be responsible for snow removal on any street where asphalt or
concrete surfacing has been placed prior to Final Acceptance and during the
warranty period. Snow removal will be the responsibility of the Responsible
Party on any unpaved streets. Any damage to work including the asphalt or
concrete surfacing, curb and gutter, fillets, and valley gutters caused to the
work exclusively by snow removal operations will not be subject to repair or
replacement.
However, the Responsible Party will be responsible for any snow removal damage
to valley gutters or fillets caused by inadequate ramping when the top lift of
asphalt has not been installed. The City shall not provide snow removal
services on streets where manholes, valve boxes, and any other items protrude
above the roadway surface.
The Responsible Party will not be responsible for any routine maintenance
during the Warranty Period. Routine maintenance includes street sweeping, crack
sealing, and seal coating. However, the City is not responsible for street
sweeping caused by construction activities in the development.
In the case of an emergency repair where, in the judgment of the City, delay
would cause serious loss or damage, repairs may be made without notice being
sent to the Responsible Party, and the Responsible Party shall pay the cost
thereof.
25.    Transfer of Responsibility.
In the event of the sale, conveyance, or transfer of the Subdivision or any
portion thereof, the City will not release the Responsible Party from its
obligations under this Agreement and will continue to hold the Responsible
Party responsible for all Public Improvements until a successor in interest to
the Responsible Party has posted a suitable Performance Security and/or
Warranty Security, as applicable, and entered into an Agreement to Construct
Subdivision Improvements with the City. The Responsible Party may also assign
over its Performance Security with the written consent of the City, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld to cover said Public Improvements.
26.    Failure to Complete the Required Improvements.
In the event the Responsible Party shall fail or neglect to fulfill the
obligations under this Agreement, the City shall have the right to construct or
cause to be constructed the Public Improvements specified herein, as shown on
the Final Plat and in the plans and specifications as approved, and the
Responsible Party shall be liable to pay to and indemnify the City, the total
cost to the City thereof, including, but not limited to, engineering, attorney
fees (both outside and for staff attorneys), and contingent costs together with
any damages, either direct or consequential, which the City may sustain on
account of the failure of the Responsible Party to carry out and execute all of
the provisions of this Agreement and any agreements referenced herein. The City
shall have the unconditional right to call upon the Performance or Warranty
Security for the purposes specified and in the amounts enumerated herein.
If the Responsible Party fails to or refuses to complete the Public
Improvements under the terms of this Agreement by the dates required, the City
may upon written notice to Responsible Party at any time (or times) execute
against the Performance or Warranty Security for those funds it deems necessary
to complete the work—whether by the City, a private company, or a public
agency—upon certifying that the Responsible Party has not completed the Public
Improvements. The certification shall be made by a notarized statement signed
by the City Engineer or his designated agent.
If the City takes over the completion of the Public Improvements because of the
Responsible Party's failure or refusal to complete the same, and if the bond,
escrow, or letter of credit posted is insufficient to complete the Public
Improvements and cover the Warranty Security, the Responsible Party shall be
liable to the City upon demand for the additional funds necessary to complete
or repair the Public Improvements according to the plans and specifications.
If the City performs, or has performed on its behalf by a private company or a
public agency, the Public Improvements specified in the plans and
specifications, and if the final costs of the Public Improvements to the City
including, but not limited to, administrative costs, is less than the amount
drawn against the bond or letter of credit after withholding a sum sufficient
to cover the Warranty Security, then the City shall refund the excess to the
Responsible Party or surety within Thirty (30) days from completion and
acceptance of the Public Improvements.
27.    Breach of Agreement.
   a.    The following non-inclusive list shall constitute a breach of this
Agreement:
      (1)   Failure by the Responsible Party to complete the Public
Improvements within the contract period or any extension thereof.
      (2)   Failure or refusal by the Responsible Party to comply with an order
of the City Engineer within a reasonable time.
      (3)   Responsible Party's disregard of laws, ordinances, or instructions
of the City Engineer.
      (4)   Failure or refusal by the Responsible Party to remove rejected
materials.
      (5)   Failure or refusal by the Responsible Party to replace, perform
anew, or correct any defective or unacceptable work.
      (6)   Bankruptcy or insolvency of the Responsible Party, or the making of
an assignment for the benefit of creditors by the Responsible Party.
      (7)   Failure by the Responsible Party to carry on the work in an
acceptable manner.
      (8)   Any other breach of a material provision of this Agreement.
      Upon Responsible Party's breach, the City shall be entitled to give
notice of default to the Responsible Party and security provider, if any. The
notice of default shall indicate how the Responsible Party has breached and
shall indicate what action the Responsible Party must take to cure such breach.
The Responsible Party shall have Fifteen (15) days to take substantial action
to cure such breach or appeal pursuant to Sections 30.040 through 30.046 of the
Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
   b.   If the Responsible Party does not, within the time for cure provided in
the notice of default, take substantial action to cure such breach, the
Responsible Party shall, at the written direction of the City Engineer,
relinquish possession and control of the work, and the City shall thereupon
have full power and authority, to terminate the contract, to take over the
completion of the work, to enter into agreements with others for the completion
of said contract according to the terms and provisions thereof, or to use such
other methods as in the City's opinion may be required for the performance of
said contract, or completion of Public Improvements, in an acceptable manner.
   c.   The Responsible Party and its security provider shall be liable for all
outlay and expense incurred by the City, together with the costs of completing
the Public Improvements, and such costs may be deducted from any monies due or
which may become due to the Responsible Party. In case such outlay and expense
exceeds the sum that would have been payable under the Warranty Security, or to
the extent said Warranty Security fails to make payments, the Responsible Party
shall be liable for and shall pay to the City the amount of said sums.
   d.   Neither the City, nor any officer, agent, nor employee thereof, shall
be in any way liable or accountable to the Responsible Party or the Responsible
Party's security provider for the method by which the completion of said Public
Improvements, or any portion thereof, may be accomplished, or for the price
paid therefor. Neither by taking over the work nor by declaring a default,
shall the City forfeit the right to recover damages from the Responsible Party
for failure to complete the Public Improvements.
                                          Responsible Party:
                                          By ____________________________
STATE OF                       )
                  :SS
COUNTY OF                    )
On this __________ day of _________________________, 20_____, before me, the
undersigned officer, personally appeared
____________________________________________, known to me or satisfactorily
proven to be the person(s) whose name(s) is (are) subscribed to the within
instrument and acknowledged that ____he____ executed the same for the purposes
therein contained.
   In witness whereof, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
                                 _________________________________
   (SEAL)                            Notary Public—State of: _____________
                                 My Commission Expires: ____________
City of Sioux Falls:
                                                                       
Mayor                      Date
ATTEST:
                              
City Clerk
(1992 Code, App. A, § 15A, App. 3) (Ord. 81-08, passed 7-7-2008; Ord. 92-12,
passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 08-17, passed 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 158: 2006 JOINT ZONING REGULATIONS LINCOLN COUNTY AND SIOUX FALLS
Section
Title and Purpose
   
158.001   Title
   
158.002   Purpose
Districts and Boundaries
   
158.015   Boundaries of joint and platting jurisdiction
   
158.016   Districts designated
   
158.017   Incorporated by reference
   
158.018   Boundaries of districts, maps
   
158.019   Rules where uncertainty as to boundaries arises
   
158.020   Vacation of streets and roads
   
158.021   Classification of land coming within the joint zoning jurisdiction
A-1 Agricultural District
   
158.035   Intent
   
158.036   Permissive uses
   
158.037   Permitted special uses
   
158.038   Conditional uses
   
158.039   Accessory uses
   
158.040   Parking regulations
   
158.041   Sign regulations
   
158.042   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RR Rural Residential District
   
158.055   Intent
   
158.056   Permissive uses
   
158.057   Permitted special uses
   
158.058   Conditional uses
   
158.059   Accessory uses
   
158.060   Parking regulations
   
158.061   Sign regulations
   
158.062   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RS-1 Residential District
   
158.075   Intent
   
158.076   Permissive uses
   
158.077   Permitted special uses
   
158.078   Conditional uses
   
158.079   Accessory uses
   
158.080   Parking regulations
   
158.081   Sign regulations
   
158.082   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RS-2 Residential District
   
158.095   Intent
   
158.096   Permissive uses
   
158.097   Permitted special uses
   
158.098   Conditional uses
   
158.099   Accessory uses
   
158.100   Parking regulations
   
158.101   Sign regulations
   
158.102   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RD Residential District
   
158.115   Intent
   
158.116   Permissive uses
   
158.117   Permitted special uses
   
158.118   Conditional uses
   
158.119   Accessory uses
   
158.120   Parking regulations
   
158.121   Sign regulations
   
158.122   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RA-1 Residential District
   
158.135   Intent
   
158.136   Permissive uses
   
158.137   Permitted special uses
   
158.138   Conditional uses
   
158.139   Accessory uses
   
158.140   Parking regulations
   
158.141   Sign regulations
   
158.142   Density, area, yard and height regulations
C Commercial District
   
158.155   Intent
   
158.156   Permissive uses
   
158.157   Permitted special uses
   
158.158   Conditional uses
   
158.159   Accessory uses
   
158.160   Parking regulations
   
158.161   Sign regulations
   
158.162   Density, area, yard and height regulations
I-1 Light Industrial District
   
158.175   Intent
   
158.176   Permissive uses
   
158.177   Permitted special uses
   
158.178   Conditional uses
   
158.179   Accessory uses
   
158.180   Parking regulations
   
158.181   Sign regulations
   
158.182   Density, area, yard and height regulations
I-2 General Industrial District
   
158.195   Intent
   
158.196   Permissive uses
   
158.197   Permitted special uses
   
158.198   Conditional uses
   
158.199   Accessory uses
   
158.200   Parking regulations
   
158.201   Sign regulations
   
158.202   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RC Recreation/Conservation District
   
158.215   Intent
   
158.216   Permissive uses
   
158.217   Permitted special uses
   
158.218   Conditional uses
   
158.219   Accessory uses
   
158.220   Parking regulations
   
158.221   Sign regulations
   
158.222   Density, area, yard and height regulations
PD Planned Development District
   
158.235   Intent
   
158.236   Procedure
   
158.237   Initial development plan
   
158.238   Final development plan
   
158.239   Amendments
   
158.240   Planned development districts
WS Water Source Protection Overlay District
   
158.255   Intent
   
158.256   Boundaries of district
   
158.257   Conditional uses
   
158.258   Standards
   
158.259   Prohibited uses
Additional Use Regulations
   
158.270   Fences
   
158.271   Adult uses
   
158.272   Wind energy conversion systems
   
158.273   Home occupations
   
158.274   Mineral exploration and development
   
158.275   Mobile homes/manufactured homes
   
158.276   Accessory building and uses
   
158.277   Additional yard regulations
   
158.278   Additional height regulations
   
158.279   Airport approach zones
   
158.280   Rock, sand and gravel extraction
   
158.281   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities
   
158.282   Temporary uses
Parking and Loading Regulations
   
158.295   Location
   
158.296   Off-street parking requirements
   
158.297   Rules for computing parking spaces
   
158.298   Minimum improvement and maintenance standards
   
158.299   Off-street loading requirements
On-Premises Signs
   
158.310   Intent
   
158.311   Permitted signs and sign area
   
158.312   Regulations and limitations of permitted signs
   
158.313   Special situations
   
158.314   Exemptions
   
158.315   Illumination
   
158.316   Temporary and portable signs
   
158.317   Prohibited signs
   
158.318   Maintenance and removal
Off-Premises Signs
   
158.330   Purpose and intent
   
158.331   General regulations
   
158.332   Conditional uses
   
158.333   Exceptions
   
158.334   Prohibited signs
   
158.335   Maintenance and removal
Nonconforming and Nonstandard Uses
   
158.350   Purpose and intent
   
158.351   Continuation of nonconforming uses
   
158.352   Use becoming nonconforming by change in law or boundaries
   
158.353   Change in nonconforming use
   
158.354   Extension or enlargement
   
158.355   Restoration after damage
   
158.356   Discontinuance of nonconforming use
   
158.357   Effect on use which is illegal under prior law
   
158.358   Continuation of nonstandard uses
Conditional Use Regulations
   
158.370   Application to the county
   
158.371   Fees
   
158.372   Site plan
   
158.373   Hearing by planning commissions
   
158.374   Appeal of decision of planning commission
   
158.375   Hearing by the board of county commissioners and the city council
   
158.376   Expiration
   
158.377   Conditional use criteria
   
158.378   Preexisting uses
   
158.379   Reapplication
   
158.380   Revocation
   
158.381   Telecommunications towers and antenna support structures
   
158.382   Broadcast tower
Amendments to the Regulations
   
158.395   Application to county for zoning amendment
   
158.396   Fees
   
158.397   Hearing by planning commissions
   
158.398   Hearing by board and city council
   
158.399   Reapplication
Zoning Board of Adjustment
   
158.410   Establishment
   
158.411   Operational procedure
   
158.412   Appeals
   
158.413   Variances
   
158.414   Application to the county for variance
   
158.415   Fees
   
158.416   Hearing
   
158.417   Appeals from decision of board
   
158.418   Limitations
   
158.419   Jurisdiction restricted
Fees
   
158.430   General regulations
   
158.431   Change of zone
   
158.432   Planned development district
   
158.433   Major amendment
   
158.434   Minor amendment
   
158.435   Minimal amendment
   
158.436   Conditional use
   
158.437   Board of adjustment
   
158.438   Zoning permit use
General Provisions
   
158.450   General regulations
   
158.451   Zoning permits required
   
158.452   Enforcement and administration
   
158.453   Site plan
   
158.454   Violation and penalty
   
158.455   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
158.456   Interpretation, abrogation and severability
   
158.457   Saving clause
   
158.458   Purpose of catch heads
   
158.459   Effective date
Definitions
   
158.470   Purpose
   
158.471   Definitions
 
   
158.999   Penalty
TITLE AND PURPOSE
§ 158.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be referred to as the “Joint Zoning Regulations for
Lincoln County and the City of Sioux Falls.”
(1992 Code, App. F, § 1.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 93-17, passed
9-26-2017)
§ 158.002 PURPOSE.
   (a)   These regulations have been based upon the following land use
regulatory tools:
      (1)   The Sioux Falls 2040 Comprehensive Development Plan adopted by the
board of county commissioners on April 25, 2017, and the city council on
October 11, 2016, and as amended by the city council (April 18, 2017); and
      (2)   The Lincoln County Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the board of
county commissioners on September 27, 2004.
   (b)   All of the aforementioned land use regulatory tools are in conformance
with SDCL ch. 11-2, 11-4 and 11-6. These regulations shall establish a common
working relationship between Lincoln County and the city to carry out the goals
and objectives of the plan as adopted by the county and city, but especially to
lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration or
scattering of population; and to encourage a distribution of population or mode
of land utilization that will facilitate the economical and adequate provisions
of transportation, roads, water supply, drainage, sanitation, education,
recreation or other public requirements. The regulations are intended to
preserve and protect existing property uses and values against adverse or
unharmonious adjacent uses by zoning land outside the corporate boundaries of
the city.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 1.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 93-17, passed
9-26-2017)
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
§ 158.015 BOUNDARIES OF JOINT AND PLATTING JURISDICTION.
   (a)   The Lincoln County/City of Sioux Falls joint zoning and platting
jurisdiction geographic area shall be geographically portrayed in accordance
with the applicable joint jurisdictional boundary delineated in the Official
Lincoln County/City of Sioux Falls Joint Zoning and Platting Map. The Official
Lincoln County/City of Sioux Falls Joint Zoning and Platting Map, together with
all the explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by
reference and is declared to be a part of these regulations and defined as
follows:
   Beginning at the NW corner of Section 10 (T100N R51W) thence south to the NW
corner of Section 15, thence east until the intersection of the centerline of
269th Street and 468th Avenue, thence south to the W 1/4 of Section 14 (T100N
R51W), thence east along the W 1/4 section line until the middle of 469th
Avenue, thence south until the intersection of the centerline of 270th Street,
thence east until the center of the right-of-way for Interstate 29, thence
south until 271st Street, thence east until 479th Avenue, thence north 3700',
thence east 500' in NW 1/4 of Section 22 (T100N R49W), thence north to the
middle of 270th Street, thence east 750', thence north 1000' in SW 1/4 Section
15 (T100N R49W), thence east 1100', thence north 1525', thence east 300',
thence north 700', thence east to the middle of 480th Avenue, thence north to
the intersection of 480th Avenue and Woodsong Place, thence east following
Woodsong Place, thence northeasterly 1250' to the Lincoln County line/Big Sioux
River, thence north to the Lincoln/Minnehaha County line, thence following west
to the point of beginning excluding existing city limits of Sioux Falls, SD.
   (b)   Before any territory may come under the jurisdiction of these
regulations, the boundary of the joint and platting jurisdiction shall be
amended by ordinance adopted by the county commission and city council in
compliance with South Dakota Compiled Laws.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 93-17, passed
9-26-2017; Ord. 67-25, passed 10-28-2025)
§ 158.016 DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
   (a)   In order to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and
size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of a lot that may be
occupied; the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces; the density of
population; and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
trade, industry, residence or other purposes; the joint zoning jurisdiction is
hereby divided into the following districts:
 
Districts
A-1 agricultural     C commercial
RR rural residential I-1 light industrial
RS-1 residential     I-2 general industrial
RS-2 residential     RC recreation/ conservation
RD residential       PD planned development
RA-1 residential
    
   (b)   The following districts shall be designated as zoning overlay
districts, imposing special regulations on the properties that fall within
these overlay districts without abrogating the requirements imposed by the
underlying land use district regulations:
 
WS water source protection
 
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.017 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The following are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference:
   (a)   The official zoning map(s) of the area of joint jurisdiction, together
with all the explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted
by reference and is declared to be a part of these regulations. The maps shall
be signed by the chairperson of the board of county commissioners and the mayor
of Sioux Falls and be filed with the Lincoln County Auditor and Sioux Falls
city clerk;
   (b)   The flood insurance rate map is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of these regulations. Areas shown as Zone A, AO or A1-A30
on the FIRM but which are zoned A-1 agricultural on the zoning map, shall be
governed by the provisions of the RC recreation/conservation district; and
   (c)   The approved plans submitted in conjunction with any planned
development district are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.018 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS, MAPS.
   The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the maps which have been made
a part hereof by reference. That part of the maps designating the different
districts and their boundaries and that part of the legend designating the
symbols for each district shall have the same force and effect as if they were
all fully set forth herein. Other notations and references thereon are for
information only.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.019 RULES WHERE UNCERTAINTY AS TO BOUNDARIES ARISES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts shown on the district map accompanying and made a part of these
regulations by reference, the following rules apply:
   (a)   The district boundaries are roads unless otherwise shown, and where
the districts are bounded approximately by roads, the road shall be construed
to be the boundary of the district.
   (b)   Where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks
and platted lots, the district boundary shall be construed to coincide with the
nearest platted lot lines; and where the districts are bounded approximately by
platted lot lines, the platted lot lines shall be construed be the boundary of
the district, unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the maps by
legal description.
   (c)   In unplatted property, the district boundary lines shall be determined
by use of the scale appearing on the map, unless the boundaries are otherwise
indicated on the maps by legal description.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.020 VACATION OF STREETS AND ROADS.
   Whenever any street, road or other public way is vacated, the zoning
district adjoining each side of the street, road or other public way is
extended to the center of the vacation; and all area included in the vacation
shall then an henceforth be subject to the appropriate regulations of the
extended districts.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.021 CLASSIFICATION OF LAND COMING WITHIN THE JOINT ZONING JURISDICTION.
   All land coming within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall be based
upon existing zoning classification, pursuant to the Lincoln County zoning
ordinance, until otherwise changed by ordinance.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 2.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 158.035 INTENT.
   It shall be the intent of this district to provide for a vigorous
agricultural industry by preserving for agricultural production those prime
agricultural lands beyond the area of planned urban development. It is
recognized that because of the nature of both agricultural activities and
residential subdivisions, that these two uses are generally poor neighbors and
therefore the concentration of housing in the A-1 agricultural district shall
be discouraged.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.036 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the A-1 agricultural district:
   (a)   Agriculture;
   (b)   (1)   A single-family dwelling if the following provisions for
building eligibility are met.
      (2)   Each quarter-quarter section shall have one building eligibility
when all the following conditions are met.
         A.   There are no other dwellings on the quarter-quarter section.
         B.   The building site shall be a minimum of one acre.
         C.   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
         D.   The remaining portion of the quarter-quarter section is retained
as agricultural land or in its present use.
   (c)   Historical sites;
   (d)   Neighborhood utilities; and
   (e)   Antenna support structure.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.037 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the A-
1 agricultural district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein,
or by obtaining a conditional use permit for the use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382.
   (a)   A building eligibility may be used within a farmstead provided:
      (1)   The building eligibility exists on property contiguous to and under
the same ownership as the farmstead;
      (2)   There will be no more than two dwellings within the farmstead; and
      (3)   The residential structure may be a single-family dwelling,
manufactured home or mobile home.
   (b)   Cemetery subject to: the cemetery shall contain an area of 20 acres or
more or be an expansion of an existing cemetery. For purposes of this chapter,
crematories and related mortuary services shall not be considered accessory to
cemeteries; a chapel shall be considered as an accessory structure;
   (c)   Pet cemetery subject to a minimum area of two acres;
   (d)   Wind energy conversion system in conformance with §
158.272;
   (e)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
158.330 through
158.335;
   (f)   Greenhouses and nurseries provided there is no retail sale of products
conducted on the premises;
   (g)   A single-family dwelling located on a lot of record in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   A lot of record consisting of less than 80 acres and containing no
other dwellings shall have one building eligibility;
      (2)   A lot of record consisting of 80 acres or more shall qualify for
building eligibility as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the lot of record shall be divided by 40 acres.
The resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings on the parcel
shall represent building eligibility; and
         B.   If there is more than one building eligibility, each additional
building site shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit.
      (3)   Approval must be granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto the public road; and
      (4)   Any parcel conveyed from a lot of record must be a minimum of one
acre. The remaining portion of the lot shall be retained as agricultural land
or in its present use.
   (h)   Telecommunications tower, subject to:
      (1)   There shall be a minimum setback of 600 feet from the tower base to
any existing residence or proposed residential development area based on the
county’s adopted land use plan except the farmstead residence on the proposed
site. Building structures must meet county setback requirements. Towers shall
be no more than 200 feet in height. Towers exceeding 200 feet may be
considered, if FCC and FAA approval is received; and
      (2)   Stealth design approved by the county planning director.
   (i)   Church, subject to, the building being adjacent to an arterial or
collector street.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.038 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the A-
1 agricultural district if a conditional use permit has been obtained in
conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Rock, sand and gravel extraction in conformance with §
158.280;
   (b)   Mineral exploration in conformance with §
158.274;
   (c)   Airport/heliport;
   (d)   A single-family dwelling on a parcel which is not a lot of record
provided:
      (1)   The deed to the land or the agreement to convey the parcel was
recorded with the Lincoln County register of deeds prior to August 3, 1995;
      (2)   There are no other dwellings located on the parcel, except a parcel
of 80 acres or more shall have building eligibility determined as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the parcel shall be divided by 40 acres. The
resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings on the parcel
shall represent the building eligibility; and
         B.   Each building site shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
      (3)   The building site shall not conflict with other existing or
potential land use activities or the prevailing pattern of development;
      (4)   The soil conditions are acceptable for a building site; and
      (5)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
   (e)   Group day care;
   (f)   Private campground;
   (g)   Garden center;
   (h)   Kennel;
   (i)   Stable;
   (j)   Roadside stand;
   (k)   Golf course, golf driving range;
   (l)   Private outdoor recreation facility;
   (m)   Solid waste transfer station, rubble dump, commercial compost site;
   (n)   Electrical substation;
   (o)   Public utility facility;
   (p)   The transfer of building eligibility from one parcel to another parcel
all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The transfer of building eligibility shall occur only between
contiguous parcels under the same ownership;
      (2)   Suitability as a building site based on the following factors:
         A.   Agricultural productivity of the soil;
         B.   Soil limitations; and
         C.   Orientation of the building site(s) with respect to road
circulation and access to public rights-of-way.
      (3)   The minimum lot size shall be one acre but a larger area may be
required when soil conditions warrant;
      (4)   The parcel from which the eligibility is transferred shall continue
as agricultural land or remain in its present use; and
      (5)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
   (q)   Public facility owned and operated by a governmental entity;
   (r)   Bed and breakfast establishment;
   (s)   Broadcast tower;
   (t)   Crematories; and
   (u)   Mortuary services.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.039 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the A-1 agricultural district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.040 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All parking within the A-1 agricultural district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.041 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the A-1 agricultural district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.042 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the A-1 agricultural
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
Front yard 30 feet**
Lot area   1 acre*
Lot width  125 feet
Maximum    35 feet***
height
Rear yard  30 feet
Side yard  7 feet
*   Unless a larger lot size is required by the granting of a conditional
use permit.
**   The front yard on a major arterial street or section line road shall be
50 feet.
***   There shall be no height limit for accessory farm structures or wind
energy conversion systems except in the airport approach zone.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   If a lot of record has less area or width than herein required and its
boundary lines along the entire length abutted lands under other ownership on
August 3, 1995, and have not since been changed, the parcel of land may be used
for any use permitted in this district.
   (d)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 3.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
RR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.055 INTENT.
   This district is intended to protect a vigorous agricultural industry by
limiting the areas in which the RR rural residential district can be used. The
RR rural residential district, where permitted, shall generally be located
where provisions can be made to adequately handle sewage disposal, where the
value of the land for agricultural use is marginal, and where the water supply,
roads and emergency services are easily and economically available. This
district shall also coincide with the purpose of this zoning ordinance, §
158.002.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.056 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RR rural residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling;
   (b)   Public facility owned or operated by a governmental agency; and
   (c)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.057 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RR
rural residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
therein or by obtaining a conditional use permit for the use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Church, subject to, the building being adjacent to an arterial or
collector street;
   (b)   Elementary and high school, subject to:
      (1)   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot line.
   (c)   Private park, playground or swimming pool; and
   (d)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.058 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RR
rural residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Mobile home/manufactured home subdivision in conformance with §
158.275;
   (b)   Mobile home/manufactured home park in conformance with §
158.275;
   (c)   Group day care;
   (d)   Group home;
   (e)   Nursing home;
   (f)   Cemetery;
   (g)   Kennel;
   (h)   Stabling of horses provided they are owned by the resident of the
property and not used as a commercial operation on the property;
   (i)   Golf course, except miniature course and driving range;
   (j)   Wind energy conversion system in conformance with the requirements of
§
158.272;
   (k)   Electrical substation;
   (l)   Public utility facility; and
   (m)   Day care center.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.059 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RR rural residential district
are buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.060 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All parking within the RR rural residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.061 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RR rural residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.062 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RR rural
residential district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses
           All Uses
Density    1 acre*
Front yard 30 feet**
Lot area   1 acre*
Lot width  125 feet
Maximum    35 feet
height
Rear yard  30 feet
Side yard  7 feet
*   Where a central sanitary sewer is available, the required lot area may
be reduced to 20,000 square feet.
**   The front yard on all major arterial streets or section line roads
shall be 50 feet.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 4.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
RS-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.075 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for areas of residential use with a
gross density of generally five dwelling units per acre or less. The district
permits single-family dwellings and such supportive community facilities as
parks, playgrounds, schools, libraries and churches. It is intended that this
district provide protection for those areas existing as, or planned for,
single-family neighborhoods. Development shall coincide with completion of
proper municipal and utility improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.076 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RS-1 residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling; and
   (b)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.077 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
1 residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or
by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Churches; one of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut
upon an arterial or collector street;
   (b)   Elementary and high schools:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot line.
   (c)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director; and
   (d)   Public service facility:
      (1)   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   A neighborhood meeting shall be conducted by city and county
officials to address site and building design.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.078 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
1 residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Group day care;
   (b)   Private lake;
   (c)   Group home;
   (d)   Nursing home;
   (e)   Convent and monastery;
   (f)   Electrical substation;
   (g)   Public utility facility; and
   (h)   Day care center.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.079 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RS-1 residential district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.080 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RS-1 residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.081 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RS-1 residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.082 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RS-1 residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses Corner Lots
               All Uses      Corner Lots
Density        7,500 sq. ft. 8,500 sq. ft.
Front yard     30 ft.        30 ft.*
Lot area       7,500 sq. ft. 8,500 sq. ft.
Lot width      60 ft.        85 ft.
Maximum height 35 ft.        35 ft.
Rear yard      30 ft.        15 ft.
Side yard      7 ft.**       7 ft.**
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced to
25 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 5.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
RS-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.095 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for areas of residential use with a
gross density of generally five to seven dwelling units per acre. The district
permits single-family dwellings and such supportive community facilities as
parks, playgrounds, schools, libraries and churches. It is intended that this
district provide protection for those areas existing as or planned for single-
family neighborhoods. Development shall coincide with completion of proper
municipal and utility improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.096 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RS-2 residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling; and
   (b)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.097 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
2 residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or
by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Churches; one of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut
upon an arterial or collector street;
   (b)   Elementary and high schools:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot
lines.
   (c)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director; and
   (d)   Public service facility:
      (1)   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   A neighborhood meeting shall be conducted by city and county
officials to address site and building design.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.098 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
2 residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Group day care;
   (b)   Private lake;
   (c)   Two-family dwelling;
   (d)   Group home;
   (e)   Nursing home;
   (f)   Convent and monastery;
   (g)   Electrical substation; and
   (h)   Public utility facility.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.099 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RS-2 residential district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.100 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RS-2 residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.101 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RS-2 residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.102 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RS-2 residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses Except Duplexes Duplexes Corner Lots
               All Uses Except Duplexes Duplexes      Corner Lots
Density        5,500 sq. ft.            4,350 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
Front yard     25 ft.                   25 ft.        25 ft.*
Lot area       5,500 sq. ft.            8,700 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
Lot width      50 ft.                   60 ft.        60 ft.
Maximum height 35 ft.                   35 ft.        35 ft.
Rear yard      25 ft.                   25 ft.        15 ft.
Side yard      5 ft.**                  5 ft.**       5 ft.**
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced to
20 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 6.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
RD RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.115 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for both developing and redeveloping
areas of moderate residential density between six and 14 dwelling units per
acre. This district provides for single-family, two-family, townhouse and
multiple-family residential uses, plus support facilities such as schools,
parks, community buildings and churches. Development shall coincide with
completion of proper municipal and utility improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.116 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RD residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling;
   (b)   Two-family dwelling; and
   (c)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.117 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RD
residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or by
obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Churches: one of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut on
an arterial or collector street;
   (b)   Elementary and high schools:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut on an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot
lines.
   (c)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director;
   (d)   Public service facility:
      (1)   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   A neighborhood meeting shall be conducted by city and county
officials to address site and building design.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.118 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RD
residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been obtained
in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Three- and four-family dwellings;
   (b)   Up to and including four single-family attached units in any one
structure;
   (c)   Nursing home;
   (d)   Group day care;
   (e)   Group home;
   (f)   Convent and monastery;
   (g)   Private lake;
   (h)   Electrical substation; and
   (i)   Public utility facility.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.119 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RD residential district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.120 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RD residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.121 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RD residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.122 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RD residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 Density (Sq. Lot Area (Sq. Lot Front Width Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height
 Ft.)         Ft.)
            Density (Sq. Lot Area  Lot Front Side Yard Rear Yard     Maximum
            Ft.)         (Sq. Ft.) Width                             Height
Single-
family      5,000        5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.*   5 ft.**       35 ft.
dwelling
Three- and
four-family 2,500        7,500     75 ft.    25 ft.*   7 ft.**       35 ft.
dwelling
                                                       0 ft. or 10
Townhouses  2,400        2,400     16 ft.    25 ft.*   ft. on non-   35 ft.
                                                       party wall
                                                       side
Two-family                                             Smaller of 25
dwelling    3,000        6,000     50 ft.    25 ft.*   ft. or 25% of 35 ft.
                                                       lot depth
Other
allowable                5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.*   7 ft.**       35 ft.
uses
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced
to 20 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 7.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
RA-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.135 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for areas of moderate residential
density between ten and 17 dwelling units per acre. This district provides for
single-family, two-family, townhouse and multiple-family residential uses plus
support facilities such as schools, parks, community buildings and churches.
Development shall coincide with completion of proper municipal and utility
improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.136 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RA-1 residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling;
   (b)   Two-family dwelling;
   (c)   Up to and including six single-family attached units in any one
structure;
   (d)   Multiple dwelling;
   (e)   Elementary and high school;
   (f)   Nursing home; and
   (g)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.137 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RA-
1 residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or
by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382.
   (a)   Churches; one of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut on
an arterial or collector street;
   (b)   Group home, subject to:
      (1)   The distance between the proposed use and any existing group home
measured from lot line to lot line is not less than 1,000 feet; and
      (2)   The use shall be permitted only so long as the facility continues
to be licensed by the state.
   (c)   Nursing home, subject to, the use shall be permitted only so long as
the facility continues to be licensed by the state;
   (d)   Family day care, subject to:
      (1)   A four-foot high fence shall be constructed between the play area
and the street when the play area is adjacent to any arterial or collector
street; and
      (2)   A safe pickup and drop off area must be provided for the children.
   (e)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director; and
   (f)   Public service facility:
      (1)   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   A neighborhood meeting shall be conducted by city and county
officials to address site and building design.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.138 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RA-
1 residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Private lake;
   (b)   Boarding or rooming house;
   (c)   Convent and monastery;
   (d)   Day care center;
   (e)   Park for mobile homes and manufactured homes in conformance with §
158.275;
   (f)   Electrical substation;
   (g)   Public utility facility; and
   (h)   Telecommunications tower.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.139 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RA-1 residential district are
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.140 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RA-1 residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.141 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RA-1 residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.142 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RA-1 residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 Density (Sq. Lot Area (Sq. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum
 Ft.)         Ft.)                                                   Height
           Density   Lot Area  Lot Width Front   Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum
           (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.)           Yard                        Height
                                                                     Smaller of
Multiple                                                             25 ft. or
dwellings                                                            25% of lot
                                                                     depth
3 to 8
dwelling   2,500     7,500     50 ft.    25 ft.* 7 ft.**             45 ft.
units
9 to 12
dwelling   2,500     7,500     75 ft.    25 ft.* 15 ft.              45 ft.
units
Over 12
dwelling   2,500     30,000    100 ft.   25 ft.* 15 ft.              45 ft.
units
Rooming    200/bed   5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 5 ft.**             45 ft.
houses
Single-
family     5,000     5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 5 ft.**             45 ft.
dwelling
                                                 0 ft. or
Townhouses 2,400     5,000     16 ft.    25 ft.* 10 ft. on           45 ft.
                                                 non-party
                                                 wall side
Two-family 2,500     5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 5 ft.**             45 ft.
dwelling
Other
allowable            5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 15 ft.**            45 ft.
uses
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced to
20 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 8.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.155 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for a wide variety of commercial uses
generally located at major intersections and along major roads. This district
will include general commercial uses requiring large land areas, extensive
retail operations and outdoor display. Development shall coincide with
completion of proper municipal and utility improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.156 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the C commercial district:
   (a)   Office;
   (b)   Bank or financial institution;
   (c)   Day care center;
   (d)   Group home;
   (e)   Mortuary services;
   (f)   Indoor recreational facility;
   (g)   Nursery or greenhouse;
   (h)   Personal services; and
   (i)   Public service facility.
   (j)   Medical cannabis establishment registered with the South Dakota
Department of Health and licensed by Lincoln County, subject to:
      (1)   Must be located at least 1,000' from a single-family dwelling in
the following zoning districts: A-1, RR, RS1, RS2, RD, RA1, PD. This distance
shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building
(or portion thereof in which medical cannabis establishment or proposed to be
conducted) to the property line of the single-family dwelling.
      (2)   Must be located at least 1,000' from a public or private school.
This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of
the building (or portion thereof in which the medical cannabis establishment is
conducted or proposed to be conducted) to the property line of the public or
private school.
      (3)   Must be located at least 1,000' from a church. This distance shall
be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building (or
portion thereof in which the medical cannabis establishment is conducted or
proposed to be conducted) to the property line of the church.
      (4)   Must be located at least 1,000' from a public service facility.
This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of
the building (or portion thereof in which the medical cannabis establishment is
conducted or proposed to be conducted) to the property line of the public
service facility.
      (5)   Must be located at least 1,000' from a park. This distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building (or portion
thereof in which the medical cannabis establishment is conducted or proposed to
be conducted) to the property line of the park.
      (6)   Must be located at least 1,000' from another medical cannabis
establishment unless located on the same parcel of property and owned by the
same entity. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the
exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which each of the medical
cannabis establishments are conducted or proposed to be conducted.
      (7)   A medical cannabis establishment may contain a cultivation
facility, a cannabis testing facility, a cannabis product manufacturing
facility, or a dispensary, or any combination thereof, at one location.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 98-21, passed
8-24-2021; Ord. 56-22, passed 5-24-2022)
§ 158.157 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C
commercial district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or by
obtaining a conditional use permit for those uses in conformance with the
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Retail and wholesale trade or service, provided:
      (1)   For outside storage areas, a screening plan shall be submitted for
staff approval;
      (2)   There is no storage of a regulated substance;
      (3)   The building contains 10,000 square feet of area or less; and
      (4)   Parcel size shall be no less than one acre in size.
   (b)   Veterinarian clinic provided there is no outside kenneling of dogs;
   (c)   Frozen food locker provided there is no slaughtering of animals on the
premises;
   (d)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director; and
   (e)   Churches; one of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut on
an arterial or collector street.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.158 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C
commercial district if a conditional use permit for that use has been obtained
in conformance with the requirements in §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Drive-in theater;
   (b)   Warehouse/mini-warehouse;
   (c)   Bar, lounge or adult use;
   (d)   Equipment sales, display and repair;
   (e)   Motor vehicle sales, display, service and rental;
   (f)   Auto body shop;
   (g)   Transportation, including gasoline service station, truck stop and
terminal;
   (h)   Recycling facility;
   (i)   Uses which store or handle a regulated substance;
   (j)   Lumberyard;
   (k)   Contractor’s shop and storage yard;
   (l)   Car wash;
   (m)   Airport/heliport;
   (n)   Hospital;
   (o)   Hotel or motel;
   (p)   Motor vehicle repair shop;
   (q)   Public utility facility;
   (r)   Campground;
   (s)   Commercial recreation facility;
   (t)   Wind energy conversion system in conformance with §
158.272;
   (u)   Broadcast tower;
   (v)   Electrical substation;
   (w)   Telecommunications tower;
   (x)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
158.330 through
158.335; and
   (y)   Crematory.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.159 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses permitted in the C commercial district are accessory
buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in this district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.160 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the C commercial district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.161 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the C commercial district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.162 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   A maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the C commercial
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses
              All Uses
Density        –
Front yard     30 feet
Lot area       –
Lot width      –
Maximum height 35 feet
Rear yard      20 feet
Side yard      10 feet
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of double
frontage lots.
   (c)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner
lot.
   (d)   Any accessory uses shall be required to comply with the height, front,
rear and side yard requirements of the main building.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 9.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.175 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for a number of light manufacturing,
wholesale, warehousing and service uses in an attractive industrial park like
setting. These uses do not depend on frequent personal visits from customers or
clients and do not include residences, apartments or commercial uses which are
primarily retail in nature. It is the intention of this district to provide
high amenity industrial development along the major roads and adjacent to
residential areas, while allowing for slightly heavier development in the
interior of the industrial areas. Development shall coincide with completion of
proper municipal and utility improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.176 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the I-1 light industrial district:
   (a)   Public utility facility, electrical substation;
   (b)   Antenna support structure;
   (c)   Any permissive use except personal services listed in the C commercial
district; and
   (d)   Public service facility.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.177 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
1 light industrial district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
herein or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Warehousing, repair services, wholesale trade, light manufacturing
provided:
      (1)   For outside storage areas, a screening plan shall be submitted for
staff approval;
      (2)   There is no storage of a regulated substance on the premises;
      (3)   The building contains 20,000 square feet of area or less; and
      (4)   Parcel shall be no less than one acre in size.
   (b)   Veterinarian clinic provided there is no outside kenneling of animals;
   (c)   Frozen food locker provided there is no slaughtering of animals on the
premises;
   (d)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
158.330 through
158.335;
   (e)   Telecommunications tower, subject to:
      (1)   There shall be a minimum setback of 600 feet from the tower base to
any existing residence or proposed residential development area based on the
county’s adopted land use plan. Building structures must meet county setback
requirements. Towers shall be no more than 200 feet in height. Towers exceeding
200 feet may be considered, if FCC and FAA approval is received; and
      (2)   Stealth design approved by the county planning director.
   (f)   Retailing or personal service as an accessory use when in conjunction
with a primary use of wholesaling or manufacturing.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.178 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
1 light industrial district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Asphalt mixing plant, ready-mix concrete plant;
   (b)   Extraction of rock, sand and gravel in conformance with §
158.280;
   (c)   Airport/heliport;
   (d)   Any conditional use listed in the C commercial district; and
   (e)   Broadcast tower.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.179 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the I-1 light industrial district
are accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in
this district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.180 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the I-1 light industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.181 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the I-1 light industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.182 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the I-1 light
industrial district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses
               All Uses
Density        –
Front yard     30 feet
Lot area       –
Lot width      –
Maximum height 45 feet
Rear yard      20 feet
Side yard      10 feet
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner
lot.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 10.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 158.195 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses which may
create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with, nor compatible
with residential, office, institutional or planned or neighborhood commercial
establishments. All uses in this district shall comply with any state
regulations regarding noise, emissions, dust, odor, glare, vibration or heat
when applicable. Development shall coincide with completion of proper municipal
and utility improvements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.196 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the I-2 general industrial district: any permissive use listed in
the I-1 light industrial district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.197 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
2 general industrial district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
herein, or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Warehousing, wholesale trade, repair services, light manufacturing
provided:
      (1)   For outside storage areas, a screening plan shall be submitted for
staff approval;
      (2)   There is no storage of a regulated substance on the premises;
      (3)   The building contains 25,000 square feet of area or less; and
      (4)   The parcel shall be no less than one acre in size.
   (b)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
158.330 through
158.335;
   (c)   Telecommunications tower, subject to:
      (1)   There shall be a minimum setback of 600 feet from the tower base to
any existing residence or proposed residential development area based on the
county’s adopted land use plan. Building structures must meet county setback
requirements. Towers shall be no more than 200 feet in height. Towers exceeding
200 feet may be considered, if FCC and FAA approval is received; and
      (2)   Stealth design approved by the county planning director.
   (d)   Retailing as an accessory use when in conjunction with a primary use
of wholesaling or manufacturing.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.198 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
2 general industrial district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   General manufacturing;
   (b)   Stockyards/slaughtering of animals;
   (c)   Rendering;
   (d)   Distillation of products;
   (e)   Refining;
   (f)   Sanitary landfill, solid waste receiving station;
   (g)   Paper manufacturing;
   (h)   Tank farm; petroleum products terminal;
   (i)   Salvage or junk yard;
   (j)   Airport/heliport;
   (k)   Any conditional use listed in the I-1 light industrial district;
   (l)   Mineral exploration and development in accordance with §
158.274;
   (m)   Broadcast tower; and
   (n)   Any similar use not listed within this district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.199 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the I-2 general industrial
district are accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted
uses in this district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.200 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the I-2 general industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.201 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the I-2 general industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.202 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the I-2 general
industrial district shall be as follows.
   (b)   General requirements.
 All Uses
               All Uses
Density        –
Front yard     30 feet
Lot area       –
Lot width      –
Maximum height 55 feet
Rear yard      20 feet
Side yard      10 feet
 
(1992 Code, App. F, § 11.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
RC RECREATION/CONSERVATION DISTRICT
§ 158.215 INTENT.
   This district is intended to protect natural drainage courses in their
capacity to carry run-off water, to limit permanent structures and uses of land
in areas subject to flooding, to prevent the pollution of underground water
supplies (aquifers), to provide open space and natural areas for recreation,
and add to the aesthetic quality of the area.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.216 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RC recreation/conservation district:
   (a)   Agriculture;
   (b)   Public park; forest preserve;
   (c)   Public golf course;
   (d)   Historic sites;
   (e)   (1)   A single-family dwelling if the following provisions for
building eligibility are met.
      (2)   Each quarter-quarter section shall have one building eligibility
when all the following conditions are met:
         A.   There are no other dwellings on the quarter-quarter section;
         B.   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the flood insurance rate map;
         C.   The building site shall be a minimum of one acre;
         D.   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road; and
         E.   The remaining portion of the quarter-quarter section is retained
as agricultural land or in its present use.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.217 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RC
recreation/conservation district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
herein, or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   A building eligibility may be used within a farmstead provided:
      (1)   The building eligibility exists on property contiguous to and under
the same ownership as the farmstead;
      (2)   There will be no more than two dwellings within the farmstead;
      (3)   The farmstead is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified on
flood insurance administration maps; and
      (4)   The residential structure may be a single-family dwelling,
manufactured home or mobile home.
   (b)   Plant nursery or tree farm, subject to:
      (1)   No retail sales allowed on the premises;
      (2)   No structures exceeding 500 square feet; and
      (3)   All structures meeting the requirements of §
158.277.
   (c)   Electric substations, subject to:
      (1)   An opaque screen six feet in height must be erected on the side and
rear lot lines and on the front yard setback line; and
      (2)   The required side yard shall be 25 feet.
   (d)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director; and
   (e)   A single-family dwelling located on a lot of record in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   A lot of record consisting of less than 80 acres and containing no
other dwellings shall have one eligible building site;
      (2)   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the flood insurance rate map;
      (3)   A lot of record consisting of 80 acres or more shall qualify for
building eligibility as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the lot of record shall be divided by 40 acres.
The resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings shall
represent building eligibility;
         B.   If there is more than one building eligibility, each additional
building site shall be required to obtain a conditional use; and
         C.   Each building site shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
      (4)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road; and
      (5)   Any parcel conveyed from a lot of record must be a minimum of one
acre. The remaining portions of the lot shall be retained as agricultural land
or in its present use.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.218 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RC
recreation/conservation district if a conditional use permit for that use has
been obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382:
   (a)   Commercial recreation facility;
   (b)   Day or summer camp;
   (c)   Rifle and pistol range; trap shoot;
   (d)   Cemetery;
   (e)   Fairgrounds;
   (f)   Rock, sand and gravel extraction in conformance with §
158.280;
   (g)   A single-family dwelling to be used as a caretaker’s quarters on a
parcel which is not a lot of record provided:
      (1)   The deed to the land or the agreement to convey the parcel was
recorded with the register of deeds prior to August 3, 1995;
      (2)   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the flood insurance rate map;
      (3)   There are no other dwellings located on the parcel, except a parcel
of 80 acres or more shall have building eligibility determined as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the parcel shall be divided by 40 acres. The
resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings on the parcel
shall represent the building eligibility; and
         B.   Each building site shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
      (4)   The building site shall not conflict with other existing or
potential land use activities or the prevailing pattern of development;
      (5)   The soil conditions are acceptable for a building site; and
      (6)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
   (h)   Broadcast tower;
   (i)   The transfer of a building eligibility from one parcel to another
parcel when all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The transfer of a building eligibility shall occur only between
contiguous parcels under the same ownership;
      (2)   Suitability as a building site based on the following factors:
         A.   Agricultural productivity of the soil;
         B.   Soil limitations; and
         C.   Orientation of the building site(s) with respect to road
circulation and access to public rights-of-way.
      (3)   The minimum lot size shall be one acre but a larger area may be
required when soil conditions warrant;
      (4)   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the flood insurance rate map;
      (5)   The parcel from which the building eligibility is transferred shall
continue as agricultural land or remain in its present use; and
      (6)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.219 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses permitted in the RC recreation/conservation district are
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in this
district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.220 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RC recreation/conservation district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.295 through
158.299.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.221 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RC recreation/conservation district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
158.310 through
158.318.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.222 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RC
recreation/conservation district shall be as follows.
   (b)   General requirements.
Front yard 30 feet**
Lot area   1 acre*
Lot width  125 feet
Maximum    35 feet***
height
Rear yard  30 feet
Side yard  7 feet
*   Unless a larger lot size is required by the granting of a conditional
use permit.
**   The front yard on a major arterial street or section line road shall be
50 feet.
***   There shall be no height limit for accessory farm structures or wind
energy conversion systems except in the airport approach zone.
 
(1992 Code, App. F, § 12.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 158.235 INTENT.
   (a)   It is the intent of this district to provide flexibility from
conventional zoning regulations with increased public review for PD planned
development district projects in order to:
      (1)   Encourage well-planned, efficient development;
      (2)   Allow a planned and coordinated mix of land uses which are
compatible and are harmonious, but previously discouraged by conventional
zoning procedures;
      (3)   Encourage the redevelopment of contiguous large lot parcels into an
integrated and orderly subdivision pattern, with particular attention to
developing an efficient and coordinated network of internal streets;
      (4)   Promote the clustering of residential structures and other uses
without increasing overall density of the development area in order to preserve
unique and natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, natural drainage
systems and scenic areas;
      (5)   Protect sensitive areas and areas with restrictive soil conditions
within development areas through clustering of uses on land more suited for
building;
      (6)   Reserve adequate public right-of-way within development areas for
the eventual extension of arterial and collector streets, including proper
width and spacing of the streets;
      (7)   Improve communication and cooperation among the county, townships,
land developers and interested residents in the development of agricultural
land and redevelopment of existing areas; and
      (8)   Development shall coincide with completion of proper municipal and
utility improvements.
   (b)   It is not the intent of the PD planned development district to
accommodate or encourage the development of isolated small tracts where
adjoining parcels are not considered within an overall development scheme.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 13.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.236 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Initial development plan.
      (1)   When a petitioner wants to request a rezoning to the planned
development district, it shall be submitted to the Lincoln County planning
department, showing the information specified in §
158.237, a minimum of 30 days prior to the joint meeting of the county and city
planning commissions at which consideration is desired. After the planned
development request has been reviewed, the planning commissions shall make a
recommendation to the board of county commissioners and city council on the
requested rezoning. The board of county commissioners and city council shall
then act to approve or deny the request.
      (2)   This request for rezoning is subject to the requirements for
amendment of the zoning regulations specified in §§
158.395 through
158.399 No permit shall be issued within the development until the final
development plan is approved and the plat is filed.
   (b)   Final development plan.
      (1)   Prior to construction on any lots in the planned development, the
petitioner shall present a final development plan showing the information
specified in §
158.238, to the planning commissions, who shall have the sole authority to
approve, deny or amend the plan.
      (2)   The final development plan may be submitted in conjunction with the
initial development plan for concurrent approval on any subareas the developer
is ready to commit to a final plan. All the information required for both an
initial and final development plan must be shown for the area submitted for
concurrent approval, except that the developer may reference the requirements
of one of the traditional zoning districts as the development standard for a
particular subarea.
   (c)   Amendments.
      (1)   Major amendments. Major amendments to the initial and/or final
development plan shall be required to be approved as an amendment to the zoning
regulations, requiring the planning commissions’ review and board of county
commissioners and city council approval.
      (2)   Minor amendments.
         A.   Minor amendments to the initial and/or final development plan
shall be required to be approved by the planning commissions at a hearing.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by the posting of a sign on the property.
         B.   Minor amendments to the initial development plan may also be made
by the submission and approval of a final development plan which is changed
from the approved initial development plan. Any amendments shall be shown as a
change from the initial development plan on the final development plan, and
further these changes shall be made on the initial development plan.
      (3)   Minimal amendments. Minimal amendments to the final development
plan shall be submitted to the planning director on a reproducible development
plan showing the requested changes. The planning director may then approve the
change in writing, if he or she deems it appropriate.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 13.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.237 INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   Upon application for rezoning to the planned development district, the
petitioner shall present an initial development plan to the planning
commissions for review, and to board of county commissioners and city council
for their approval showing the following information:
   (a)   Project name and legal description;
   (b)   A preliminary subdivision plan; and
   (c)   The proposed development scheme showing the following information:
      (1)   The proposed land uses, including the number and type of proposed
residential buildings, the proposed number of dwelling units per building, the
number and type of any proposed nonresidential buildings and their square
footage;
      (2)   The proposed maximum density of the development, which shall not
exceed the density allowed in the traditional zoning districts for similar
uses, except where unique physical, environmental or design characteristics
make those densities undesirable;
      (3)   The proposed minimum setbacks which shall be no less than those
required in the traditional zoning districts for similar uses, except where
unique physical, environmental or design characteristics make the setbacks
undesirable;
      (4)   The proposed maximum height which shall be no greater than that
required in the traditional zoning districts for similar uses, except where
unique physical, environmental or design characteristics make the heights
undesirable;
      (5)   Proposed design features illustrating compatibility to the
surrounding environment and neighborhood; and
      (6)   Anticipated subarea development sequence.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 13.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.238 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (a)   Prior to construction on any lots in the planned development zoning
district, the petitioner shall present a final development plan to the planning
commissions for their approval.
   (b)   The final development plan shall show the following information:
      (1)   The subdivision name, the legal description and the individual
project name (if any);
      (2)   Boundaries of the subarea or subareas submitted for approval
superimposed on the map of the initial development plan;
      (3)   A subdivision plat of the subarea or subareas submitted for
approval;
      (4)   A copy of the written covenants, if any, which petitioner proposes
to impose upon all or any area within the district;
      (5)   A scale drawing showing the following information will be required
for everything except single-family detached dwelling subareas:
         A.   Size and location of proposed structures including height and
number of units;
         B.   Calculated floor area for each structure and a generic listing of
the uses within the structure;
         C.   Off-street parking lot arrangement designating all parking
spaces, off-street loading spaces and any outdoor trash container spaces;
         D.   Any sidewalks, bikeways or other paths;
         E.   Landscaping plans showing the type and location of any walls or
fences, the placement, size and species of any trees or shrubs and berms in
areas that will be sod or seeded;
         F.   All existing and proposed utilities, drainageways, watercourses
and location of aboveground existing utilities on adjacent property;
         G.   Proposed final ground contours;
         H.   Drainage plan;
         I.   Existing and proposed uses adjacent to the area;
         J.   Documentation of the ownership and maintenance responsibility of
any common open spaces, structures or facilities including private streets;
         K.   Any subareas proposed for multiple residential development will
be required to provide an open area for recreation. The open spaces shall not
be included in any required yard, but shall be located in the same subarea it
is intended to serve;
         L.   Proposed parking and loading spaces which shall be in conformance
with §§
158.295 through
158.299, except where unique physical, environmental or design characteristics
make the requirements undesirable;
         M.   Proposed on-site wastewater systems and facilities; and
         N.   Unless otherwise specified on the final development plan, all
development standards shall be the same as those set forth in the traditional
zoning districts, which shall be referenced for each subarea as a part of the
final development plan. For example: townhouses on Block X shall be developed
in conformance with the requirements of the RD residential district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 13.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.239 AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Major amendments. The following changes in an initial and/or final
development plan are considered major amendments:
      (1)   Any change in the proposed land uses;
      (2)   Any major change in the street pattern;
      (3)   An increase in density above that provided for in division (b)(5)
below;
      (4)   Any major change in proposed landscaping; and
      (5)   Any major change in signage.
   (b)   Minor amendments. The following changes in an initial and/or final
development plan are considered minor amendments:
      (1)   Any adjustment in the size or shape of the building envelope
(increasing the height or reducing the building setback);
      (2)   Major decrease in density;
      (3)   Any decrease in the size of required open areas;
      (4)   A minor change in the street pattern;
      (5)   Any increase in density of a subarea:
         A.   Less than 25% for a subarea with less than eight units;
         B.   Less than 15% for a subarea with between nine and 20 units; and
         C.   Less than 8% for a subarea with 21 units or more.
      (6)   Any change in the number of parking spaces;
      (7)   Any minor change in proposed landscaping; and
      (8)   Any minor change in signage.
   (c)   Minimal amendments. The following changes in an initial and/or final
development plan are considered minimal amendments:
      (1)   Any adjustment of a building within a previously established
building envelope;
      (2)   A minor reduction in density;
      (3)   Any minimal change in landscaping; and
      (4)   Any minimal change in signage.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 13.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.240 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
   Those approved development areas within the PD planned development district
shall be assigned a sequential section number following this section, in
accordance with the date of approval.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 13.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
WS WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 158.255 INTENT.
   (a)   This district is intended to preserve the quality and quantity of the
area’s water resources so as to ensure a safe and adequate supply of drinking
water for present and future generations. Restrictions shall apply to land use
activities which have the potential to contaminate water resources, including
aquifers and wellhead sites currently in use and those having the potential for
future use as a public water supply.
   (b)   The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit certain uses which
pose the greatest threat to groundwater contamination and to impose reasonable
and adequate safeguards on other uses which exhibit a potential to contaminate
the groundwater.
   (c)   The water source protection overlay district is an overlay whose
boundaries are superimposed on all districts established by this chapter. It is
not intended that these regulations interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other rules or regulations of this chapter, except that if the water source
protection overlay district imposes a greater restriction than the underlying
zoning district regulations, they shall control.
   (d)   Additional regulations governing land use within water source
protection areas may be found within the special flood hazard area ordinance
adopted by the Lincoln County Commission.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 14.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.256 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT.
   The boundaries of the water source protection overlay district are shown
upon the maps which have been made a part hereof by reference. The maps shall
be signed by the chairperson of the board of county commissioners and the Sioux
Falls mayor and filed with the Lincoln County auditor and Sioux Falls city
clerk. The maps shall have the same force and effect as if they were all fully
set forth herein.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 14.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.257 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use permit shall be required for any use which involves the
storage and/or use of a regulated substance as defined by this chapter. All
available practical methods of preventing and controlling the contamination of
groundwater from waste and other contaminants shall be employed.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 14.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.258 STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to uses in the water source protection
overlay district:
   (a)   Tanks used for the storage of a regulated substance shall be governed
as follows:
      (1)   A zoning permit shall be issued by the county planning department
prior to placement or installation of any tank described below;
      (2)   All metallic tanks installed underground must be of double-wall
construction and cathodically protected;
      (3)   All nonmetallic tanks installed underground must be of double-wall
construction;
      (4)   All underground tanks must be equipped with a continuous leak
detection system capable of immediately detecting a leak and giving audible and
visible alarms;
      (5)   All underground tanks and all aboveground stationary tanks must be
equipped with overfill protection devices. These devices must alert the
transfer operator that the tank is 90% full or automatically shut off flow to
the tank when the tank is no more than 95% full. All tanks must be equipped
with an impervious spill containment basin;
      (6)   All fluid handling piping shall be of double-walled construction
and shall include double-wall containment at the tank and to grade under any
dispensing device;
      (7)   Piping on pressure systems shall be equipped with leak detection
devices that will promptly notify the operator of a problem in the system in
one or more of the following manners:
         A.   Give an audible and visible warning through the tank alarm panel;
and
         B.   Completely stop the flow of the material to the dispenser.
      (8)   Secondary containment shall be provided around and under all
aboveground stationary tanks and consist of native soils, clays, bentonites or
artificially constructed material equivalent to 60 mil high density
polyethylene or greater. An impermeability of at least ten (-6) centimeter/
second is required to permit containment and detection of a release. Secondary
containment must be constructed and maintained to meet impermeability
requirements for the operational life of the tank(s). Secondary containment
must be capable of containing 110% of the volume of the largest tank;
      (9)   Storage of petroleum products in stationary aboveground tanks as
part of an agricultural activity shall be governed as follows:
         A.   A tank with a capacity of 55 gallons or less shall be exempt from
these standards; and
         B.   A tank with a capacity in excess of 55 gallons or a series of
tanks with a total capacity exceeding 100 gallons shall provide secondary
containment as set forth in division (a)(8) above.
      (10)   Propane tanks shall be exempt from these standards.
   (b)   Sewer lines must be of PVC material and the joints must be sealed; and
   (c)   When pastured animals are confined for winter feeding and the number
exceeds 200 animal units, measures shall be employed to contain all wastes on
site. Winter feeding of pastured animals shall not constitute a concentrated
animal feeding operation.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 14.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.259 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses shall not be allowed in the water source protection
overlay district:
   (a)   Sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer facility;
   (b)   Waste disposal except the spreading of solid and liquid animal waste;
   (c)   Sewage disposal pond except when in conjunction with a concentrated
animal feeding operation which is a nonconforming use. In this case, a
conditional use permit shall be required for the disposal pond;
   (d)   Disposal of radioactive waste;
   (e)   Disposal of snow containing de-icing chemicals;
   (f)   Concentrated animal feeding operation;
   (g)   Injection well (class V well);
   (h)   Petroleum products terminal;
   (i)   Junk or salvage yard;
   (j)   Manufacture of a regulated substance;
   (k)   Unenclosed storage of road salt;
   (l)   Cemetery;
   (m)   Crematories; and
   (n)   Mortuary services.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 14.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 158.270 FENCES.
   Regulations regarding fences shall be as follows.
   (a)   Fences up to four feet in height may be located on any part of the lot
except that a fence may not be more than 30% solid if located within 30 feet of
a street intersection, measuring along the property line.
   (b)   Fences up to six feet in height may be erected on those parts of a lot
that are as far back or farther back from the street than the main building.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Fences up to six feet in height may be placed in the side-street-
side front yard where:
         A.   The side-street-side front yard abuts an arterial street shown on
the major street plan;
         B.   The side-street-side front yard is not adjacent to a side yard;
         C.   The fence is located no closer to the front yard than the rear
wall of the main building; and
         D.   No driveways exit on to the arterial street.
      (2)   In the C, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, fences not more than eight
feet in height may be located on any part of a lot other than the required
front yard except when the lot is adjacent to a residential district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.271 ADULT USES.
   (a)   In the development and execution of these regulations, it is
recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation
of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood.
These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or
regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in
any one area.
   (b)   None of the following permitted uses may be established, operated or
maintained within 1,000 feet of a residential district, a church, a school
meeting all the requirements of the Compulsory Education Laws of the state, or
a public park:
      (1)   Adult bookstore;
      (2)   Adult theater;
      (3)   Adult photo studio;
      (4)   Any use which has as a part of its operation adult entertainment or
amusement including, but not limited to, a restaurant or eating place, a bar,
lounge or tavern; and
      (5)   Any use intended to provide adult amusement or entertainment.
   (c)   Not more than two of the following permitted uses may be established,
operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of each other:
      (1)   Adult bookstore;
      (2)   Adult theater;
      (3)   Adult photo studio;
      (4)   Any use which has as a part of its operation adult entertainment or
amusement including, but not limited to, a restaurant or eating place, a bar,
lounge or tavern;
      (5)   Any use intended to provide adult amusement or entertainment;
      (6)   A bar; and
      (7)   A liquor store.
   (d)   The 1,000-foot restriction provided for in division (c) above may be
waived and a conditional use permit issued upon proper application if the
county and city find:
      (1)   The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or
injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of these
regulations will be observed;
      (2)   The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a
“skid row” area; and
      (3)   All applicable regulations will be observed.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.272 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
   The regulations regarding wind energy conversion systems (hereafter referred
to as WECS) shall be as follows.
   (a)   Limited use. No WECS installed in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations shall generate power as a commercial enterprise as defined by
the public utility commission.
   (b)   Setback requirements.
      (1)   The minimum distance between the property line, overhead utility
lines or another wind turbine and any tower support base of a WECS shall be
equal to the proposed tower height (plus the radius of the rotor for the
horizontal access machines).
      (2)   Contiguous property owners and planned developments may construct a
WECS for their use in common. If property held by more than one single owner is
used to meet the setback requirements, a site plan establishing easements or
reserved areas must be submitted to the planning commissions for their
approval.
   (c)   Tower access. Climbing access to the WECS tower shall be limited
either by means of a fence six feet high around the tower base with a locking
portal, or by limiting tower climbing apparatus so there is access to it no
lower than 12 feet from the ground.
   (d)   Electromagnetic interference. If a WECS is installed in any location
along or within the major access of an existing microwave communications link,
the person desiring to install the WECS shall be required to provide a letter
from the business whose link they are within or adjacent to stating that the
business whose link is affected would have no objection to the installation of
the WECS.
   (e)   Air space. A WECS shall be located or installed in compliance with the
guidelines of the Federal Aviation Administration Regulations with regard to
airport approach zones and clearance around VOR stations.
   (f)   Interconnect. The WECS, if interconnected to an electric utility
distribution system, shall meet the interconnect requirements of the electric
utility company.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.273 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   The regulations regarding home occupations shall be as follows.
   (a)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling.
   (b)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
   (c)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be
employed by or participate in the home occupation.
   (d)   The entrance to the space devoted to the occupation must be from
within the building.
   (e)   There shall be no display of products visible in any manner when
viewed from outside the dwelling.
   (f)   No advertising or display signs shall be permitted other than a
nameplate attached to the dwelling. The nameplate shall not be illuminated and
shall not be more than two square feet in area. No off- premises signs shall be
used.
   (g)   The occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
   (h)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
   (i)   The occupation shall not generate more than four visits per day from
clients, customers and delivery vehicles. Delivery vehicles shall be limited to
auto, pickup or service truck.
   (j)   The occupation shall not result in additional off-street parking
spaces for clients or customers.
   (k)   Toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive or
other restricted materials are prohibited.
   (l)   No equipment or process shall be used in the occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the normal senses off the
property.
   (m)   No equipment or process shall be used in the occupation which creates
visual or audible electrical interference in any radio or television receiver
or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the property.
   (n)   A zoning permit shall be secured for all home occupations in
conformance with the procedure outlined in §§
158.450 through
158.459.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.274 MINERAL EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT.
   The regulations regarding mineral exploration and development shall be as
follows.
   (a)   Exploration for minerals may be approved by conditional use permit
only as long as the following minimum requirements are met.
      (1)   The applicant shall provide:
         A.   A description of the mineral or minerals which are the subject of
the exploration;
         B.   Maps showing the general area within which the exploration
operation will be conducted;
         C.   A detailed description of the regional environmental conditions,
to include surface land use and vegetation, as well as a detailed description
of the area’s geologic formations and hydrology from the best available
scientific sources;
         D.   Maps indicating the location of the drill sites to the nearest
section of land, a technical description of the exploration process, the types
of equipment to be used and the estimated time table for each phase of work and
for final completion of the program;
         E.   A description of the major environmental impacts upon air
quality, water quality and quantity and land use modification presented by the
proposed exploration;
         F.   A description of the proposed plan to address the identified
environmental impacts to include all measures to be taken to prevent soil
erosion, water contamination, air contamination, disruption of the areas
ecological balance, and any other related hazard to public health and safety;
         G.   A plan for reclamation of the land to its original condition
after exploration is completed. Measures to be taken for surface reclamation
shall take into account the impact on adjacent land uses and natural resources
and the proposed future use of the lands explored and adjacent lands. The
reclamation plans include:
            1.   Reclamation schedule;
            2.   Methods of plugging drill holes;
            3.   Methods of severing and returning topsoil and subsoil;
            4.   Methods of grading, backfilling and contouring of exploration
sites and access roads;
            5.   Methods of waste management and disposal, including liquid and
solid wastes; and
            6.   Methods of revegetation.
         H.   A surety performance bond in an amount to be determined by the
city council and board of county commissioners to assure that sufficient funds
will be available to carry out required reclamation and, if necessary,
decontamination of the affected ground and surface waters. The amount shall be
set by the city council and board of county commissioners based on an estimate
of the cost of reclamation and decontamination. The bond shall be released five
years after exploration has ceased unless the governing bodies find for good
cause shown, that the water quality of the affected area has not been restored
or the reclamation plan has not been completed. The amount of the surety bond
may be reduced by the governing bodies, if a bond is held by the State of South
Dakota for the same purpose, by the same amount of the latter bond.
      (2)   The applicant shall identify specific phases when monitoring and
inspection of the exploration activities shall be conducted by city, county,
state, federal or independent personnel to assure compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. If a conditional use permit is granted, the
permit shall identify the inspection agency and it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to notify the agency when monitoring or inspection is
required. The applicant shall bear the burden of the cost of the monitoring and
inspection program as determined by the governing bodies.
      (3)   A conditional use permit shall be issued only after all of the
conditions specified herein have been met. Evidence of violation of the
regulations, including but not limited to air and water contamination, shall be
cause for an immediate cessation of exploration activities.
   (b)   Mineral extraction and/or mining may be approved by conditional use
permit only as long as the following minimum requirements are met.
      (1)   The applicant shall provide:
         A.   A description of the mineral or minerals to be mined or milled;
         B.   Maps showing the area within which the mining or milling
operations will be conducted;
         C.   A description of the surface land use and vegetation, as well as
a description of the nature and depth of the top soil and subsoil;
         D.   An environmental assessment which establishes base line
conditions for radioactive intoxicant materials and air, ground and surface
waters, soils, vegetation and animals;
         E.   A description of the overburden, mineral seams and other geologic
formations, their conductivities and hydraulic gradients, known to exist above
the deepest projected depth of the mining operation;
         F.   A description of the hydrology to the deepest projected depth of
the mining operation, including mapping of the depth, water table level, extent
and flow characteristics of groundwater and aquifers for the hydrologic regime
of the groundwater and drainage basins affected by the mining or milling
operation;
         G.   A technical description of the mining or milling, types of
equipment to be used, detailed site plan of all anticipated construction, an
estimated timetable for each phase of work and for final completion of the
program, a statement of source, quality and quantity of water to be used in the
mining or milling operations, as well as the chemical and radioactive
characteristics of all mined or milled products, waste products and emissions
to the environment;
         H.   A description of the major environmental impacts upon air
quality, water quality and quantity and land use modification presented by the
mining or milling operations;
         I.   A description of the proposed plan to address the identified
environmental impacts to include:
            1.   Methods of separating the topsoil, subsoil and soil piles,
protecting them from erosion before reclamation begins, and keeping the topsoil
free from acid or toxic materials;
            2.   Plan for ensuring that acid forming or toxic materials
constituting a hazard uncovered or created during mining or milling are
promptly treated in a manner to prevent water and air contamination;
            3.   Measures to maintain the quantity and quality of ground and
surface water, hydrologic balance, productivity of farmland and soil and water
recharge capacity; and
            4.   Procedures to prevent water and air contamination through
radioactive or toxic seepage of runoff from tailings, ponds, mine wastes, mine
dewatering discharge or other mining and milling related operations.
         J.   A plan for the reclamation of the land after mining is completed.
Measures to be taken for surface reclamation shall take into account the impact
on adjacent land uses and natural resources, and the proposed future use of the
lands mined and adjacent lands, and shall include:
            1.   A reclamation schedule;
            2.   Methods of grading, backfilling and contouring of disturbed
areas and access roads;
            3.   Methods of waste management and disposal, including liquid and
solid wastes; and
            4.   Methods of revegetation.
         K.   A surety performance bond in an amount to be determined by the
city council and board of county commissioners to assure that sufficient funds
will be available to carry out required reclamation and, if necessary,
decontamination of affected ground and surface waters. The amount shall be set
by the city council and board of county commissioners based on an estimate of
the cost of reclamation and decontamination. The bond shall be released five
years after mining and milling has ceased unless the governing bodies find, for
good cause shown, that the water quality of the affected area has not been
restored or the reclamation plan has not been completed. The amount of the bond
may be reduced by the commissioners if a bond is held by the state for the same
purpose, by the same amount of the latter bond.
      (2)   The applicant shall identify specific phases when monitoring and
inspection of the mining and milling process shall be conducted by city,
county, state, federal or independent personnel to assure compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. If the conditional use permit is granted, the
permit shall identify the inspection agency and it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to notify the agency when monitoring or inspection is
required. The applicant shall bear the burden of the cost of the monitoring and
inspection program as determined by the governing bodies.
      (3)   A conditional use permit shall be issued only after all conditions
specified therein have been met. Evidence of violation of the regulations,
including, but not limited to, air and water contamination, shall be cause for
an immediate cessation of the mining and milling.
   (c)   Solution mining and/or in situ mining of an ore body with the
circulation of chemicals through injection and recovery wells for minerals is
prohibited.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.275 MOBILE HOMES/ MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   Regulations regarding mobile homes and manufactured homes shall be as
follows.
   (a)   A park intended for the placement of mobile homes and manufactured
homes on rented lots and where the roads are not publicly dedicated shall meet
the following minimum standards:
      (1)   A plan shall be prepared showing the layout of the park, including
lot lines and road system. Upon approval of the conditional use permit for the
park, the plan shall be filed in the county planning department and govern all
future development;
      (2)   Each lot shall have a minimum size required for the zoning district
in which the park is located. However, a smaller lot size may be approved as
part of the conditional use permit;
      (3)   No dwelling or any structure, addition or appurtenance thereto
shall be located less than the minimum setback required by the district in
which the park is located. The setback requirements may be changed as part of
the approval of the conditional use permit;
      (4)   Each lot shall abut or face a clear unoccupied space, roadway or
street having a width of at least 34 feet where parking is permitted on both
sides, 27 feet in width where parking is restricted to one side only and 24
feet wide where parking is prohibited, or be connected to the street or roadway
by a private driveway not less than 12 feet in width, serving no more than four
lots. A hard surfaced material shall be used on all roadways except in the RR
district, in which case gravel may be used; and
      (5)   The park shall be a minimum of ten acres in size.
   (b)   A subdivision for manufactured homes shall be required to meet the
subdivision regulations and the density, area and yard requirements for the
district in which it is located. The subdivision shall be a minimum of ten
acres in size.
   (c)   A conditional use application for a manufactured home, when located
outside a park or subdivision, will be judged on the compatibility of the
structure compared to neighboring dwelling units, including, but not limited
to, width; length; area; number of stories; siding and roofing materials; roof
style and pitch; and condition. In no instance shall the minimum width of the
structure, exclusive of overhangs, be less than 22 feet.
   (d)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes existing prior to the effective
date of adoption of these regulations may be replaced with another structure by
making application for a conditional use permit. The compatibility of the
replacement dwelling with neighboring dwellings shall be considered in
reviewing the conditional use request.
   (e)   A mobile home or manufactured home may be located on land owned by the
residents during the construction of a dwelling thereon, and must be removed
upon completion of the dwelling or after one year, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   All mobile homes and manufactured homes as defined in §
158.471 must be located in conformance with these requirements.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.276 ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES.
   The regulations regarding accessory buildings and uses shall be as follows.
   (a)   Limited use. Accessory buildings and uses are buildings and uses
customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the district in which it
is located. In the A-1, RR, RS, RD and RA districts, accessory buildings and
uses are limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building;
      (2)   A private residential structure used only for the storage of
noncommercial vehicles and other related material;
      (3)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbeque oven, fireplace and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses;
      (4)   Home occupation in conformance with §
158.273; and
      (5)   Temporary storage and distribution of seed and similar type
products provided the use is located within a farmstead, the product is stored
within a completely enclosed building typical of farm buildings and the use is
limited to the seasonal sale of products from the premises.
   (b)   Time of construction. No accessory buildings shall be constructed upon
a lot until the construction of a main building has been actually commenced,
and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main building on the lot is
also being used.
   (c)   Setback requirements.
      (1)   Accessory buildings which are attached to or located within ten
feet of the main building shall be considered a part of the main building and
shall comply with the same yard requirements as the main building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings not a part of the main building, when located
in the required rear yard, shall be no closer than three feet to the side and
rear property lines.
   (d)   Location of accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not occupy
more than 30% of the rear yard, subject further to the following limitations:
      (1)   In the A-1 and RC districts, the total area of accessory buildings
shall not exceed 1,200 square feet when the buildings are located in a
subdivision of more than four lots unless a conditional use permit has been
approved;
      (2)   In all residential districts, the total area of accessory buildings
shall not exceed 1,200 square feet unless a conditional use permit has been
approved; and
      (3)   In a planned development district, the total area of accessory
buildings shall not exceed 1,200 square feet unless a minor amendment has been
approved.
   (e)   Family day care. Family day care.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.277 ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Number of main buildings on tract. No more than one main building
shall be located on a tract or lot when used for residential purposes. When a
tract or lot is used for commercial purposes, more than one main building may
be located on the tract or lot provided the buildings conform to all yard
requirements around the lot for the district in which the tract or lot is
located.
   (b)   Adjustments to front yard requirements. Where, on the effective date
of these regulations, 40% or more of a frontage was occupied by two or more
buildings, then the front yard is established in the following manner:
      (1)   Where the building furthermost from the street provides a front
yard not more than ten feet deeper than the building closest to the street,
then the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then
existing front yards;
      (2)   Where this division (b)(1) above is not the case and a lot is
within 100 feet of a building on each side, then the front yard is a line drawn
from the closest front corners of these two adjacent buildings; and
      (3)   Where neither division (b)(1) nor (b)(2) above is the case, and the
lot is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, then the front
yard is the same as that of the existing adjacent building.
   (c)   Adjustment to side yard requirements. Buildings with side yard
setbacks less than required by this chapter, may have additions erected in line
with the existing building and provided further that the addition will be
erected no closer to the lot line then the existing building.
   (d)   Projections from buildings. Every part of any required yard shall be
open to the sky and unobstructed except:
      (1)   Eaves may project into a front or rear yard 36 inches, exclusive of
gutters;
      (2)   Eaves may project into a side yard 24 inches, exclusive of gutters;
      (3)   Ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical
solar screen and ornamental features which may project 12 inches;
      (4)   Air conditioners, not to exceed five-ton unit or parts thereof, may
project into a required side yard, provided that the projections shall be
distant at least three feet from the adjacent lot line and shall not extend
more than three feet from the building. The air conditioners may project into a
required front yard, but shall not extend more than three feet from the
building, and the air conditioner may extend into one side of a corner lot; and
      (5)   Solar collectors which are a part of the main building may extend
into a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet.
   (e)   Porches and terraces in front yards.
      (1)   An open, unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard
for a distance not exceeding ten feet. Balconies and paved terraces may project
into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding six feet.
      (2)   An enclosed vestibule containing not more than 40 square feet may
project into a required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet.
   (f)   Projection of terraces, porches, platforms and ornamental features.
Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not
extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story
may project into a required side or rear yard, provided these projections be
distanced at least three feet from the adjacent side lot line.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.278 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Exceptions. The height regulations established in these regulations shall
not be applied to:
   (a)   Flag poles, domestic television antennas, church spires, chimneys or
water towers, except when these structures shall be located in the airport
approach zones;
   (b)   Mechanical appurtenances and elevator penthouses which are located on
top of a building shall not exceed 12 feet in height above the maximum
permitted in the district in which they are located;
   (c)   The maximum height for telecommunications towers and wireless
communications facilities shall not exceed 100 feet for single users or 200
feet for two or more users. When the structure is located in an airport
approach zone, Federal Aviation Administration approval will be required prior
to permit issuance; and
   (d)   Broadcast towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.279 AIRPORT APPROACH ZONES.
   (a)   Approach zone.
      (1)   Within the air space above the approach zone to each end of a
runway designed to be used for instrument landings, no building, structure or
growth shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a plane with a
slope of one (vertical) to 50 (horizontal) projected from a point 200 feet
beyond the end of a runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, the plane to be in
the shape of symmetrical trapezoid 1,000 feet in width at its lowest point and
4,000 feet in width at its highest point; combined with a second plane with a
slope of one (vertical) to 40 (horizontal) extending from the upper edge of the
first plane for an additional distance of 40,000 feet, the plane to be in the
shape of a symmetrical trapezoid 4,000 feet in width at its lowest point and
16,000 feet in width at its highest point.
      (2)   Within the air space above the approach zone to each end of a
runway not designed to be used for instrument landings, no building or
structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with a slope of
one (vertical) to 40 (horizontal) projected from a point 200 feet beyond the
end of the runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, the plane to be a symmetrical
trapezoid (*) feet wide at its lowest point and (*) feet wide at its highest
point.
   (b)   Transition zones. Within the established transition zones adjacent to
each instrument and non-instrument runway and approach zone, no building,
structure or growth shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a
plane with a slope of one (vertical) to seven (horizontal). Transition zones
extend outward and upward from a line (*) feet on either side of the center
line of non-instrument runways for the length of the runway plus 200 feet on
each end; to a height 150 feet above the elevation of the airport reference
point. In addition, transition zones are established adjacent to both
instrument and non-instrument approach zones which flare outward and upward
symmetrically along the entire length of each approach zone to where they
intercept to the surfaces of the horizontal and conical zones.
   (c)   Conical zone.
      (1)   Within (*) feet from the established airport reference point, no
building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a horizontal
plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation. This horizontal zone
does not include the approach or transition zones.
      (2)   Within the conical zone, which commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and extends outward there from a distance of (*) feet, no
building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with
a slope of one (vertical) to 20 (horizontal).
      (3)   Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to
a height up to 20 feet above the surface of the land.
*   The applicable distance in feet (referenced in this section) must be based
on runway length as set forth in § 77.27 of Part 77 of the Federal Aviation
Regulations.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.10) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.280 ROCK, SAND AND GRAVEL EXTRACTION.
   (a)   Intent.
      (1)   This section addresses the application, review and regulation of
extraction and on-site processing of rock, sand and gravel. An applicant must
meet certain requirements as specified in division (c) below when filing for a
conditional use permit in addition to the general requirements contained in
other sections of the zoning regulations.
      (2)   The developmental and operational criteria contained in division
(g) below are intended to assist in the formulation of conditions to be imposed
on individual extraction operations. The criteria have been designed to
eliminate potential health risks and minimize the adverse impact on other land
uses due to extraction operations.
      (3)   The county and city will have the discretion of requiring more or
less stringent conditions based upon the location of a proposed operation. It
is also recognized that the operations will not be appropriate throughout all
areas of the joint zoning jurisdiction.
   (b)   Submission of application. The application for rock, sand or gravel
extraction shall be filed with the office of planning and zoning on the
prescribed conditional use form at least 30 days in advance of a regularly
scheduled joint meeting of the planning commissions.
   (c)   Application. The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
the following:
      (1)   Maps showing the area within which the extraction operations will
be conducted, including areas to be disturbed, setbacks from property lines,
and the location of all structures, equipment and access and haul roads;
      (2)   A description of the surface land use and vegetation, including all
pertinent physical characteristics;
      (3)   A hydrologic study which shall include all available information
from the State Geological Survey and other information pertinent to the
application. If the applicant believes a study is not warranted, documentation
shall accompany the application in support of this position;
      (4)   A reclamation plan which takes into consideration the criteria
listed in division (f)(10) below; and
      (5)   The applicant shall meet with the township supervisors of the
affected township to discuss repair and maintenance responsibilities on
township roads to be used as haul routes. A summary of the meeting(s) shall be
presented with the application.
   (d)   Fee. If a conditional use permit is granted, the operator shall pay to
the county an annual fee of $10 per acre of land which is being disturbed by
the extraction activities and has not been reclaimed. The fee shall be used to
defray the direct and indirect costs associated with general administration and
enforcement of this section. The fee shall be payable by January 20 of each
year and deposited in the general fund of the county. The disturbed land area
existing on January 1 of each year shall be used in calculating the fee.
   (e)   Notification requirements. In addition to the notification
requirements of §§
158.370 through
158.382, the planning director shall notify by United States mail all property
owners of record within one mile of the proposed conditional use area or the
owners of the 30 properties nearest to the affected property, whichever affects
the least number of owners, of the time, date, place and purpose of the public
hearing. The notice shall be mailed not less than 15 days prior to the public
hearing.
   (f)   Developmental and operational criteria. The following criteria shall
be considered in developing conditions for applications involving rock, sand
and gravel extractions. More stringent requirements may be imposed by the
county and city or the applicant may present arguments to relax the
requirements based on specific characteristics of the site.
      (1)   Buffer area. A minimum distance of 1,000 feet should be maintained
between an existing residence and a rock, sand or gravel operation, except in
those instances when the operator secures a waiver from the affected landowner.
      (2)   Hours of operation.
         A.   Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 12:00 noon. Operations should not be conducted on legal holidays.
Activities such as office or maintenance operations which produce no noise off-
site should not be restricted by the hours of operation.
         B.   Blasting should be scheduled on weekdays at 12:00 noon. There
should be no blasting on legal holidays. Area residents should be notified of
the date and time of each blast.
      (3)   Visual considerations.
         A.   Earth berms and vegetation should be employed to minimize visual
impacts and reduce the effects of noise.
         B.   The need for and placement of berms should be determined by the
orientation and position of the excavation site with respect to residences and
roadways. Berms should be located in a way as to restrict the public’s view of
the property. Consideration should be given to placing the berms as close to
the public point of view as practical. Generally, berms should be six feet in
height and seeded immediately after construction to avoid soil erosion. Berms
should be maintained and kept reasonably free of weeds.
         C.   The operator should work with the county conservation district
and county planning director to develop a planting program. Consideration
should be given to planting one or more of the following: evergreen, Russian
olive, ash, caragana, crab apple, lilac and buffalo berry. The plants should be
properly cared for to ensure the highest survival rate and all dead plants
replaced during the current planting season. As a minimum, the program should
include trees of varying maturity. The planting program should be reduced to
writing and kept on file in the county planning department.
         D.   At a minimum, berms should be constructed prior to blasting or
the extraction of rock, sand or gravel.
      (4)   Blasting. Ground vibration and over pressure (air blast) should be
monitored for each blast and not exceed guidelines established by the United
States Bureau of Mines.
      (5)   Noise.
         A.   The noise level produced from rock, sand and gravel operations
should not exceed an average of 55 decibels recorded over a ten-minute period
measured at the nearest existing residence to the extraction operation.
         B.   Off-site activities which contribute to background noise levels
should be taken into consideration when monitoring an operation.
         C.   Blasting should not be recorded as part of the noise level.
      (6)   Air quality.
         A.   Air quality monitoring should be conducted at the operator’s
expense when conditions warrant;
         B.   Ambient air quality: total suspended particulate matter–150
micrograms per cubic meter of air as a 24-hour average not to be exceeded more
than once per year, and 60 micrograms per cubic meter of air as an arithmetic
mean; PM10 (ten micrometers or less in size) consistent with the regulations of
the state;
         C.   Employ techniques that minimize the release of particulate matter
created by material stockpiles, vehicular movement and process operations; and
         D.   Dust control agents should be applied to township gravel roads
designated as haul routes and all driving surfaces within the extraction area.
      (7)   Hydrology, dewatering and drainage.
         A.   Existing wells should be monitored at the operator’s expense to
document changes in hydrologic conditions around extraction sites.
         B.   Dewatering of the extraction site should not result in downstream
flooding.
         C.   Berms should not interrupt the natural drainage of the area,
unless the diversion is part of an approved drainage control system.
      (8)   Haul roads.
         A.   In order to minimize the negative impact of truck traffic on area
residents, extraction operations should be located on or near existing hard
surfaced roads. Consideration should be given to the number of residents
located along gravel surfaced roads intended for use as haul roads;
         B.   Identify repair and maintenance responsibilities through a haul
road agreement; and
         C.   Consider the potential impact on county highways to be used as
haul routes.
      (9)   Operator surety.
         A.   A surety performance bond may be required in an amount to be
determined by the planning commissions to assure that sufficient funds will be
available to protect the county and city in the event the operator abandons a
site without completing the conditions imposed by the conditional use permit,
including reclamation, fulfillment of the agreement with the township
concerning repair of designated haul roads and, if necessary, decontamination
of affected ground and surface waters.
         B.   In lieu of the required surety, the operator may deposit cash
with the county in the amount equal to the required surety.
      (10)   Reclamation.
         A.   The type and extent of reclamation should be based on the type of
material extracted on the intended post-mining land use, but in all cases the
reclamation procedures should result in the rehabilitation of affected land
through contouring and soil stabilization, revegetation and other appropriate
means so as to create the least amount of unsightliness and most appropriate
future use of the reclaimed area. Bodies of water may be incorporated into an
acceptable reclamation plan;
         B.   Provide maps, including cross sections, showing the existing
natural topography and anticipated topographic conditions upon completion of
reclamation;
         C.   Grading should achieve a contour that is most beneficial to the
proposed future land use. All berms should be removed where sand and gravel
operations were conducted. In most cases involving quarry operations, the berms
should remain in place unless their removal would serve a more useful purpose;
         D.   Topsoil should remain on site and be used during reclamation;
         E.   A seeding and revegetation plan should be developed for the
affected area in consultation with the county conservation district; and
         F.   All required reclamation activities should be completed and a
compliance inspection performed by the county planning director prior to the
release of the surety.
      (11)   Additional considerations.
         A.   The maximum height of a bench in a quarry should be 30 feet.
         B.   The property should be secured during nonworking hours by means
of gates and fencing. The property should continue to be secured until all
required reclamation activities have been completed.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.11) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.281 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES AND WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (a)   Intent. Regulations regarding development of telecommunications
towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities are
intended to encourage the development of a competitive wireless communications
marketplace while protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public and
maintaining the aesthetic integrity of the community. The regulations cover the
placement, construction and modification of telecommunications towers, antenna
support structures and wireless communications facilities. The specific intent
of this section is:
      (1)   To regulate the location of telecommunications towers, antenna
support structures and wireless communications facilities;
      (2)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impact of telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities;
      (3)   To minimize adverse visual impact of telecommunications towers,
antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities through
careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques;
      (4)   To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of
telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities;
      (5)   To avoid potential damage to property caused by telecommunications
towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities by
ensuring that the structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or when determined to be
structurally unsound;
      (6)   To ensure that telecommunications towers, antenna support
structures and wireless communications facilities are compatible with
surrounding land uses;
      (7)   To facilitate the provision of wireless communications services to
residents and businesses in an orderly fashion; and
      (8)   To promote the location of telecommunications towers in
nonresidential areas.
   (b)   Application required. The following item must be satisfactorily
addressed in a formal application to obtain a building permit at any given
location in any zoning district: compliance with all applicable building codes,
Federal Aviation Administration Regulations and §
158.279.
   (c)   Location/setbacks.
      (1)   Where a telecommunications tower is located within 600 feet of any
residential zoning district, existing residential use except a farmstead, or
future residential area, the minimum distance from the telecommunications tower
base to the nearest existing residential structure or building setback line is
not less than the proposed height of the tower.
      (2)   Where a telecommunications tower is required to meet Federal
Aviation Administration paint and/or lighting regulations, the distance between
the telecommunications tower and any residential zoning district or use, or any
recreation/conservation district, shall not be less than one-half mile.
   (d)   Design character.
      (1)   Telecommunications towers and antenna support structure design
shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that create
compatibility with the natural setting and surrounding structures.
      (2)   Telecommunications towers shall be protected from corrosion or
rusting, and if painted, be a neutral color, unless otherwise required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
   (e)   Stealth. Telecommunications towers in any nonresidential district
where located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district or existing
residential use except a farmstead shall be monopole design.
   (f)   Interference with public safety radio services. In order to ensure
that public safety radio services will be free from harmful or destructive
interference, any applicant requesting a permit to site a telecommunications
tower, antenna support structure or wireless communications facility shall
provide documented Federal Communications Commission approval prior to permit
issuance.
   (g)   Illumination. Telecommunications towers shall not be artificially
lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (h)   Maintenance.
      (1)   All telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and
wireless communications facilities shall be maintained in good condition, order
and repair so that they shall not endanger the life or property of any person.
      (2)   A.   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and
wireless communications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with
Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association
Standard EIA/TIA 222 (latest revision), all applicable laws, and so as not to
interfere with the use of other property.
         B.   Upon the county planning director’s determination that a tower
structure is a hazard to public safety, the owner shall be required to perform
an inspection by a registered professional engineer and make all recommended
corrections.
      (3)   All maintenance or construction on telecommunications towers,
antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities shall be
performed by persons employed by, or under contract to the owner.
      (4)   If an owner discontinues use of a telecommunications tower, or if
an owner files notice with the Federal Communications Commission of its intent
to cease operating the tower, the owner shall give written notice to the county
planning director of the date of the discontinuance.
   (i)   Abandonment.
      (1)   If the county receives notice of discontinuance, or if any
telecommunications tower is not used for 365 consecutive days, the owner may be
notified that a determination of abandonment has been made. If, within 30 days
of receipt of notice, the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or
under repair during the period, the county planning director may determine that
the site has been abandoned.
      (2)   Within 75 days of notice of the determination of abandonment, the
owner shall remove the tower from the site. If an owner fails to do so, the
county may remove the tower and recover the cost from the owner.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.12) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.282 TEMPORARY USES.
   (a)   Intent. The requirements of this section are intended to provide for
the regulation and permitting of uses and associated improvements on private
property which are not so recurring in nature as to constitute a permanent use.
These requirements are not intended to regulate temporary uses on public
property, including public rights-of-way.
   (b)   Permit required. No person shall operate a temporary use without first
obtaining a permit therefore from the county planning department as prescribed
in this section. If an objection is filed pursuant to division (f) below or if
the county planning department determines that a hearing should be held due to
the scope of the proposed use, the temporary use application shall be referred
to the planning commissions for action. A date for public hearing shall be set
at which time the county and city planning commissions shall meet jointly to
consider the application. At the joint meeting, the planning commissions shall
decide by a vote of each body whether to grant the temporary use permit. When
the planning commissions are not in agreement, the application shall be
considered denied.
   (c)   Applications.
      (1)   Submission deadline. All applications for a temporary use permit
shall be made to the county planning department at least 60 days prior to the
proposed commencement date of the use, provided a lesser time may be allowed
consistent with the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Temporary use plan.
         A.   All temporary uses shall be subject to approval of a temporary
use plan.
         B.   The plan shall describe the nature and location of all temporary
improvements and activities, the location of any permanent buildings intended
to be used, the time period for which the temporary use permit is requested,
and other information in sufficient detail as the county planning department
determines is reasonably necessary to adequately review the application and to
ensure the use will be conducted in a manner consistent with the requirements
of this section.
   (d)   Fee. A fee of $50 shall accompany the application for a temporary use
permit.
   (e)   Standards for review. The following standards shall be used in
determining the suitability and compatibility of a temporary use:
      (1)   The temporary use will have no adverse effect on nearby properties
or jeopardize public health, safety and general welfare;
      (2)   The temporary use will not create hazardous traffic conditions or
result in traffic in excess of the capacity of the roads serving the use;
      (3)   The site is adequate to accommodate the proposed use, including the
provision for on- and off- site parking;
      (4)   Adequate sanitation facilities will be available on the site;
      (5)   The time period and hours of operation for the temporary use are
clearly specified;
      (6)   Provision is made for the removal, cleanup and restoration of the
site;
      (7)   The temporary use will not adversely impact the natural
environment;
      (8)   The site is suitable for the proposed temporary use, considering
flood hazard, drainage, soils and other conditions which may constitute a
danger to life, health or property; and
      (9)   All temporary improvements and any permanent structures proposed to
be used will comply with all applicable provisions of the county’s building
code.
   (f)   Notice. The county planning department shall send written notice of
the temporary use permit application to the owners of all property located
within 600 feet of the property involved. Written notice shall also be sent to
the city planning department. The notice shall be sent at least 14 days before
the county planning department makes its determination on the temporary use
permit. If any property owner so notified files a written objection prior to
the time the county planning department makes its determination regarding the
application, the application shall be referred to the planning commissions for
action.
   (g)   Conditions of approval. Reasonable conditions may be required in
connection with the approval of any temporary use permit which are deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the social and
economic well-being of those who will use the temporary use, residents and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed use, and the community as a
whole. Any condition imposed must be clearly specified in writing on the
temporary use permit.
   (h)   Appeal of planning department or planning commission decision. Any
person aggrieved by an action of the county planning department in granting,
denying, revoking or suspending a temporary use permit may appeal the action to
the planning commissions. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
county planning department within five working days of the decision. The action
of the planning commissions may be appealed to the board of county
commissioners and city council in the same manner.
   (i)   Hearing by board and city council. In the case of an appeal of a
decision of the planning commissions, a date for public hearing shall be set at
which time the board of county commissioners and city council shall meet
jointly to consider the temporary use application. At the joint meeting, the
board of county commissioners and city council shall decide by a vote of each
body whether to grant the temporary use permit.
   (j)   Exemptions. The following uses shall not require a temporary use
permit:
      (1)   Estate or real estate sales involving the property or items from
the property where the sale is held;
      (2)   Garage, yard or rummage sales provided:
         A.   Sales last not longer than three days;
         B.   Sales are held no more than twice yearly; and
         C.   Sales are conducted on the owner’s property or one of the owner’s
property in case of a multi-party sale.
      (3)   Weddings, purely social parties or similar family events where the
function or event involves the owner or lessor of the property and where no
monetary consideration or fees for the use of the property or attendance is
involved.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 15.13) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
§ 158.295 LOCATION.
   All parking required by this subchapter shall be located in conformance with
the following requirements:
   (a)   The parking lot shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front
property line; and
   (b)   Parking spaces for all structures shall be located on the same site as
the structure the parking is intended to serve; except that by conditional use
permit, parking may be located within 300 feet of the use it is intended to
serve.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 16.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.296 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking for specific uses shall be required as follows:
Use Required Spaces
Use                                                                           Required Spaces
All nonresidential buildings, except those specified below                    1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area
Auditoriums, theaters, other places of public assembly                        1 parking space for each 4 seats
Bowling alley                                                                 3 spaces per alley
Church or temple                                                              1 parking space for each 4 seats in the main auditorium
Community center, library, museum or similar public or semi-public buildings  10 parking spaces plus 1 additional space for each additional 300
                                                                              square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet
Hospital                                                                      1.5 parking spaces for each bed
Hotel or motel                                                                5 parking spaces plus 1 space for each sleeping room or suite
Manufacturing or industrial establishments, research or testing laboratory,   2 parking spaces for each 3 employees on the maximum shift, plus
bottling plant, warehouse or other similar establishments                     space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in
                                                                              connection therewith
                                                                              Buildings in which 20% or more of the gross area is occupied by
Medical office building                                                       members of healing profession; 1 parking space for each 200 square
                                                                              feet of the gross area used for medical purposes
Mortuary                                                                      One space for each 50 square feet of floor area in slumber rooms or
                                                                              1 for each 4 seats in chapel, whichever is greater
Multiple dwellings                                                            1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit of one bedroom or less; 2 spaces
                                                                              for each dwelling unit of 2 bedrooms or more
Multiple dwellings for the elderly and handicapped                            0.75 spaces for each dwelling unit
                                                                              1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area except
Other retail uses                                                             for planned shopping centers of 100,000 square feet of floor area or
                                                                              more who may reduce their requirement to one space for each 400
                                                                              square feet of floor area
Personal services                                                             1 parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area
Private club or lodge                                                         1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area
Restaurant, bar, café or recreation or amusement establishment not specified 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area or 1 parking
herein                                                                        space per 3 fixed seats, which ever is greater
Retail stores selling furniture, appliance or home improvement products (i.e. 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area
carpet, paint, wallpaper and the like)
Rooming and boarding houses, sororities and fraternities                      1 space per 2 beds
Sanitarium or institutional home                                              1 parking space for each 3 beds
School
                                                                              Because of the unique parking needs of colleges and universities, a
                                                                              permit application for new construction must include a parking study
   Colleges and universities                                               prepared by the applicant of the parking needs of the entire campus
                                                                              including the new use and the study must address a plan to meet the
                                                                              parking needs of the staff and students
   Elementary school                                                       5 spaces plus 1 parking space for each teacher and staff member
   High schools                                                            1 parking space for each 3 students based on the building’s design
                                                                              capacity
   Junior high school                                                      25 spaces plus 1 parking space for each teacher and staff member
Single-family and two-family dwellings                                        1 space for each dwelling unit
 
(1992 Code, App. F, § 16.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.297 RULES FOR COMPUTING PARKING SPACES.
   In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces, the following
rules shall be applied:
   (a)   FLOOR AREA shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use,
excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking as herein defined;
   (b)   Where fractional spaces result, the number of parking spaces required
shall be the nearest whole number;
   (c)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after August 3,
1995, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of
dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided
on the basis of the enlargement or change; and
   (d)   Whenever a building or use existing prior to August 3, 1995, is
reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of 20% or more in floor area, the
building or use in its entirety shall than and thereafter comply with the
parking requirements set forth herein. Any enlargement or change in use of less
than 20% of the gross floor area shall be provided with parking based on the
enlargement or change.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 16.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.298 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   Driveways, parking lots and loading/unloading areas shall conform with the
following improvement and maintenance standards.
   (a)   Any driveways, parking lots or loading/unloading areas in a commercial
or industrial zoning district shall be constructed with a hard surface when the
property is accessed from a hard surface road.
   (b)   If a driveway, parking lot or loading/unloading area is not hard
surfaced with concrete or asphalt, a gravel surface shall be provided. The
gravel surface shall be maintained to a minimum thickness of at least four
inches.
   (c)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm water from
a driveway, parking lot or loading/unloading area and the owner shall ensure
that the water does not flow onto adjoining property in a quantity or manner
that would be detrimental thereto.
   (d)   An opaque fence, wall, berm or landscaping of a height and character
necessary for adequate screening of the parking lot from adjacent residentially
used property shall be provided. Where there is a difference in elevation
between the property which needs the screening and the property receiving the
benefit of the screening, the height of the screen barrier shall be measured on
the high side.
   (e)   The entrances and exits to and from any parking lot shall be approved
by the director. Proper directional signs shall be provided.
   (f)   The entrances and exits to and from any parking lot or loading/
unloading area shall be approved by the director. Proper directional signs
shall be provided.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 16.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.299 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   There shall be provided at the time any building is erected or
structurally altered, off-street loading spaces in accordance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Office buildings.
 
5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. of GFA*  One 12-foot by 20-foot loading space
25,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. of GFA  One 14-foot by 35-foot loading space
50,001 to 200,000 sq. ft. of GFA Two 14-foot by 35-foot loading spaces
Add one additional 14-foot by 35-foot loading space for each 75,000 square
feet of gross floor area above 200,000 square feet.
*GFA means gross floor area.
 
      (2)   Retail or service establishment.
 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. of GFA   One 12-foot by 20-foot loading space
5,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA   One 14-foot by 35-foot loading space
20,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. of GFA Two 14-foot by 35-foot loading spaces
Add one additional space for each 75,000 square feet of gross floor area above
1,000,000 square feet.
 
      (3)   Wholesale, commercial use.
 
2,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA   One 14-foot by 35-foot loading space
20,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. of GFA Two 14-foot by 35-foot loading spaces
Add one additional space for each 75,000 square feet of gross floor area above
100,000 square feet.
    
      (4)   Manufacturing or industrial use. One 14-foot by 35-inch space for
each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one 14-foot by 35-inch space
for each portion thereof in excess of 50,000 square feet.
   (b)   Loading spaces are to be provided on each lot in compliance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The loading space shall be completely contained on the lot it is
intended to serve;
      (2)   The loading space shall be arranged on the lot in a way as to allow
normal movement of traffic in and around the loading area; and
      (3)   No loading space shall be permitted to extend into any public
right-of-way.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 16.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
ON-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 158.310 INTENT.
   (a)   These regulations provide standards for the erection and maintenance
of private signs. The principal feature of this section is the restriction on
the total sign area permissible per site. All private signs shall be erected
and maintained in accordance with the following standards.
   (b)   The general objectives of these standards are to promote health,
safety, welfare and in part to achieve the following:
      (1)   Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing
that signs:
         A.   Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or
abandonment; and
         B.   Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting
motorists, or by impairing the driver’s ability to see pedestrians, obstacles
or other vehicles, or to see and interpret any official traffic sign, signal or
device.
      (2)   Communications efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of
information by providing that:
         A.   Businesses and services may identify themselves;
         B.   Customers and persons may locate a business or service; and
         C.   No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight
line from public rights-of-way for communication purposes.
      (3)   Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare
and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing
that signs:
         A.   Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-
way; and
         B.   Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and
contiguous property by their brightness, size, height or movement.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.311 PERMITTED SIGNS AND SIGN AREA.
   In the following districts, the sign area and height set forth shall apply
to all signs on the premises except as provided in §
158.314.
   (a)   A-1 agricultural and RC recreation/conservation districts.
      (1)   Signs advertising the use of a particular breed, type, variety,
hybrid, or brand of plant, chemical or tillage. No one sign shall exceed 16
square feet in area per face;
      (2)   Uses which are governed by conditional use may have signs on the
premises in accordance with the stipulations of the permit; and
      (3)   No hunting, no trespassing and similar signs.
   (b)   C commercial, I-1 and I-2 industrial.
      (1)   Wall, roof or projecting signs:
         A.   The total sign area on structures which are two stories or less
in height shall not exceed two square feet for each linear foot of building
frontage; and
         B.   The total sign area on structures which are greater than two
stories in height shall not exceed either two square feet for each linear foot
of building frontage, or 15% of the area of the frontage wall, whichever is
greater.
      (2)   Freestanding signs having a total sign area not to exceed one
square foot for each linear foot of road frontage or 200 square feet, whichever
is less; and
      (3)   The maximum sign height shall be 30 feet.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.312 REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF PERMITTED SIGNS.
   The regulations and limitations of permitted signs shall be as spelled out
below.
   (a)   Wall signs. Wall signs may be located anywhere on the wall of a
building.
   (b)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   Projecting signs may project no more than five feet from the
building face.
      (2)   Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade level about any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road or drive.
      (3)   Projecting signs may project no more than five feet above the top
of a parapet or roof line including the framework or support.
   (c)   Roof signs. Roof signs shall rise no higher than five feet above the
top of a parapet or roof line and shall not exceed the height limits for the
zoning district.
   (d)   Freestanding signs.
      (1)   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per street frontage
except that businesses on frontages of 300 feet, or more, may erect two
freestanding signs; however, the total sign area for both signs may not exceed
that allowed for the street frontage.
      (2)   Freestanding signs shall be located only in the front or side yard.
      (3)   Freestanding signs shall not project over public property.
      (4)   A.   Freestanding signs shall not be erected within the area of a
corner of two intersecting streets or a street and railroad. Area of a corner,
in this case, shall be the triangular area formed by measuring 40 feet from the
intersection along both roads and connecting these two points with a straight
line.
         B.   Exceptions: Freestanding signs may be located in the area of a
corner when the sign and sign structure comply with the following:
            1.   The sign face is located 12 feet above grade level; and
            2.   The sign structure is of a size and spacing as to not obstruct
the view of the intersection.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.313 SPECIAL SITUATIONS.
   This section contains the sign regulations for the following special
situations.
   (a)   Shopping centers.
      (1)   A freestanding sign shall be allowed on each street frontage
stating the name of the center and the major tenants provided no other
freestanding signs are erected.
      (2)   The sign area shall be determined independently from the sign area
allowed under §§
158.311 and
158.312. A sign area of one square foot for each one lineal feet of street
frontage or 200 square feet per frontage, whichever is smaller, shall be
allowed. The height shall not exceed 40 feet.
   (b)   Interstate highway interchange. In the C, I-1 and I-2 districts,
businesses which are adjacent to both the interstate and the intersecting cross
street may by conditional use permit erect one additional on- premises
freestanding sign not to exceed 200 square feet or 60 feet in height.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.314 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs may be allowed in addition to the signs permitted in §
158.311, but signs must be in conformance with all other state and local laws.
   (a)   Construction signs. Building contractors, lending institutions and
professional firms may post temporary signs on site under construction. The
total sign area shall not exceed 100 square feet or 20 feet in height and shall
be removed upon completion of the project.
   (b)   Neighborhood identification signs. In any zone, a masonry wall,
landscaping and other similar material or feature may be combined to form a
display for neighborhood or tract identification, provided that the legend of
the signs or display shall consist only of the neighborhood or tract name.
   (c)   Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance
of his or her duty shall be permitted.
   (d)   Integral signs; name. Names of building, dates of erection, monumental
citations, commemorable tablets and the like, of permanent type construction
and made an integral part of the building structure shall be permitted.
   (e)   Private traffic directional signs. Signs directing traffic movement
onto and out of a commercial premises may be located at each vehicular entrance
onto a public street.
   (f)   Real estate signs. Temporary real estate signs shall be permitted.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.315 ILLUMINATION.
   Regulations regarding the illumination of signs shall be as follows.
   (a)   Shading. The light from any illuminated sign or billboard shall be so
shielded, shaded or directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely
affect surrounding or facing premises or safe vision of operators of vehicles
on public or private roads.
   (b)   Blinking and flashing. Blinking, flashing, pulsating or fluttering
lights, or other illuminated devices which have a changing light shall not be
located closer than 300 feet from any residential district. This restriction
shall not apply to signs displaying the date, time and temperature exclusively.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.316 TEMPORARY AND PORTABLE SIGNS.
   (a)   Temporary and portable signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and may
be displayed for 60 days per calendar year in the C and I districts. It shall
be the duty of the user of the sign to:
      (1)   Notify and obtain approval from the county planning director prior
to placement of the sign;
      (2)   Notify the county planning director upon removal of the sign. The
county planning director shall continue to deduct one day from the 60 days
allowed per calendar year until notice of removal is received or a total of 60
days has elapsed; and
      (3)   Place the signs in locations so that the provisions of this
subchapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances are complied with.
   (b)   Temporary and portable signs in the A-1 district, when used in
conjunction with roadside stands and fireworks stands, shall be authorized as
part of the conditional use permit granted to those uses.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.317 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited.
   (a)   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited. No person shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way, or public property, or on private
property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached
thereto or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the basic
purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business or activity located on the same premises or any other premises. This
is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign
attached to a bus or lettering on a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Nuisance signs. Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal
or which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device or which hide from view any traffic, street sign or signal shall be
removed upon notice.
   (c)   Banners. Banners shall be prohibited except on a temporary basis for a
maximum of 21 days during any calendar year.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.318 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   Every on-premises sign, including any exempt from this code in respect to
permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good structural and aesthetic
condition at all times. Any abandoned, unsafe or unsightly sign shall be
removed or renovated within 60 days upon written notice. If the owner fails to
remove or renovate the sign within the required time period, the county may
remove the sign at the owner’s expense.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 158.330 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent the uncontrolled use of off-
premises signs so as to promote the health, safety and general welfare of those
persons using the public rights-of-way. These regulations are intended to
preserve the overall landscape quality of the county while allowing the
reasonable use of signs to inform the traveling public. This is accomplished
through the application of standards for size, illumination and separation.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17A.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.331 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   In the A-1 and RC districts, off-premises signs shall be limited to
those which provide direction to a business or use and shall be constructed in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   A maximum sign area of nine square feet;
      (2)   The sign shall contain the business name and directional
information only;
      (3)   There shall be no more than one sign face per direction of facing;
      (4)   A sign shall not be within a 600-foot radius of any other off-
premises sign intended to be read from the same right-of-way. The sign shall
not be within a 600-foot radius of any other off-premises sign intended to be
read from a different right-of-way. All spacing measurements in this division
(a)(4) shall refer to a measurement made along the edge of the right-of-way and
shall apply only to structures located on the same side of the highway. These
spacing provisions do not apply to signs separated by buildings or other
obstructions in a manner that only one sign facing located within the above
spacing distance is visible from the road right-of-way at any one time;
      (5)   A sign shall not be illuminated nor shall blinking or flashing
lights be used; and
      (6)   A maximum height of 16 feet.
   (b)   The following regulations shall apply to off- premises signs in the C,
I-1 and I-2 districts except as permitted in §
158.332:
      (1)   A maximum sign area of 288 square feet;
      (2)   There shall be no more than one sign face per direction of facing;
      (3)   The maximum height shall be 40 feet;
      (4)   No part of the sign face or structure shall be located in or
overlap into the required side or rear yard setbacks or public right-of-way;
      (5)   A sign shall not be within a 600-foot radius of any other off-
premises sign intended to be read from the same right-of-way. The sign shall
not be within a 600-foot radius of any other off-premises sign intended to be
read from a different right-of-way. All spacing measurements in this division
(b)(5) shall refer to a measurement made along the right-of-way and shall apply
only to structures located on the same side of the highway. These spacing
provisions do not apply to signs separated by buildings or other obstructions
in a manner that only one sign facing located within the above spacing distance
is visible from the road right-of-way at any one time; and
      (6)   The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shielded, shaded or
directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely affect surrounding or
facing premises or the safe vision of operators of vehicles on public roads.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17A.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.332 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use permit in conformance with §§
158.370 through
158.382 shall be obtained for the following off-premises signs:
   (a)   Off-premises signs over 288 square feet to a maximum of 672 square
feet and signs with more than one sign face per direction of facing in the C
and I districts; and
   (b)   A conditional use permit shall be required for off-premises signs
within 600 feet of a park, school, church, viaduct, designated historic site or
river greenway or cemetery, or within any areas designated on the Image
Conservation Areas and Gateways map.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17A.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.333 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Directional signs for nonprofit organizations not to exceed four
square feet per sign face;
   (b)   Political campaign signs provided the signs are removed within five
days after the election; and
   (c)   Directional signs, street name signs or other signs which have been
authorized and directed by a governmental unit.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17A.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.334 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited.
   (a)   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited. No person shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or public property, or on private
property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached
thereto or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the basic
purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business or activity located on the same premises or any other premises. This
is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign
attached to a bus or lettering on a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Nuisance signs. Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal
or which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device or which hide from view any traffic, street sign or signal shall be
removed upon notice.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17A.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 158.335 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   Every off-premises sign shall be maintained in good structural and aesthetic
condition at all times. Any abandoned, unsafe or unsightly sign shall be
removed or renovated within 60 days upon written notice. If the owner fails to
remove or renovate the sign within the required time period, the county may
remove that sign at the owner’s expense.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 17A.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
NONCONFORMING AND NONSTANDARD USES
§ 158.350 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to specify those
circumstances under which they shall be permitted to continue.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.351 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the lawful use of a premises
existing immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter may be
continued although the use does not conform to the provisions hereof.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.352 USE BECOMING NONCONFORMING BY CHANGE IN LAW OR BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever the use of a premises becomes a nonconforming use through a change
in zoning ordinance or district boundaries, that use may be continued, although
the use does not conform to the provisions thereof.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.353 CHANGE IN NONCONFORMING USE.
   (a)   If no structural alterations or additions are made, a nonconforming
use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more
restrictive classification. For the purposes of this chapter, each of the
following classifications shall be considered to be “more restrictive” than
those it precedes:
RC   Recreation/conservation
RR   Rural residential
RS-1 Residential
RS-2 Residential
RD   Residential
RA-1 Residential
C    Commercial
I-1  Light industrial
I-2  General industrial
 
   (b)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restrictive
use or to a permitted use, the use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restrictive use.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.354 EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT.
   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, converted,
reconstructed or structurally altered unless the use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which the premises is located except that a
conditional use permit may be authorized after the following criteria are given
specific consideration:
   (a)   Effect on surrounding property values;
   (b)   The density of land use zoning for the subject and adjacent
properties;
   (c)   The degree of hardship upon the applicant which would be caused by
failure to grant the permit; and
   (d)   It can be demonstrated that it was the owner’s intent to use the
entire premises for the use prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.355 RESTORATION AFTER DAMAGE.
   (a)   When the use of a building is nonconforming as defined by this chapter
and that building is damaged by a fire, explosion, act of God or the public
enemy to the extent of more than 60% of its fair market value, it shall not be
restored except in conformity with the provisions of the district in which the
building is located.
   (b)   Exception: Single-family dwellings may be restored if damaged less
than 100%.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.356 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   In the event that a nonconforming use is discontinued for more than one
year, any subsequent use shall thereafter be in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which it is located.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.357 EFFECT ON USE WHICH IS ILLEGAL UNDER PRIOR LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as authorization for, or
approval of, the continuance of the use of a premises in violation of zoning
regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this
subchapter.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.358 CONTINUATION OF NONSTANDARD USES.
   (a)   Nonstandard uses existing immediately prior to the effective date of
this subchapter may be continued, although the uses do not conform to the
provisions hereof.
   (b)   Nonstandard buildings or structures may be enlarged or extended,
converted, reconstructed or structurally altered as follows:
      (1)   Enlargements, extensions, conversions or structural alterations may
be made as required by law or ordinance;
      (2)   Structural alteration of buildings or structures may otherwise be
made if the changes do not encroach into an existing front yard, side yard or
rear yard which is less than the minimum required yards for the district in
which they are located; and
      (3)   Enlargement, extension, conversion of buildings or structures may
otherwise be made if the changes comply with the minimum required yards, lot
area, height, landscaping, parking and density for the district in which they
are located.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 18.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 158.370 APPLICATION TO THE COUNTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a conditional use permit in
any zoning district shall file a written application with the Lincoln County
planning department requesting a conditional use permit.
   (b)   This application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Legal description of the land on which the conditional use is
requested;
      (2)   Name, address and phone number of the owner of the property which
is the subject of the application;
      (3)   Name, address and phone number of the person making the application
if made by anyone other than the owner;
      (4)   Zoning district classification under which the property is
regulated at the time of the application; and
      (5)   Any other information concerning the property as may be requested
by the Lincoln County planning department or the county and city planning
commissions.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.371 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a conditional use permit, the
applicant shall pay to Lincoln County a fee as designated in §§
158.430 through
158.438. This fee is utilized to help defray necessary administrative costs of
processing the application as required.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.372 SITE PLAN.
   Except when waived by the planning director, each application for a
conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the
following information:
   (a)   The legal description of the property;
   (b)   The name of the project and/or business;
   (c)   The scale and north arrow;
   (d)   All existing and proposed buildings and additions;
   (e)   Dimensions of all buildings;
   (f)   Distance from all building lines to the property lines at the closest
points;
   (g)   Building height and number of stories;
   (h)   Dimensions of all property lines;
   (i)   Parking lot or spaces, designating each space, lot dimensions, stalls
and aisles;
   (j)   Screening; showing the height, location and type of material to be
used; and
   (k)   Name and location of all adjacent roads, waterways and other public
places. Any conditional use permit which has been approved shall conform in all
ways to the site plans submitted. In the event that changes have been
stipulated on the plan as part of the approval of the conditional use permit,
the conditional use permit shall conform to the plan in all ways except for the
stipulated changes.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.373 HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSIONS.
   Upon the filing of an application for a conditional use permit, the planning
director shall set a date for public hearing, at which time and place the
county and city planning commissions shall jointly meet to consider the
conditional use permit request.
   (a)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the Lincoln County planning
department shall be posted on the property at least seven days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
   (b)   Action. At the joint meeting, the county and city planning commissions
shall decide whether to grant the conditional use permit with those conditions
and safeguards as are appropriate or to deny the conditional use permit when
not in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations. The decision
of the planning commissions shall be final unless an appeal is filed in
accordance with §
158.374. In the event the planning commissions are not in agreement on a
decision whether to grant a conditional use permit, the following shall apply:
      (1)   When one planning commission votes to grant a conditional use
permit and the other planning commission votes to deny, the permit is deemed to
be denied and the petitioner may appeal the decision to the governing bodies in
accordance with §
158.374;
      (2)   When both planning commissions vote to grant a conditional use
permit but the conditions are not identical, the application shall be presented
to a joint meeting of the county commission and city council for final action.
The requirements of §
158.375 shall apply; and
      (3)   When one or the other planning commission votes to defer action on
a conditional use permit, the application shall be considered at a future joint
meeting of the planning commissions.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.374 APPEAL OF DECISION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The decision rendered by the planning commissions on a conditional use
permit may be appealed to the board of county commissioners and the city
council. To appeal the decision of the planning commissions, the applicant or
any other person aggrieved by the decision shall file a written appeal with the
Lincoln County planning department within five working days of the planning
commissions’ decision.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.04A) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.375 HEARING BY THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND THE CITY COUNCIL.
   When an appeal has been filed in accordance with §
158.374 or the decision by each planning commission is not in agreement, the
board of county commissioners and the city council shall jointly conduct a
public hearing and take final action on the conditional use application.
   (a)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the Lincoln County planning
department shall be posted on the property at least seven days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
   (b)   Hearing. At the public hearing, the board of county commissioners and
city council shall review the decisions of the respective planning commissions
on the applications coming before them. In making their determination of these
applications, they need not be bound by the actions of the planning
commissions.
   (c)   Action. The board of county commissioners and the city council shall
decide whether to grant the conditional use permit with the conditions and
safeguards as are appropriate or to deny the conditional use permit when not in
harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations. The board and the
city council, in making their determinations on the applications, may make
changes in accordance with or in rejection or modification of the decisions of
the respective planning commissions. In order for any conditional use permit to
be approved, the board of county commissioners and the city council must each
vote in favor of the application.
   (d)   Protest. The conditional use permit shall take effect 20 days after
approval unless a written protest is filed with the county auditor, signed by
at least 40% of the owners of equity in the lots or parcels located within 250
feet of the property granted a conditional use permit. A corporation shall be
construed to be a sole owner; and when parcels of land are in the name of more
than one person, ownership representation shall be in proportion to the number
of signers who join in the petition in relation to the number of owners. If a
protest is filed, the conditional use permit shall not become effective unless
it is approved by two-thirds of the board of county commissioners and two-
thirds of the city council.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.376 EXPIRATION.
   (a)   A conditional use permit which has been approved shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building, work or use authorized by
the conditional use permit is not commenced within one year from the date of
approval.
   (b)   This provision shall not apply to a conditional use permit approved
for a residential use in the A-1 or RC zoning districts.
   (c)   Upon written request to the planning director and prior to the
conditional use permit expiration date, a one-year time extension for the
conditional use permit may be granted by the planning director, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   There was no public objection presented during the public hearing
process for the original conditional use permit; and
      (2)   The land uses for the surrounding properties have not significantly
been altered since the original approval date for the conditional use permit.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.377 CONDITIONAL USE CRITERIA.
   The following considerations shall be employed when acting upon requests for
conditional uses.
   (a)   The impact of the proposed use on adjacent properties shall be a major
consideration. The proposed use should be generally compatible with adjacent
properties and other properties in the district.
   (b)   Measures shall be taken to ensure that the proposed use does not alter
the general character of the area or neighborhood.
   (c)   The effects of noise, odor, traffic, air and water pollution and other
negative factors shall be eliminated or controlled through the use of
screening, setbacks and orientation.
   (d)   The proposed use shall not adversely affect the public.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.378 PREEXISTING USES.
   An existing use eligible for a conditional use permit which was lawfully
established on the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to have
received a conditional use permit as herein required and shall be provided with
the permit by the county upon request, and it shall not be a nonconforming use,
provided, however, for any enlargement, extension or relocation of the existing
use, an application in conformance with this chapter shall be required.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.379 REAPPLICATION.
   No applicant requesting a conditional use permit whose application includes
the same or substantially the same requirements for the same or substantially
the same property as that which has been denied by the planning commissions or
the board of county commissioners and city council shall be again considered by
the planning commissions before the expiration date of six months from the date
of the final action on the application.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.380 REVOCATION.
   If the planning director finds that at any time that the terms, conditions
or requirements of the conditional use permit have not been complied with, or
that any phase thereof has not been completed within the time required under
the permit or any amendment thereto, the planning director shall report this
fact to the permittee, landowner and/or operator, and the county and city
planning commissions. The county and city planning commissions may, after
conducting a public hearing, of which the permittee, landowner and/or operator
shall be notified, make a recommendation to the board of county commissioners
and the city council for their consideration and action. The board of county
commissioners and the city council may, after conducting a public hearing, of
which the permittee, landowner and/or operator shall be notified, revoke the
conditional use permit for failure to comply with the terms, conditions or
requirements of the permit.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.10) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.381 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   Where a conditional use permit is required for approval of
telecommunications towers and antenna support structures, the following will be
considered.
   (a)   Design character.
      (1)   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and equipment
buildings shall be compatible with the architectural style of the surrounding
built environment, considering exterior materials, roof form, scale, mass,
color, texture and character. Equipment buildings may be located underground
where feasible. To prevent undue concentration of telecommunications towers,
consideration should be given to co-location as a first alternative.
      (2)   Wireless communications facilities on new telecommunications tower
structures, antenna support structures or co-located on existing
telecommunications towers shall minimize visual impact.
   (b)   Screening.
      (1)   A telecommunications tower site and tower base adjacent to
residential property, except when located in a farmstead, shall be provided
with a fence, wall, berm or shrubbery of sufficient height and of a character
necessary to provide adequate visual screening. Where the adjacent property is
across public right-of-way from a telecommunications tower site, screening
shall be provided in all cases except when the right-of-way is an arterial
street.
      (2)   Existing vegetation and grades on the site shall be preserved as
much as possible. Natural growth around the property perimeter on large, wooded
lots may be considered a sufficient buffer to telecommunications towers. In
locations where the visual impact of the telecommunications tower would be
minimal, the screening requirement may be reduced or waived.
   (c)   Fencing. Adjacent to a residentially used or zoned property, natural
materials shall be used for fence screening. If chain-link fencing is needed
for safety and security, additional landscape screening shall be required
outside the chain-link fence to screen public view of the telecommunications
tower site.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.11) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.382 BROADCAST TOWER.
   Location of the tower shall be done with consideration for public safety in
the event that the tower would fall and to minimize adverse visual impact of
broadcast towers through careful design, siting and screening. Care should be
taken to avoid interference with any similar broadcast use and in no event
shall the tower be located in any airport approach zone. The tower shall be
constructed in a manner that will make it inaccessible for unauthorized persons
to climb.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 19.12) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS
§ 158.395 APPLICATION TO COUNTY FOR ZONING AMENDMENT.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a change in regulations,
restrictions or boundaries of the zoning map of any property from one zoning
district classification to another zoning district classification, shall make
application for the change to the Lincoln County planning department. The
application shall be provided by the department and be completed in full by the
applicant.
   (b)   Every three months or at the discretion of the planning director, the
city and county planning commissions will set hearings to consider requested
changes or amendments to the zoning ordinance or zoning map pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   (c)   The board of county commissioners and the city council may from time
to time on their own motion, after public notice and hearing, and after proper
consideration from the planning commissions (as required by §
158.397) amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 20.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.396 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a zoning district classification
change, the applicant shall pay to Lincoln County the appropriate fee as
designated in §§
158.430 through
158.438. These fees shall be utilized to help defray necessary administrative
costs of processing the application as required, including publication and
printing of required notices.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 20.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.397 HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSIONS.
   (a)   Generally. Upon the filing of an application for a request of zoning
district classification change, the Lincoln County planning department shall
set a date for public hearing, at which time and place the county and city
planning commissions shall meet jointly to consider the zoning classification
changes. The public hearing shall comply with the provisions of SDCL 11-2, 11-
4 and 11-6.
   (b)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the Lincoln County planning
department shall be posted on the property at least seven days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
   (c)   Recommendations from planning commissions. The county and city
planning commissions shall, respectively, make a recommendation to the board of
county commissioners and city council on those applications for zoning district
classification changes which have been considered and all other amendments to
these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 20.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.398 HEARING BY BOARD AND CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   Generally. The board of county commissioners and the city council
shall jointly conduct a public hearing to act on all applications which have
been processed and forwarded to them for public hearing as provided in these
regulations. The county auditor shall cause to be published a notice of the
time and place when and where all persons interested shall be given a full,
fair and complete hearing. The public hearing shall comply with the provisions
of SDCL 11-2, 11-4 and 11-6.
   (b)   Supplementary notice. Supplementary to the published notice, a sign(s)
to be provided by the Lincoln County planning department shall be posted on the
property at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing.
   (c)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the board of county
commissioners and the city council shall review the decisions and
recommendations of their respective planning commissions on all applications
coming before them as provided in these regulations. The board of county
commissioners and the city council must each vote in favor of the proposed
action before any changes or modifications are made in the regulations,
restrictions or zoning map.
   (d)   Protest. Twenty days after publication of the board of county
commissioners’ and city council’s approval, the zoning district classification
change shall take effect unless the referendum be invoked, or unless a written
protest is filed with the county auditor, signed by at least 40% of the owners
of equity in the lots or parcels located within 250 feet from any part of the
proposed district. A corporation shall be construed to be a sole owner; and
when parcels of land are in the name of more than one person, ownership
representation shall be in proportion to the number of signers who join in the
petition in relation to the number of owners. If a protest is filed, the
ordinance shall not become effective unless the ordinance is approved by a
resolution by two-thirds of the board of county commissioners and two-thirds of
the city council.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 20.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.399 REAPPLICATION.
   No application requesting a zoning district classification change on any
property whose application includes any property either entirely or
substantially the same as that which has been denied by the board of the county
commissioners and city council, shall again be considered by the planning
commissions before the expiration of six months from the date of the final
action of the board of county commissioners and city council.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 20.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 158.410 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The zoning board of adjustment shall consist of the planning commissions of
Lincoln County and Sioux Falls. The board may, in appropriate cases and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, grant variances and hear appeals to
the terms of these regulations in harmony with the general purpose and intent
and in accordance with general and specific rules herein contained.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.411 OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The board shall meet at the regularly scheduled joint meetings of the
county and city planning commissions. Special meetings may be held at the call
of the chairpersons. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and
all business coming before the board shall be transacted at the meetings.
   (b)   The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, records of
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the
county planning department and shall be a public record.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.412 APPEALS.
   The board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the county
planning director in the enforcement of these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.413 VARIANCES.
   The zoning board of adjustment shall not vary the regulations unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case that all of the following conditions are present:
   (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
   (b)   The conditions upon which the application for a variance is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification or other property substantially similar in use;
   (c)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the area in which the
property is located;
   (d)   The proposed variance will not unreasonably impair: an adequate supply
of light and air to adjacent property; increase the congestion in the public
streets; increase the danger of fire; endanger the public safety; or diminish
or impair property values within the area;
   (e)   That because of circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility
that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of
the zoning regulations and that the authorization of a variance is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
   (f)   The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that
will afford reasonable relief and will represent the least modification
desirable of the zoning regulations;
   (g)   The board shall hear and make determinations on variance to exceed the
height limits as established by these regulations; and
   (h)   The board of adjustment, under its authority to grant variances may
impose reasonable conditions on the grant, and one accepting those conditions
is bound by them.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.414 APPLICATION TO THE COUNTY FOR VARIANCE.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a variance or wishing to appeal a
decision of the county planning director or his or her authorized
representatives shall make application for the request to the county planning
department. The application shall be provided by the department and completed
in full by the applicant.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.415 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a variance or appeal by the board,
the applicant shall pay to Lincoln County the appropriate fee as designated in
§§
158.430 through
158.438. These fees shall be utilized to help defray necessary administrative
costs of processing the application as required.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.416 HEARING.
   (a)   Generally. Upon the filing of an application, the county planning
department shall set a date for public hearing, at which time and place the
zoning board of adjustment shall meet to consider the request for variance or
appeal.
   (b)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the county planning department
shall be posted on the property at least seven days prior to the scheduled
hearing.
   (c)   Decision. All requests under this subchapter shall be acted upon at a
joint meeting of the county and city planning commissions. The planning
commissions shall vote on the requests independently, and a favorable vote by a
majority of the members of each planning commission shall be required to
approve each request.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.417 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF BOARD.
   Appeals may be taken to the circuit court by any person or persons, jointly
or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer, or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the county, aggrieved by any decision
of the board, in the manner and form provided by the statutes of the state, in
those cases made and provided.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.418 LIMITATIONS.
   Any order of the board granting a variance may be declared invalid by the
board unless substantially completed within two years from the date of the
order. The county planning director shall notify the property owner of record
upon invalidation of a variance.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.419 JURISDICTION RESTRICTED.
   The board of adjustment shall have no jurisdiction to hear requests or grant
variances of the height limitations for broadcast towers, telecommunications
towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities
regulated by this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 21.10) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
FEES
§ 158.430 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The current fee schedule shall be available from the city planning
department and the Lincoln County planning department. All fees required by
this subchapter shall be the property of the county and shall be deposited with
the county treasurer and credited to the general fund. The fees shall be paid
at the time of filing the application with the county planning department. No
action shall be taken on any application until all applicable fees have been
paid in full. Under no conditions shall any fee required hereunder be refunded
after the application has been heard by the planning commissions. An applicant
who withdraws his or her application prior to the planning commission meeting
is entitled to a refund provided all publication costs incurred by the county
are first deducted from the fee.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.431 CHANGE OF ZONE.
   A fee of $350 shall be charged for filing an application to change the
zoning classification of property except to the planned development district.
If any use, for which a rezoning is required, is commenced prior to the
application for a rezoning, the application fee shall be double the regular
fee.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 13-08, passed
1-28-2008)
§ 158.432 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   A fee of $350, $50 for each subarea, shall be charged for the filing of an
application to change to the planned development district. If any use, for
which a rezoning is required, is commenced prior to the application for a
rezoning, the application fee shall be double the regular fee.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 13-08, passed
1-28-2008)
§ 158.433 MAJOR AMENDMENT.
   A fee of $100 shall be charged for the filing of an application for a major
amendment to a planned development district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.434 MINOR AMENDMENT.
   A fee of $50 shall be charged for the filing of an application for a minor
amendment to a planned development district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.435 MINIMAL AMENDMENT.
   A fee of $25 shall be charged for filing of an application for a minimal
amendment to a planned development district.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.436 CONDITIONAL USE.
   A fee of $250 shall be charged for filing an application for a conditional
use permit in any district. If any use, for which a conditional use permit is
required, is commenced prior to the application for a conditional use permit,
the application fee shall be double the regular fee.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 13-08, passed
1-28-2008)
§ 158.437 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   A fee of $250 shall be charged for filing an application for an appeal to
the zoning board of adjustment.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 13-08, passed
1-28-2008)
§ 158.438 ZONING PERMIT USE.
   A fee of $50 shall be charged for all zoning permits not requiring a
building permit fee.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 22.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 13-08, passed
1-28-2008)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.450 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The following general regulations shall apply to all zoning districts.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, no building shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any structure or
land be used:
      (1)   Except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the
structure or land is located;
      (2)   Except in conformance with the height and minimum lot requirements,
and the parking and sign regulations, and any other applicable requirements of
the district in which the structure or land is located; and
      (3)   Except in conformance with any federal, state or county codes as
may be applicable. Where these regulations and any other rules and regulations
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
   (b)   The density and yard requirements of these regulations are minimum
regulations for each and every building existing at the effective date of these
regulations and for any building hereafter erected or structurally altered. No
land required for yards or other open spaces about an existing building or any
building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be considered a yard
or lot area for more than one building.
   (c)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one
main building on a lot except as otherwise provided in these regulations.
   (d)   Cooperatives, condominiums and all other forms of property ownership
do not affect the provisions of these regulations and all requirements shall be
observed as though the property were under single ownership.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.451 ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or repair a building
or structure or to commence the construction, alteration or repair of a
building or structure, without first having obtained a zoning permit from that
entity exercising land use authority as described in §§
158.370 through
158.382. This requirement shall not apply to minor nonstructural changes
involving no change of use.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.452 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
   Enforcement and administration of these regulations shall be as follows.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the county planning director, herein referred
to as the director, to enforce these regulations.
   (b)   The director or an authorized representative shall be charged with the
following:
      (1)   Receive applications required by these regulations;
      (2)   Issue permits;
      (3)   Make necessary inspections to assure compliance; and
      (4)   Issue notices or orders as may be necessary to assure compliance.
   (c)   An application for a zoning permit shall be submitted in a form as the
director may prescribe. The application shall be made by the owner or lessee,
or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder employed in
connection with the proposed work. If the application is made by a person other
than the owner in fee, when required by the director, it shall be accompanied
by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee, or the person making the
application that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that
the person making the application is authorized to make the application. Such
shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner,
and if the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible officers. The
application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give additional
information as may be required by the director for an intelligent understanding
of the proposed work.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.03) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.453 SITE PLAN.
   Site plans shall be reviewed for the following.
   (a)   Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by a site
plan in accordance with §
158.372 showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size,
shape and location of the building to be erected, and other information as may
be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A record of
applications and site plans shall be kept in the office of the director.
   (b)   Nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the filing of amendments
to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time
before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought. The
amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the
original application.
   (c)   The director or authorized representative shall examine applications
for zoning permits within a reasonable time after filing. If, after
examination, it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with all
applicable laws, the application shall be approved and a permit issued as soon
as practicable. If the examination reveals otherwise, the application shall be
rejected, with the findings attached to the application, and a copy delivered
to the applicant.
   (d)   Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prevent the
director or authorized representative from issuing a zoning permit for the
construction of footings before the entire plans and detailed statements of the
building or structure have been submitted or approved, if adequate plans and
detailed statements have been presented for the same and have been found to
comply with the requirements.
   (e)   (1)   All work performed under a permit issued by the director or
authorized representative shall conform to the approved application and plans,
and approved amendments thereof. The location of all new construction as shown
on the approved site plan, or an approved amendment thereof, shall be strictly
adhered to; and
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or
tract of which a site plan has been filed and has been used as the basis for a
permit, unless a revised site plan showing the proposed change in conditions
shall have been filed and approved, provided that this shall not apply when the
lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public
improvement.
   (f)   Every permit issued by the director under the provisions of these
regulations shall have his or her signature affixed thereto; but this shall not
prevent him or her from authorizing a subordinate to affix his or her
signature.
   (g)   A permit under which no work is commenced within one year after
issuance shall expire by limitation.
   (h)   The director may revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of these regulations in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.04) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.454 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Violations shall be treated in the manner specified below.
   (a)   The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of these regulations has been committed or shall
exist; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or
upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent,
architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or
assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon
which a violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of these regulations, the appropriate
authorities of Lincoln County, in addition to other remedies, may institute
injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure or land.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.455 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and floor
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the flood zone or uses permitted within the areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall not create
liability on the part of Lincoln County or the city or on any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.06) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.456 INTERPRETATION, ABROGATION AND SEVERABILITY.
   (a)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare.
It is not the intent to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. However, where these regulations and other
regulations, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. All other
regulations inconsistent with these regulations are hereby repealed to the
extent of this inconsistency only.
   (b)   If any section, clause, provision or portion of these regulations is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of these regulations shall not be affected thereby.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.07) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.457 SAVING CLAUSE.
   These regulations shall in no manner affect pending actions either civil or
criminal, founded on or growing out of any regulations hereby repealed. These
regulations shall in no manner affect rights or causes of action, either civil
or criminal, not in suit that may have already accrued or grown out of any
regulations repealed.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.08) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.458 PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS.
   The catch heads appearing in connection with the sections of these
regulations are inserted simply for convenience to serve the purpose of an
index. The introductory statements found at the beginning of each subchapter
are to serve as general references only. The catch heads, introductory
statements and illustrative examples of zoning terms shall be wholly
disregarded by any person, office, court or other tribunal in construing the
terms and provisions of these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.09) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.459 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication as provided by law.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.10) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
DEFINITIONS
§ 158.470 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall
include the word “structure” and “premises;” the word “shall” is mandatory and
not directory; the words “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended,”
“designed” or “arranged to be used or occupied”; the word “lot” includes the
words “plot,” “parcel” or “tract;” and the word “person” includes a firm,
association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well
as an individual. Any word not herein defined shall be as defined in any
recognized standard English dictionary.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 24.01) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
§ 158.471 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign or sign structure which contains no sign copy,
contains obliterated or obsolete sign copy, or is maintained in an unsafe or
unsightly condition for a period of three months shall be considered an
abandoned sign.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES. A subordinate building or portion of the main
building, the use of which is incidental to and customary in connection with
the main building or the main use of the premises and which is located on the
same lot with the main building or use. An ACCESSORY USE is one which is
incidental to the main use of the premises.
   ADULT AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT. Amusement or entertainment which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or
which features topless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators, or similar entertainment.
   ADULT BOOKSTORES. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of those materials.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than 50 persons used for presenting material for observation by patrons
and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT PHOTO STUDIO. An establishment which, on payment of a fee, provides
photographic equipment and/or models for the purpose of photographing specified
anatomical areas.
   AGRICULTURE. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or
personal use, of plants and land useful to man, including but not limited to:
forages sod crops; grains and seed crops; trees and forest products; fruits of
all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or
forestry management program. This definition explicitly precludes intensive
agricultural activities such as feedlot operations and agribusiness activities.
   AIRPORT. A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with
hangers, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for
passengers, including heliports.
   ANTENNA. Any device that radiates or captures electromagnetic wave signals,
including digital voice and data signals, analog voice and data signals, video
signals or microwave signals, and is mounted on a structure that allows freedom
from obstruction for the radiation and capture of the electromagnetic signals.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any existing structure that supports wireless
communications facilities, such as but not restricted to, telecommunications
and broadcast towers, buildings, clock towers, steeples and light poles.
   AQUIFER. A zone stratum or group of strata that can store and transit water
in sufficient quantities for specific use.
   ARCADE. A building or structure, open to the public, which contains coin
operated games and similar entertainment and amusement devices, as the primary
use or with five or more games as an accessory use.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises which provides for the
retail sale of gasoline, oil, tires, batteries and accessories for motor
vehicles and for certain motor vehicle services, including washings, tire
changing, repair service, battery service, radiator service, lubrication, brake
service, wheel service and testing or adjusting of automotive parts. Automobile
repair work may be done at a service station provided that no rebuilding of
engines, spray paint operations or body or fender repair is permitted. Gasoline
pumps and gasoline pump islands shall be located more than 12 feet from the
nearest property line.
   AUTOMOBILE STORAGE YARD. The temporary storage of vehicles which are
impounded, licensed and operable in an unroofed area.
   BAR/LOUNGE. An establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages,
including low point beer, by the drink.
   BILLBOARD. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service
or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of Lincoln County.
   BOARDINGHOUSE. A building, other than a hotel or apartment hotel, where for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging, meals or
lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons.
   BROADCAST TOWER. A structure, not including offices or studio, for the
transmission of radio or television broadcast communications.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of the lot that can be occupied by the principal
use, thus excluding the front, rear and side yards.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is completely
separated from every other portion by masonry or fire wall without any window,
which wall extends from the ground to the roof, then the portion shall be
deemed to be a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the grade to:
      (1)   The highest point of a flat roof;
      (2)   The deck line of a mansard roof; or
      (3)   The average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE. A line on the lot running parallel to the required horizontal
distance from the nearest property line.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   BUS/TRUCK TERMINAL. An area and building where buses, trucks and cargo is
stored; where loading and unloading is carried on regularly; and where minor
maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.
   CAMPGROUND. A plot of ground consisting of two or more campsites where
camping units can be located and occupied as temporary living quarters.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. An entity registered with the South
Dakota Department of Health pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G that acquires,
possesses, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, or sells
cannabis products to a medical cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY or TESTING FACILITY. An independent entity
registered with the South Dakota Department of Health pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-
20G to analyze the safety and potency of cannabis.
   CATHODIC PROTECTION. A technique to prevent corrosion of a metal surface by
making that surface the cathode of an electrochemical cell; protection of a
tank through the application of either galvanic anodes or impressed current.
   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the CEMETERY.
   CHAPEL. A structure located within a cemetery and used for conducting
funeral services.
   CHURCH. A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that
by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized
religious services and associated accessory uses.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Sioux Falls.
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION. The members appointed by the city to serve in an
advisory capacity on planning and zoning matters.
   CLUB. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle licensed by the state as a commercial
vehicle.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted long-range plan intended to guide the growth
and development of the area, including analysis, recommendations and proposals
of economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zoning district, but which if controlled, would
promote the public health, safety and welfare.
   CONTAINMENT FACILITY.
      (1)   PRIMARY. The tank, pit, container, pipe, enclosure or vessel of
first containment of a regulated substance.
      (2)   SECONDARY. A second level of containment outside the primary
containment facility designed to prevent a regulated substance from reaching
land or waters outside the containment area.
   CONTAMINATION, AIR. A concentration of any radioactive or toxic material
which is a product, by-product or otherwise associated with any exploration,
mining or milling operation that increases ambient air radiation levels by 50
mrems from the background levels established prior to the commencement of the
activity, measured at the perimeter of the mining or milling site or at the top
of an exploration hole.
   CONTAMINATION, WATER. A concentration of any radioactive or toxic material
which is a product, by-product or otherwise associated with any exploration,
mining or milling operation that exceeds the maximum contaminate levels
established by the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et
seq. and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CONTRACTOR’S SHOP AND STORAGE YARD. Use of land or building(s) for storage
and preparation of materials used by that same individual(s) in conducting the
business of construction and repair work, generally completed at some other on-
site location.
   COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION. The members appointed by the board of county
commissioners to serve in an advisory capacity on planning and zoning matters.
   CREMATORY. A mortuary where corpses are cremated.
   CULTIVATION FACILITY. An entity registered with the South Dakota Department
of Health pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G that acquires, possesses, cultivates,
delivers, transfers, transports, supplies, or sells cannabis and related
supplies to a medical cannabis establishment.
   DAY CARE. The providing of care and supervision of a child or children as a
supplement to regular parental care, without transfer of legal custody or
placement for adoption, with or without compensation, on a regular basis for a
part of a day.
   DAY CARE, CENTER. Is normally in a facility used for providing day care,
nursery or pre-kindergarten services, and is limited in number over 12 by the
square footage of useable space available. The ratio is 35 square feet per
child indoors and 50 square feet per child outdoors.
   DAY CARE, FAMILY. Care is done in a family home and the number of children
cared for is limited to a maximum of six children under the age of 14 years.
Included in the count are the provider’s own children six years and under. See
HOME OCCUPATION.
   DAY CARE, GROUP. Is normally in a family home. The number of children cared
for is seven to 12 children under the age of 14 years including the provider’s
own children six years and under.
   DENSITY. The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing
structures per unit of land.
   DISTRICT. An area for which regulations governing the use of buildings and
premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use
are uniform.
   DRIVE-UP SERVICE WINDOW/DEVICE. An establishment which accommodates the
patron’s motor vehicles, from which the occupants may obtain or receive a
service or obtain a product through a service window or automated device.
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, constructed in conformance with
the Uniform Building Code, and used exclusively for human habitation, including
single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including
hotels, motels or lodging houses. This definition does not include a mobile
home or manufactured home. See MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three
or more families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by
one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two
families.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling occupied or intended to be
occupied as separate living quarters by a single family as defined herein.
   ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION. A premises which may or may not contain buildings,
where the interconnection and usual transformation of electrical service takes
place between systems. An ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION shall be secondary,
supplementary, subordinate and auxiliary to the main system.
   ELIGIBLE BUILDING SITE (BUILDING ELIGIBILITY). A site which fulfills the
requirements for the construction or placement of a residential dwelling. To
compute the number of eligible building sites on a lot of record of 40 acres or
more, the total acreage of the parcel shall be divided by 40 acres. The
resulting whole number minus any existing residential structures is the number
of building sites eligible on the lot of record.
   EXPLORATION. The act of searching for or investigating a mineral deposit. It
includes, but is not limited to, sinking shafts, tunneling, drilling core and
bore holes, and digging pits or cuts and other works for the purpose of
extracting samples prior to commencement of development of extraction
operations, and the building of roads, access ways and other facilities related
to the work. Any and all shafts, tunnels or holes shall not exceed 18 inches in
diameter unless the conditional use for exploration provides for a larger
diameter. The term does not include those activities which cause no or very
little surface disturbance, such as airborne surveys and photographs, use of
instruments or devices which are hand-carried or otherwise transported over the
surface to make magnetic, radioactive or other tests and measurements, boundary
or claim surveying, location work or other work which causes no greater land
disturbance than is caused by ordinary lawful use of the land by persons not
involved in exploration.
   FAMILY. One or more individuals, related by blood or law, occupying a
dwelling unit and living as a single household unit. A FAMILY shall not include
more than three adults who are unrelated by blood or law, in addition to
persons actually related by blood or law the following persons shall be
considered related by blood or law for the purposes of this chapter:
      (1)   A person residing with the FAMILY for the purpose of adoption;
      (2)   Not more than six persons under 18 years of age, residing in a
foster home licensed or approved by a governmental agency;
      (3)   Not more than four persons 19 years of age or older residing with
the FAMILY for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by a
governmental agency; and
      (4)   Any person who is living with the FAMILY at the direction of a
court.
   FARMSTEAD. An area consisting of a farm dwelling or dwellings and
agricultural buildings and structures devoted to and used in connection with an
agricultural operation. A FARMSTEAD is generally bounded on one or more sides
by a tree belt but does not include crop and pasture land.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of Lincoln County on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazard
and their potential for flooding.
   FLOODPLAIN. A land area adjoining a river, creek, watercourse or lake which
is likely to be flooded and which is designated as Zone A, AO or A1-A30 on the
FIRM.
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area.
   FLOOR AREA. The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls
and includes the total of all space on all floors of a building. It does not
include porches, garages or space in a basement or cellar when the space is
used for storage or incidental uses.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street or highway, between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) or for a distance of 400 feet on
either side of a proposed building or structure, measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street, but not
including property more than 400 feet distant on either side of a proposed
building or structure.
   FROZEN FOOD LOCKER. A place where the animal is dressed and packaged, where
no rendering or refining is done.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory or portion of a main building housing
the automobiles of the occupants of the premises, but not commercial vehicles.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling, storing or parking motor-driven vehicles. The term repairing shall not
include an automobile body repair shop nor the rebuilding, dismantling, or
storage of wrecked or junked vehicles.
   GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building or premises, used for housing only motor-
driven vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles.
   GENERAL MANUFACTURING. Those manufacturing processes including light
manufacturing which have the potential to be a nuisance due to dust, odor,
noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat, glare or the operation of the
processes outside the building.
   GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
   GROUNDWATER. Subsurface water that fills available openings in rock or soil
materials so that it may be considered water saturated.
   GROUP HOME. A supervised living or counseling arrangement in a family home
context providing for the care of children or adults.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for
profit and located entirely within a dwelling, which use is accessory,
incidental, and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes
and does not change the essential residential character or appearance of the
dwelling.
   HYDROLOGIC BALANCE. The relationship between the quality and quantity of
inflow to and outflow from the storage in hydrologic units, such as a drainage
base and aquifer, soil zone lake or reservoir it encompasses, the quantity and
quality relationships between precipitation, runoff, evaporation, and the
change in ground and surface water storage.
   HYDROLOGIC REGIME. The entire state of water movement in a given area which
is a function of the climate and includes the entire water cycle for the
drainage area.
   JOINT ZONING JURISDICTION. The area outside the Sioux Falls city limits
where the zoning of property is jointly agreed upon and regulated by the board
of county commissioners and city council.
   KENNEL. Any premises or portion thereon where dogs, cats or other household
pets are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept for remuneration.
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals and animal shelters are specifically
excluded.
   LIGHT MANUFACTURING. Those manufacturing processes which are not obnoxious
due to dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat or glare. These
commercial and industrial uses are characterized by generally having all
aspects of the process carried on within the building itself.
   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot for the
standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having a minimum area of 540 square
feet, a minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum depth of 35 feet, and a vertical
clearance of at least 14.5 feet.
   LOT. A parcel or tract of land having specific boundaries and which has been
recorded in the register of deeds office. A LOT used for residential purposes
shall include only one main building together with its accessory buildings,
open spaces and parking spaces required by these regulations and shall have its
principal frontage upon a road or other approved access.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting roads,
as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT, FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line
ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line. In no case, shall any structure be closer
than three feet to any lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in
the office of the register of deeds, or a parcel of land the deed or agreement
to convey to which was recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior to
August 3, 1995.
   LOT, WIDTH. The width of a lot at the front yard line.
   MAIN BUILDING. See PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   MAJOR STREET. Streets or roads which have been designated as freeways or
arterial routes on the major street plan.
   MAP, OFFICIAL ZONING. The map or maps, which are legally adopted as a part
of these joint zoning regulations, between the city and Lincoln County, that
delineate the boundaries of the zoning districts as enumerated in these
regulations.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY OR DISPENSARY. An entity registered with the
South Dakota Department of Health pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G that acquires,
possesses, stores, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies, or
dispenses cannabis, cannabis products, paraphernalia, or related supplies and
educational materials to cardholders.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation facility, a cannabis testing
facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility, or a dispensary.
   MILLING. The processing or enhancing of a mineral.
   MINE DEWATERING DISCHARGE. Water that has been discharged from active or
abandoned mines in areas affected by mineral exploration, mining and milling.
   MINERAL. An inanimate constituent of the earth in a solid, liquid or gaseous
state which, when extracted from the earth, is useable in its natural form as a
metal, a metallic compound, a chemical, an energy source, or a raw material for
manufacturing or construction material. For the purpose of these regulations,
this definition does not include surface or subsurface water, geothermal
resources or sand, gravel and quarry rock.
   MINERAL EXTRACTION. The removal of a mineral from its natural occurrence on
affected land. The term includes, but is not limited to, underground and
surface mining.
   MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME. Any single-family permanent living quarters,
more than eight feet wide and 32 feet in length, and designed and built to be
towed on its own chassis.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land designed and maintained for the
purpose of providing a location for mobile homes and site delivered dwellings
as living quarters and where private roads provide access to individual lots.
This definition shall specifically exclude sales lots for mobile homes, site
delivered dwellings, travel trailers and similar operations.
   MORTUARY SERVICES. Services related to the storing of human bodies prior to
their burial or cremation.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. Any building or structure in which a business,
service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing or repair of vehicles
is conducted or rendered. Including rebuilding of engines, spray paint
operations and hourly repair.
   mrem. One thousandth of an REM.
   NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY. Telephone, electric and cable television
lines, poles and equipment; water or gas pipes, mains and valves; sewer pipes
and valves; lift stations; telephone exchanges and repeaters; and all other
facilities and equipment (excluding buildings that exceed 120 square feet of
roof area. necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public
utility.
   NONCONFORMING USES. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of passage of these regulations or amendment thereto, which does not
conform after the passage of these regulations or amendment thereto with the
use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   NONSTANDARD USE. The category of nonconformance consisting of lots occupied
by buildings or structures or uses which existed immediately prior to the
effective date of this chapter which fail to comply with any of the following:
minimum lot requirements for the area, density, width, front yard, side yard,
rear yard, height, unobstructed open space, or parking for the district in
which they are located, even though the use of the premises conforms to the
permitted uses within the district as set out in the provisions of this
chapter.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
   PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store
one automobile, together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a
street and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
   PERMISSIVE USES. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
   PERMITTED SPECIAL USE. A use allowed in a zoning district subject to the
applicable restrictions of that zoning district and additionally subject to
certain restrictions for that specific use.
   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES (PCS). Licenses granted by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to build digital wireless phone networks which
compete with standard cellular service.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or their apparel. Including, but not limited to:
laundry or dry cleaning, receiving station; garment services; coin operated
laundries; photographic and art studios; beauty shops; barber shops; shoe
repair; reducing salons and health clubs; clothing rental; private schools.
   PLANNING DIRECTOR. The individual for Lincoln County designated to
administer the zoning regulations and who is responsible for the enforcement of
the regulations.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the primary or
predominant use of the lot on which it is located.
   PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY. Government facilities and uses that provide an
essential public purpose or service including, but not limited to, a police
station, judicial court, fire station, ambulance service, transit or
transportation transfer station, library, community center, public recreation
facility or office, but not including public utility or treatment stations,
maintenance facilities, sanitary landfills or facilities for incarcerated
persons.
   PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES. See NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY. The definition
is the same as the “Neighborhood” except that buildings that exceed 120 square
feet in roof area are allowable.
   QUARTER-QUARTER SECTION. A quarter of a quarter section as determined by the
United States Rectangular Land Survey System. A government lot as determined by
the rectangular land survey system shall be considered a quarter-quarter
section for purposes of these regulations. For purposes of these regulations,
rights-of-way for public or private transportation shall not impact the
completeness of a quarter-quarter section.
   RECHARGE CAPACITY. The ability of the soils and underlying materials to
allow precipitation and runoff to infiltrate and reach the zone of saturation.
   REGULATED SUBSTANCE. A regulated substance shall include: pesticides and
fertilizers, hazardous and toxic substances designated by the EPA through any
of the following: Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. or Comprehensive
Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601
et seq.; petroleum and petroleum substances, kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge,
oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils, additives used in refining
oils and gasoline. This term does not include sewage and sewage sludge.
   REM (ROENTGEN EQUIVALENT MAN). A measurement of the biological effects
resulting from ionizing radiant energy where roentgen is the amount of
radiation leading to the absorption of 88 ergs of energy per gram of air.
   RETAIL SALES AND TRADE. Establishments engaged in selling products, goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption; and
establishments engaged in providing services or entertainment to the general
public including eating and drinking establishments, hotels, motels, repair
shops, indoor amusement, copying services, health, professional, educational
and social services, and other miscellaneous services.
   SALVAGE OR JUNK YARD. An open area where waste or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
tires, bottles and motor vehicles. This definition includes an automobile
wrecking or dismantling yard, but does not include uses established entirely
within enclosed buildings.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A site for the disposal of garbage and other refuse
material.
   SETBACK/SETBACK LINE. The line that is the required minimum distance from
any lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure
must be erected or placed.
   SIGN. Any object, device or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or
visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
This definition does not include national or state flags or their emblem or
insignia, interior window displays, athletic scoreboards or the official
announcements or signs of government.
   SIGN (OFF-PREMISES). A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.
   SIGN (ON-PREMISES). A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is
located.
   SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A facility for the slaughtering and processing of animals
and the refining of their byproducts.
   SOLID WASTE RECEIVING STATION. A facility where garbage and other refuse
material is brought to the site and deposited in a container, then compressed
and transported to a sanitary landfill.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         A.   Human genitals, pubic region;
         B.   Buttock; and
         C.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of undraped human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
   STABLE. Any premises or part thereon where horses or any equine animal are
maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return for remuneration, or are kept
for the purpose of sale.
   STATIONARY TANK. An aboveground tank which is fixed permanently in place on
a foundation, rack, cradle, stilts or on the ground. The term does not include
tanks mounted on wheels, trolleys, skids, pallets or rollers.
   STEALTH. For freestanding telecommunications towers, it is the ability to
blend into the context of the surrounding environment at a given location. For
antenna support structures, STEALTH is the ability to camouflage or conceal the
presence of wireless communication facilities. Methods of camouflage or
concealment are required to be approved by the county planning director.
   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
   STREET. A public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property. Also referred to a ROAD or HIGHWAY.
   STREET LINE. The line between the public right-of-way and private property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. For the
purpose of these regulations, retaining walls, concrete slabs and utility poles
are not considered STRUCTURES.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building developments
(whether immediate or future). This term includes resubdivision and, when
appropriate to the context, is related to the process of subdividing or to the
land subdivided.
   SURFACE IMPOUNDMENT. A facility or part of a facility which is a natural
topographic depression, human-made excavation or dike area formed primarily of
earthen materials (although it may be lined with human-made materials), which
is designed to hold an accumulation of liquid wastes or wastes containing free
liquids, and which is not an injection well. Examples of surface impoundments
are holding, storage, settling and aeration pits, ponds and lagoons.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A self-supporting lattice, guyed-lattice or
monopole structure which supports wireless communications facilities. The term
includes new and existing towers that are used for services such as microwave,
common carrier, cellular telephone, personal communication services, two-way
radio paging and other similar services. The term TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER does
not include amateur radio operators’ equipment, as licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance above grade to the
highest point of the telecommunications tower, including the base pad and any
antenna.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITE. The lot of record for which the
telecommunications tower is located.
   TRAILER. Any of the following.
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
      (2)   MOTOR-HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (3)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses. Permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer of the
trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not
exceeding eight feet, and a body length not exceeding 30 feet.
   TRUCK STOP. Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a
business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage or
repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the
dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into motor
vehicles, the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar
commercial vehicles. A TRUCK STOP also may include overnight accommodations and
restaurant facilities.
   UNSAFE SIGN. A sign on which the display area or structure has deteriorated
due to rust, rotting or physical damage to the point where any portion of the
sign has the potential to fall shall be considered unsafe.
   UNSIGHTLY SIGN. A sign which has deteriorated to the point where at least
one-fourth of the display area is no longer clearly recognizable at a distance
of 20 feet; or where the paint is peeling, chipping or flaking from the
structure shall be considered an unsightly sign.
   WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
   WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, manure, sludge from a waste treatment plant,
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other
discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural
operations, and from community activities, but does not include solid or
dissolved materials in domestic sewage or dissolved materials in irrigation
return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to
permits under § 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1342, as amended to January 1, 1986, or source, special nuclear or by-product
materials as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1.
   WATER SOURCE PROTECTION AREA. A geographical area overlying a geologic
formation, group of formations, or part of a formation capable of yielding,
storing or transmitting a usable amount of groundwater to wells or springs for
domestic or animal use. Any deposition of sand and gravel that is connected to
water bearing strata or is not isolated.
   WATER TABLE. The upper surface of a zone of saturation where the body of
groundwater is not confined by an overlying impermeable zone.
   WHOLESALE MERCHANDISING/TRADE. Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, the individuals or companies.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). Any mechanism or device designed for
the purpose of converting wind energy into electrical or mechanical power.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides,
antennas, antenna arrays and any other equipment associated with the
transmission or reception of telecommunications signals which a person seeks to
locate or have installed upon or near a telecommunications tower or antenna
support structure.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the
front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.
   YARD LINE. See BUILDING LINE.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full width of the lot between a principal
building and the rear lot line.
   YARD, REQUIRED. The required open space between a property line and a
building line. The open space shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upwards except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. The REQUIRED FRONT YARD shall extend across the front
of a lot between the property lines. There shall be a REQUIRED FRONT YARD on
each street side of a corner lot. The REQUIRED FRONT YARD with the smallest
required front yard may be referred to as the side-street-side front yard.
   YARD, REQUIRED REAR. The REQUIRED REAR YARD shall extend across the rear of
a lot between the property lines. On corner lots, the REQUIRED REAR YARD may be
to the rear of either street. On interior lots, the REQUIRED REAR YARD shall in
all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. The REQUIRED SIDE YARD shall extend between the
required front yard line and the required rear yard line. There shall only be
one REQUIRED SIDE YARD on a corner lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot,
and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A specifically delineated area in the joint zoning
jurisdiction within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the
use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
   ZONING PERMIT. A document signed by the planning director or an authorized
representative as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or
installation of a building, which acknowledges that use, or building complies
with the provisions of the zoning regulations or an authorized variance
therefrom.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 24.02) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006; Ord. 98-21, passed
8-24-2021)
§ 158.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200. Each and every
day that the violation continues may constitute a separate offense.
(1992 Code, App. F, § 23.05) (Ord. 10-06, passed 1-23-2006)
CHAPTER 159: COMPREHENSIVE EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
Title and Purpose
   
159.001   Title
   
159.002   Purpose
Districts and Boundaries
   
159.015   Boundaries of joint jurisdiction
   
159.016   Districts designated
   
159.017   Incorporated by reference
   
159.018   Boundaries of districts, maps
   
159.019   Rules where uncertainty as to boundaries arises
   
159.020   Vacation of streets and roads
   
159.021   Classification of land coming within the joint zoning jurisdiction
A-1 Agricultural District
   
159.035   Intent
   
159.036   Permissive uses
   
159.037   Permitted special uses
   
159.038   Conditional uses
   
159.039   Accessory uses
   
159.040   Parking regulations
   
159.041   Sign regulations
   
159.042   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RR Rural Residential District
   
159.055   Intent
   
159.056   Permissive uses
   
159.057   Permitted special uses
   
159.058   Conditional uses
   
159.059   Accessory uses
   
159.060   Parking regulations
   
159.061   Sign regulations
   
159.062   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RS-1 Residential District
   
159.075   Intent
   
159.076   Permissive uses
   
159.077   Permitted special uses
   
159.078   Conditional uses
   
159.079   Accessory uses
   
159.080   Parking regulations
   
159.081   Sign regulations
   
159.082   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RS-2 Residential District
   
159.095   Intent
   
159.096   Permissive uses
   
159.097   Permitted special uses
   
159.098   Conditional uses
   
159.099   Accessory uses
   
159.100   Parking regulations
   
159.101   Sign regulations
   
159.102   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RD Residential District
   
159.115   Intent
   
159.116   Permissive uses
   
159.117   Permitted special uses
   
159.118   Conditional uses
   
159.119   Accessory uses
   
159.120   Parking regulations
   
159.121   Sign regulations
   
159.122   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RA-1 Residential District
   
159.135   Intent
   
159.136   Permissive uses
   
159.137   Permitted special uses
   
159.138   Conditional uses
   
159.139   Accessory uses
   
159.140   Parking regulations
   
159.141   Sign regulations
   
159.142   Density, area, yard and height regulations
C Commercial District
   
159.155   Intent
   
159.156   Permissive uses
   
159.157   Permitted special uses
   
159.158   Conditional uses
   
159.159   Accessory uses
   
159.160   Parking regulations
   
159.161   Sign regulations
   
159.162   Density, area, yard and height regulations
I-1 Light Industrial District
   
159.175   Intent
   
159.176   Permissive uses
   
159.177   Permitted special uses
   
159.178   Conditional uses
   
159.179   Accessory uses
   
159.180   Parking regulations
   
159.181   Sign regulations
   
159.182   Density, area, yard and height regulations
I-2 General Industrial District
   
159.195   Intent
   
159.196   Permissive uses
   
159.197   Permitted special uses
   
159.198   Conditional uses
   
159.199   Accessory uses
   
159.200   Parking regulations
   
159.201   Sign regulations
   
159.202   Density, area, yard and height regulations
RC Recreation/Conservation District
   
159.215   Intent
   
159.216   Permissive uses
   
159.217   Permitted special uses
   
159.218   Conditional uses
   
159.219   Accessory uses
   
159.220   Parking regulations
   
159.221   Sign regulations
   
159.222   Density, area, yard and height regulations
PD Planned Development District
   
159.235   Intent
   
159.236   Procedure
   
159.237   Initial development plan
   
159.238   Final development plan
   
159.239   Amendments
   
159.240   Planned development districts
WS Water Source Protection Overlay District
   
159.255   Intent
   
159.256   Boundaries of district
   
159.257   Conditional uses
   
159.258   Standards
   
159.259   Prohibited uses
RRC Red Rock Corridor Overlay District
   
159.270   Intent
   
159.271   Boundaries of district
   
159.272   Development standards
   
159.273   Variance
Additional Use Regulations
   
159.285   Fences
   
159.286   Adult uses
   
159.287   Wind energy conversion systems
   
159.288   Home occupations
   
159.289   Mineral exploration and development
   
159.290   Mobile homes/manufactured homes
   
159.291   Accessory building and uses
   
159.292   Salvage operation or junkyard
   
159.293   Traffic visibility
   
159.294   Additional yard regulations
   
159.295   Additional height regulations
   
159.296   Airport approach zones
   
159.297   Rock, sand and gravel extraction
   
159.298   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities
   
159.299   Broadcast tower
   
159.300   Temporary uses
   
159.301   Vehicles and equipment restrictions
   
159.302   Solar energy conversion system
   
159.303   Vacation home rental/short- term rental
   
159.304   Long-term lease or rental
   
159.305   Accessory dwelling units (ADU)
Parking and Loading Regulations
   
159.315   Location
   
159.316   Off-street parking requirements
   
159.317   Rules for computing parking spaces
   
159.318   Minimum improvement and maintenance standards
   
159.319   Off-street loading requirements
On-Premises Signs
   
159.330   Intent
   
159.331   Permitted signs and sign area
   
159.332   Regulations and limitations of permitted signs
   
159.333   Special situations
   
159.334   Exemptions
   
159.335   Illumination
   
159.336   Temporary and portable signs
   
159.337   Prohibited signs
   
159.338   Maintenance and removal
Off-Premises Signs
   
159.350   Purpose and intent
   
159.351   General regulations
   
159.352   Conditional uses
   
159.353   Exceptions
   
159.354   Prohibited signs
   
159.355   Maintenance and removal
Nonconforming and Nonstandard Uses
   
159.370   Purpose and intent
   
159.371   Continuation of nonconforming uses
   
159.372   Use becoming nonconforming by change in law or boundaries
   
159.373   Change in nonconforming use
   
159.374   Extension or enlargement
   
159.375   Restoration after damage
   
159.376   Discontinuance of nonconforming use
   
159.377   Effect on use which is illegal under prior law
   
159.378   Continuation of nonstandard uses
Conditional Use Regulations
   
159.390   Application to the county
   
159.391   Fees
   
159.392   Site plan
   
159.393   Hearing by planning commissions
   
159.394   Appeal of decision of planning commissions
   
159.395   Hearing by board of county commissioners and city council
   
159.396   Expiration
   
159.397   Conditional use criteria
   
159.398   Reapplication
   
159.399   Revocation
Amendments to the Regulations
   
159.410   Application to county for zoning amendment
   
159.411   Fees
   
159.412   Hearing by planning commissions
   
159.413   Hearing by board and city council
   
159.414   Reapplication
Zoning Board of Adjustment
   
159.425   Establishment
   
159.426   Operational procedure
   
159.427   Appeals
   
159.428   Variances
   
159.429   Application to county for variance
   
159.430   Fees
   
159.431   Hearing
   
159.432   Appeals from decision of board
   
159.433   Limitations
   
159.434   Jurisdiction to hear requests or grant variances
Fees
   
159.445   General regulations
   
159.446   Change of zone
   
159.447   Planned development district
   
159.448   Major amendment
   
159.449   Minor amendment
   
159.450   Conditional use
   
159.451   Board of adjustment
   
159.452   Zoning permits
General Provisions
   
159.465   General regulations
   
159.466   Building permits required
   
159.467   Enforcement and administration
   
159.468   Site plan
   
159.469   Violation and penalty
   
159.470   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
159.471   Interpretation, abrogation and severability
   
159.472   Saving clause
   
159.473   Purpose of catch heads
   
159.474   Effective date
Definitions
   
159.485   Purpose
   
159.486   Definitions
   
159.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Floodplain management, see
ch. 156
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Zoning, see
ch. 160
State law reference:
   Municipal planning and zoning, see SDCL ch. 11-4
   Power to adopt zoning ordinance, see SDCL 9-12-13
TITLE AND PURPOSE
§ 159.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be referred to as the Revised Joint Zoning Ordinance
for Minnehaha County and the City of Sioux Falls.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 1.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003; Ord. 94-17, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 159.002 PURPOSE.
   These regulations have been based upon the Sioux Falls, Comprehensive Plan
adopted by the board of county commissioners on March 28, 2017, and the city
council on October 11, 2016, amended by the city council on April 18, 2017, and
are in conformance with SDCL chapters 11-2, 11-4 and 11-6. These regulations
shall establish a common working relationship between the city and Minnehaha
County to carry out the goals and objectives of the plan as adopted by the city
and county, but especially to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure
safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general
welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of
land; to avoid undue concentration or scattering of population; and to
encourage a distribution of population or mode of land utilization that will
facilitate the economical and adequate provisions of transportation, roads,
water supply, drainage, sanitation, education, recreation or other public
requirements. The regulations are intended to preserve and protect existing
property uses and values against adverse or unharmonious adjacent uses by
zoning land outside the corporate boundaries of the city but not to exceed
three miles from the city limits.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 1.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 94-17, passed
9-26-2017)
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
§ 159.015 BOUNDARIES OF JOINT JURISDICTION.
   (a)   The land within the joint zoning jurisdiction shall be contained
within the following boundaries:
   Beginning along the south boarder of Section 32 (T101N R50W) approximately
1,090 feet east of the SW corner of Section 32-T101N-R50W, thence west to the
SW corner of Section 31, thence north to the NW corner of the S1/2 of the N1/
2 of Section 18, thence east to the NE corner of the S1/2 of the NW1/4 of
Section 17, thence north to the NW corner of the NE1/4 of Section 29 (T102N
R50W), thence east to the NE corner of the NW1/4 of Section 28, thence north to
the NW corner of the S1/2 of the SE1/4 of Section 21, thence east to the NE
corner of the S1/2 of the SE1/4 of Section 21, thence north to the SW corner of
the NW1/4 of Section 22, thence east to the SE corner of the NW1/4 of Section
22, thence north to the NE corner of the NW1/4 of Section 22, thence east to
the NE corner of the NW1/4 of Section 23, thence north to the NW corner of the
SE1/4 of Section 14, thence east to the NE corner of the SE1/4 of Section 14,
thence north to the NW corner of Section 13, thence east to approximately 821
feet east of NE corner of the Section 17 (T102N R49W), thence south to the S1/
2 section line of Section 16, thence east to the NE corner of the S1/2 of
Section 15, thence north to the NE corner of Section 15, thence east to the NE
corner of Section 18 (T102N R48W), thence south to the SW corner of Section 8
(T101N R48W), thence east along the centerline of Madison Street to the
intersection with SD Highway 11, thence south to the SE corner of Section 33,
thence west along the county line to the point of beginning.
   (b)   Before any territory may come under the jurisdiction of these
regulations, the boundary of the joint jurisdiction shall be amended by
ordinance adopted by the county commission and city council in compliance with
South Dakota Compiled Laws.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003; Ord. 26-05, passed 3-14-2005; Ord. 94-17, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 159.016 DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
   (a)   In order to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and
size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of a lot that may be
occupied; the size of the yards, courts and other open spaces; the density of
population; and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
trade, industry, residence or other purposes; the joint zoning jurisdiction is
hereby divided into the following districts:
 
Districts
A-1 agricultural     C commercial
RR rural residential I-1 light industrial
RS-1 residential     I-2 general industrial
RS-2 residential     RC recreation/ conservation
RD residential       PD planned development
RA-1 residential
 
   (b)   The following districts shall be designated as zoning overlay
districts, imposing special regulations on the properties that fall within
these overlay districts without abrogating the requirements imposed by the
underlying land use district regulations:
 
WS water source protection
 
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003)
§ 159.017 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The following are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference.
   (a)   The flood insurance rate map is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of these regulations. Areas shown as Zone A, AO or A1--
A30 on the FIRM but which are zoned A-1 agricultural on the zoning map, shall
be governed by the provisions of the RC recreation/conservation district; and
   (b)   The approved plans submitted in conjunction with any planned
development are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these
regulations.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003; Ord. 26-05, passed 3-14-2005)
§ 159.018 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS, MAPS.
   The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the maps which have been made
a part hereof by reference. That part of the maps designating the different
districts and their boundaries and that part of the legend designating the
symbols for each district shall have the same force and effect as if they were
all fully set forth herein. Other notations and references thereon are for
information only.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.019 RULES WHERE UNCERTAINTY AS TO BOUNDARIES ARISES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts shown on the district map accompanying and made a part of these
regulations by reference, the following rules apply.
   (a)   The district boundaries are roads unless otherwise shown, and where
the districts are bounded approximately by roads, the road shall be construed
to be the boundary of the district.
   (b)   Where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks
and platted lots, the district boundary shall be construed to coincide with the
nearest platted lot lines; and where the districts are bounded approximately by
platted lot lines, the platted lot lines shall be construed be the boundary of
the district, unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the maps by
legal description.
   (c)   In unplatted property, the district boundary lines shall be determined
by use of the scale appearing on the map, unless the boundaries are otherwise
indicated on the maps by legal description.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.020 VACATION OF STREETS AND ROADS.
   Whenever any street, road or other public way is vacated, the zoning
district adjoining each side of the street, road or other public way is
extended to the center of the vacation; and all area included in the vacation
shall then an henceforth be subject to the appropriate regulations of the
extended districts.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.021 CLASSIFICATION OF LAND COMING WITHIN THE JOINT ZONING JURISDICTION.
   In all territories which may hereafter come within the joint zoning
jurisdiction, the zoning districts as they exist in the zoning ordinance for
Minnehaha County shall be continued unless otherwise changed by ordinance.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 2.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003)
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 159.035 INTENT.
   It shall be the intent of this district to provide for a vigorous
agricultural industry by preserving for agricultural production those prime
agricultural lands beyond the area of planned urban development. It is
recognized that because of the nature of both agricultural activities and
residential subdivisions, that these two uses are generally poor neighbors and
therefore the concentration of housing in the A-1 agricultural district shall
be discouraged.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.036 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the A-1 agricultural district:
   (a)   Agriculture. A building for the storage of agricultural equipment or
products shall be allowed provided the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   The parcel(s) consists of not less than 40 acres of unplatted land;
and
      (2)   The property’s principal use is devoted to agriculture.
   (b)   A single-family dwelling if the following provisions for building
eligibility are met. Each quarter-quarter section shall have one building
eligibility when all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   There are no other dwellings on the quarter-quarter section;
      (2)   The building site shall be a minimum of one acre;
      (3)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road; and
      (4)   The remaining portion of the quarter-quarter section is retained as
agricultural land or in its present use.
   (c)   Historical sites;
   (d)   Church;
   (e)   Neighborhood utilities; and
   (f)   Antenna support structure.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004; Ord. 134-06, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 159.037 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the A-
1 agricultural district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein,
or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   A building eligibility may be used within a farmstead provided:
      (1)   The building eligibility exists on property contiguous to and under
the same ownership as the farmstead;
      (2)   There will be no more than two dwellings within the farmstead; and
      (3)   The residential structure may be a single-family dwelling,
manufactured home or mobile home.
   (b)   Cemetery, subject to, the cemetery shall contain an area of 20 acres
or more or be an expansion of an existing cemetery;
   (c)   Pet cemetery, subject to, a minimum area of two acres;
   (d)   Wind energy conversion system in conformance with §
159.287;
   (e)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
159.350 through
159.355;
   (f)   Greenhouses and nurseries provided there is no retail sale of products
conducted on the premises;
   (g)   A single-family dwelling located on a lot of record in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   A lot of record consisting of less than 80 acres and containing no
other dwellings shall have one building eligibility;
      (2)   A lot of record consisting of 80 acres or more shall qualify for
building eligibility as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the lot of record shall be divided by 40 acres.
The resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings on the parcel
shall represent building eligibility; and
         B.   If there is more than one building eligibility, each additional
building site shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit.
      (3)   Approval must be granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto the public road; and
      (4)   Any parcel conveyed from a lot of record must be a minimum of one
acre. The remaining portion of the lot shall be retained as agricultural land
or in its present use.
   (h)   Telecommunications tower, subject to:
      (1)   A minimum distance of 300 feet from the telecommunications tower to
any residential zoning district, existing residential use except a farmstead,
or future residential area designated on the adopted land use plan, measured
from the base of the telecommunications tower to the property line;
      (2)   A minimum distance of one-half mile between telecommunications
towers measured from the base of one telecommunications tower to the base of
another; and
      (3)   Stealth design approved by the county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004)
§ 159.038 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the A-
1 agricultural district if a conditional use permit has been obtained in
conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Rock, sand and gravel extraction in conformance with §
159.297;
   (b)   Mineral exploration in conformance with §
159.289;
   (c)   Airport/heliport;
   (d)   A single-family dwelling on a parcel which is not a lot of record
provided:
      (1)   The deed to the land or the agreement to convey the parcel was
recorded with the register of deeds prior to September 27, 1988;
      (2)   There are no other dwellings located on the parcel, except a parcel
of 80 acres or more shall have building eligibility determined as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the parcel shall be divided by 40 acres. The
resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings on the parcel
shall represent the building eligibility; and
         B.   Each building site shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
      (3)   The building site shall not conflict with other existing or
potential land use activities or the prevailing pattern of development;
      (4)   The soil conditions are acceptable for a building site; and
      (5)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
   (e)   Group day care;
   (f)   Private campground;
   (g)   Garden center;
   (h)   Kennel;
   (i)   Stable;
   (j)   Produce stand exceeding 400 square feet in area;
   (k)   Fireworks sales provided the length of sales does not exceed nine
days;
   (l)   Golf course, golf driving range;
   (m)   Recreation facility;
   (n)   Trap shoot, rifle range, pistol range;
   (o)   Sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer station, rubble dump,
commercial compost site;
   (p)   Livestock sales barn;
   (q)   Concentrated animal feeding operation;
   (r)   Electrical substation;
   (s)   Public utility facility;
   (t)   Agriculturally related operations involving the handling, storage and
shipping of farm products;
   (u)   The transfer of building eligibility from one parcel to another parcel
when all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The transfer of a building eligibility may only occur between
contiguous parcels.
      (2)   Suitability as a building site based on the following factors:
         A.   Agricultural productivity of the soil;
         B.   Soil limitations; and
         C.   Orientation of the building site(s) with respect to road
circulation and access to public rights-of-way.
      (3)   The minimum lot size shall be one acre but a larger area may be
required when soil conditions warrant;
      (4)   The parcel from which the eligibility is transferred shall continue
as agricultural land or remain in its present use;
      (5)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road; and
      (6)   When a transfer is proposed between contiguous parcels, the
transferring property owner and recipient property owner must both sign the
conditional use permit application for transfer of a building eligibility.
   (v)   Public facility owned and operated by a governmental entity;
   (w)   Bed and breakfast establishment;
   (x)   Broadcast tower;
   (y)   Farmer’s market;
   (z)   Solar energy conversion system;
   (aa)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (bb)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004; Ord. 76-09, passed 8-17-2009; Ord. 37-14, passed 6-24-2014; Ord. 98-
23, passed 10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025; Ord. 19-25, passed 4-22-
2025)
§ 159.039 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the A-1 agricultural district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.040 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All parking within the A-1 agricultural district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.041 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the A-1 agricultural district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.042 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the A-1 agricultural
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
Front yard 30 ft.**
Lot area   1 acre*
Lot width  125 ft.
Maximum    35 ft.***
height
Rear yard  30 ft.
Side yard  7 ft.
*   Unless a larger lot size is required by the granting of a conditional
use permit.
**   The front yard on a major arterial street or section line road shall be
50 feet.
***   There shall be no height limit for accessory farm structures or wind
energy conversion systems except in the airport approach zone.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   If a lot of record has less area or width than herein required and its
boundary lines along the entire length abutted lands under other ownership on
March 27, 1970, and have not since been changed, the parcel of land may be used
for any use permitted in this district.
   (d)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 3.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.055 INTENT.
   This district is intended to protect a vigorous agricultural industry by
limiting the areas in which the RR rural residential district can be used. The
RR rural residential district, where permitted, shall generally be located
where provisions can be made to adequately handle sewage disposal, where the
value of the land for agricultural use is marginal, and where the water supply,
roads and emergency services are easily and economically available.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.056 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RR rural residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling;
   (b)   Public facility owned or operated by a governmental agency; and
   (c)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.057 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RR
rural residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
therein or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Church, subject to, the building being adjacent to an arterial street
or section line road.
   (b)   Elementary and high school, subject to:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot line.
   (c)   Private park, playground or swimming pool; and
   (d)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.058 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RR
rural residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Mobile home/manufactured home subdivision in conformance with §
159.290;
   (b)   Mobile home/manufactured home park in conformance with §
159.290;
   (c)   Group day care;
   (d)   Group home;
   (e)   Nursing home;
   (f)   Cemetery;
   (g)   Kennel;
   (h)   Stabling of horses provided they are owned by the resident of the
property and not used as a commercial operation on the property;
   (i)   Golf course, except miniature course and driving range;
   (j)   Wind energy conversion system in conformance with the requirements of
§
159.287;
   (k)   Electrical substation;
   (l)   Public utility facility;
   (m)   Day care center;
   (n)   Keeping fowl, provided the maximum number not exceed six fowl with no
roosters;
   (o)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (p)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 12-14, passed
1-28-14; Ord. 98-23, passed 10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 159.059 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RR rural residential district
are buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.060 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All parking within the RR rural residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.061 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RR rural residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.062 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RR rural
residential district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses
           All Uses
Density    1 acre*
Front yard 30 ft.**
Lot area   1 acre*
Lot width  125 ft.
Maximum    35 ft.
height
Rear yard  30 ft.
Side yard  7 ft.
*   Where a central sanitary sewer is available, the required lot area may
be reduced to 20,000 square feet.
**   The front yard on all major arterial streets or section line roads
shall be 50 feet.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 4.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RS-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.075 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for areas of residential use with a
gross density of generally five dwelling units per acre or less. The district
permits single-family dwellings and such supportive community facilities as
parks, playgrounds, schools, libraries and churches. It is intended that this
district provide protection for those areas existing as, or planned for,
single-family neighborhoods. A central sanitary sewer system must be available
to serve these developments.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.076 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RS-1 residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling; and
   (b)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.077 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
1 residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or
by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Churches:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot line.
   (b)   Elementary and high schools:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot line.
   (c)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.078 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
1 residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Group day care;
   (b)   Private lake;
   (c)   Group home;
   (d)   Nursing home;
   (e)   Convent and monastery;
   (f)   Electrical substation;
   (g)   Public utility facility;
   (h)   Day care center;
   (i)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (j)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 98-23, passed
10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 159.079 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RS-1 residential district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.080 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RS-1 residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.081 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RS-1 residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.082 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RS-1 residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses Corner Lots
               All Uses      Corner Lots
Density        7,500 sq. ft. 8,500 sq. ft.
Front yard     30 ft.        30 ft.*
Lot area       7,500 sq. ft. 8,500 sq. ft.
Lot width      60 ft.        85 ft.
Maximum height 35 ft.        35 ft.
Rear yard      30 ft.        15 ft.
Side yard      7 ft.**       7 ft.**
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced to
25 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 5.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RS-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.095 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for areas of residential use with a
gross density of generally five to seven dwelling units per acre. The district
permits single-family dwellings and such supportive community facilities as
parks, playgrounds, schools, libraries and churches. It is intended that this
district provide protection for those areas existing as or planned for single-
family neighborhoods. Central sanitary sewer system must be available to serve
these developments.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.096 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RS-2 residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling; and
   (b)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.097 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
2 residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or
by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Churches:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building line shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot
lines.
   (b)   Elementary and high schools:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut upon an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot
lines.
   (c)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.098 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RS-
2 residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Group day care;
   (b)   Private lake;
   (c)   Two-family dwelling;
   (d)   Group home;
   (e)   Nursing home;
   (f)   Convent and monastery;
   (g)   Electrical substation;
   (h)   Public utility facility;
   (i)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (j)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 98-23, passed
10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 159.099 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RS-2 residential district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.100 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RS-2 residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.101 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RS-2 residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.102 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RS-2 residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses Except Duplexes Duplexes Corner Lots
               All Uses Except Duplexes Duplexes      Corner Lots
Density        5,500 sq. ft.            4,350 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
Front yard     25 ft.                   25 ft.        25 ft.*
Lot area       5,500 sq. ft.            8,700 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
Lot width      50 ft.                   60 ft.        60 ft.
Maximum height 35 ft.                   35 ft.        35 ft.
Rear yard      25 ft.                   25 ft.        15 ft.
Side yard      5 ft.**                  5 ft.**       5 ft. **
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced to
20 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 6.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RD RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.115 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for both developing and redeveloping
areas of moderate residential density between six and 14 dwelling units per
acre. This district provides for single-family, two-family, townhouse and
multiple-family residential uses, plus support facilities such as schools,
parks, community buildings and churches. A central sanitary sewer system must
be available to serve these developments.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.116 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RD residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling;
   (b)   Two-family dwelling; and
   (c)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.117 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RD
residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or by
obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Churches:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut on an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot
lines.
   (b)   Elementary and high schools:
      (1)   One of the principle frontages of the premises shall abut on an
arterial or collector street; and
      (2)   The main building shall be set back 25 feet from the side lot
lines.
   (c)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.118 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RD
residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been obtained
in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Three- and four-family dwellings;
   (b)   Up to and including four single-family attached units in any one
structure;
   (c)   Nursing home;
   (d)   Group day care;
   (e)   Group home;
   (f)   Convent and monastery;
   (g)   Private lake;
   (h)   Electrical substation;
   (i)   Public utility facility;
   (j)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (k)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 98-23, passed
10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 159.119 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RD residential district are
buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.120 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RD residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.121 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RD residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.122 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RD residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 Density (Sq. Lot Area (Sq. Lot Front Width Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height
 Ft.)         Ft.)
            Density (Sq. Lot Area  Lot Front Side Yard Rear Yard     Maximum
            Ft.)         (Sq. Ft.) Width                             Height
Single-
family      5,000        5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.*   5 ft.**       35 ft.
dwelling
Three- and
four-family 2,500        7,500     75 ft.    25 ft.*   7 ft.**       35 ft.
dwelling
                                                       0 ft. or 10
Townhouses  2,400        2,400     16 ft.    25 ft.*   ft. on non-   35 ft.
                                                       party wall
                                                       side
                                                       5 ft.**
Two-family  3,000        6,000     50 ft.    25 ft.*   Smaller of 25 35 ft.
dwelling                                               ft. or 25% of
                                                       lot depth
Other
allowable                5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.*   7 ft.**       35 ft.
uses
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced
to 20 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 7.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RA-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.135 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for areas of moderate residential
density between ten and 17 dwelling units per acre. This district provides for
single-family, two-family, townhouse and multiple-family residential uses plus
support facilities such as schools, parks, community buildings and churches. A
central sanitary sewer system must be available to serve these developments.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.136 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RA-1 residential district:
   (a)   Single-family dwelling;
   (b)   Two-family dwelling;
   (c)   Up to and including six single-family attached units in any one
structure;
   (d)   Multiple dwelling;
   (e)   Elementary and high school;
   (f)   Nursing home;
   (g)   Church; and
   (h)   Neighborhood utilities.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.137 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RA-
1 residential district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or
by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399.
   (a)   Churches, the main building shall be set back 15 feet from the side
lot lines;
   (b)   Group home subject to:
      (1)   The distance between the proposed use and any existing group home
measured from lot line to lot line is not less than 1,000 feet; and
      (2)   The use shall be permitted only so long as the facility continues
to be licensed by the state.
   (c)   Nursing home, subject to, the use shall be permitted only so long as
the facility continues to be licensed by the state;
   (d)   Group day care subject to:
      (1)   A four-foot-high fence shall be constructed between the play area
and the street when the play area is adjacent to any arterial or collector
street; and
      (2)   A safe pick up and drop off area must be provided for the children.
   (e)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.138 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RA-
1 residential district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Private lake;
   (b)   Boarding or rooming house;
   (c)   Convent and monastery;
   (d)   Day care center;
   (e)   Park for mobile homes and manufactured homes in conformance with §
159.290;
   (f)   Electrical substation;
   (g)   Public utility facility;
   (h)   Telecommunications tower;
   (i)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (j)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 98-23, passed
10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 159.139 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the RA-1 residential district are
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in the
district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.140 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RA-1 residential district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.141 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RA-1 residential district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.142 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RA-1 residential
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 Density (Sq. Lot Area (Sq. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum
 Ft.)         Ft.)                                                   Height
           Density   Lot Area  Lot Width Front   Side Yard Rear Yard  Maximum
           (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.)           Yard                         Height
                                                           Smaller of
Multiple                                                   25 ft. or
dwellings                                                  25% of lot
                                                           depth
3 to 8
dwelling   2,500     7,500     50 ft.    25 ft.* 7 ft.**              45 ft.
units
9 to 12
dwelling   2,500     7,500     75 ft.    25 ft.* 15 ft.               45 ft.
units
Over 12
dwelling   2,500     30,000    100 ft.   25 ft.* 15 ft.               45 ft.
units
Rooming    200/bed   5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 5 ft.**              45 ft.
houses
Single-
family     5,000     5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 5 ft.**              45 ft.
dwelling
Two-family 2,500     5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 5 ft.**              45 ft.
dwelling
                                                 0 ft. or
Townhouses 2,400     5,000     16 ft.    25 ft.* 10 ft. on            45 ft.
                                                 non-party
                                                 wall side
Other
allowable  --        5,000     50 ft.    25 ft.* 15 ft.**             45 ft.
uses
*   The front yard along the side street side of a corner lot may be reduced
to 20 feet.
**   The side yard will be required to be increased to ten feet when the
building is three stories in height or more.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   Buildings with side yard setbacks less than required herein, may have
additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that
the additions will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing
building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 8.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.155 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for a wide variety of commercial uses
generally located at major intersections and along major roads. This district
will include general commercial uses requiring large land areas, extensive
retail operations and outdoor display.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.156 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the C commercial district:
   (a)   Office;
   (b)   Bank or financial institution;
   (c)   Group day care, day care center, group home;
   (d)   Mortuary;
   (e)   Indoor recreational facility;
   (f)   Nursery or greenhouse;
   (g)   Church; and
   (h)   Personal services.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.157 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C
commercial district in conformance with the conditions prescribed herein or by
obtaining a conditional use permit for those uses in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Retail and wholesale trade or service, provided:
      (1)   For outside storage areas, a screening plan shall be submitted for
staff approval;
      (2)   There is no storage of a regulated substance; and
      (3)   The building contains 10,000 square feet of area or less.
   (b)   Veterinarian clinic provided there is no outside kenneling of dogs;
   (c)   Frozen food locker provided there is no slaughtering of animals on the
premises; and
   (d)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
   (e)   Medical cannabis dispensary.
      (1)   The facility shall provide proof of registration with the South
Dakota Department of Health or proof that registration has been sought and is
pending approval, and shall at all times maintain a valid, accurate, and up-to-
date registration with the South Dakota Department of Health. Should
registration be denied or revoked at any time, any permitted special use or
conditional use shall immediately become void.
      (2)   The facility shall at all times operate in compliance with all
South Dakota Department of Health regulations pertaining to such facilities.
      (3)   The facility shall not be operated or maintained on a parcel within
1,000 feet measured by a straight line in all directions, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line
of a parcel containing a single-family dwelling, church, elementary, middle, or
high school licensed by the state, day care, public use facility, park, or
other medical cannabis dispensaries.
      (4)   The facility must operate entirely within an indoor, enclosed, and
secure facility. No exterior sales, and no sidewalk displays, shall be
permitted. No drive-through, drop-off, or pickup services shall be permitted.
      (5)   The facility shall be limited to hours of operation not earlier
than 8:00 a.m. and not later than 10:00 p.m.
      (6)   There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors which
can be seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the
property where the facility is operating.
      (7)   No one under the age of 18 shall be permitted in the facility.
      (8)   No use of medical cannabis shall be permitted on the premises of
the facility.
      (9)   The facility shall submit a disposal plan to, and obtain approval
from the planning director or his or her designee. Medical cannabis remnants
and byproducts shall be disposed of according to an approved plan and shall not
be placed within an exterior refuse container.
      (10)   The facility shall submit a security and fire protection plan to
and obtain approval from the planning director or his or her designee. The
facility shall demonstrate how it will maintain effective security and control.
The security plan shall specify the type and manner of 24-hour security,
tracking, recordkeeping, record retention, and surveillance system to be
utilized in the facility.
      (11)   The facility shall submit a site plan for approval by the planning
director or his or her designee and a floor plan for approval by the planning
director or his or her designee. The floor plan shall identify internal
security measures. All medical cannabis product, byproduct, and waste shall be
stored in an interior secure vault or receptacle in such a manner as to protect
against improper dissemination.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 114-21, passed
9-28-2021)
§ 159.158 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C
commercial district if a conditional use permit for that use has been obtained
in conformance with the requirements in §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Drive-in theater;
   (b)   Warehouse/mini-warehouse;
   (c)   Bar, lounge or adult use;
   (d)   Equipment sales, display and repair;
   (e)   Motor vehicle sales, display, service and rental;
   (f)   Auto body shop;
   (g)   Transportation, including gasoline service station, truck stop and
terminal;
   (h)   Recycling facility;
   (i)   Fireworks sales provided sales are conducted from a permanent building
when business operations exceed nine days;
   (j)   Uses which store or handle a regulated substance;
   (k)   Lumberyard;
   (l)   Contractor’s shop and storage yard;
   (m)   Car wash;
   (n)   Airport/heliport;
   (o)   Hospital;
   (p)   Hotel or motel;
   (q)   Motor vehicle repair shop;
   (r)   Public utility facility;
   (s)   Campground;
   (t)   Commercial recreation facility;
   (u)   Wind energy conversion system in conformance with §
159.287;
   (v)   Broadcast tower;
   (w)   Electrical substation;
   (x)   Telecommunications tower;
   (y)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
159.350 through
159.355; and
   (z)   Solar energy conversion system.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 37-14, passed
6-24-2014)
§ 159.159 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses permitted in the C commercial district are accessory
buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in this district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.160 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the C commercial district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.161 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the C commercial district shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.162 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   A maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the C commercial
district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses
               All Uses
Density        —
Front yard     30 ft.
Lot            —
Lot area       —
Maximum height 35 ft.
Rear yard      20 ft.
Side yard      10 ft.
Width          —
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of double
frontage lots.
   (c)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner
lot.
   (d)   Any accessory uses shall be required to comply with the height, front,
rear and side yard requirements of the main building.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 9.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.175 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for a number of light manufacturing,
wholesale, warehousing and service uses in an attractive industrial park like
setting. These uses do not depend on frequent personal visits from customers or
clients and do not include residences, apartments or commercial uses which are
primarily retail in nature. It is the intention of this district to provide
high amenity industrial development along the major roads and adjacent to
residential areas, while allowing for slightly heavier development in the
interior of the industrial areas.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.176 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the I-1 light industrial district:
   (a)   Public utility facility, electrical substation;
   (b)   Antenna support structure; and
   (c)   Any permissive use except personal services listed in the C commercial
district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.177 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
1 light industrial district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
herein
or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance with the
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Warehousing, repair services, wholesale trade, light manufacturing
provided:
      (1)   For outside storage areas, a screening plan shall be submitted for
staff approval;
      (2)   There is no storage of a regulated substance on the premises; and
      (3)   The building contains 20,000 square feet of area or less.
   (b)   Veterinarian clinic provided there is no outside kenneling of animals;
   (c)   Frozen food locker provided there is no slaughtering of animals on the
premises;
   (d)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
159.350 through
159.355;
   (e)   Telecommunications tower, subject to:
      (1)   A minimum distance of 300 feet from the telecommunications tower to
any residentially zoned or used property measured from the base of the
telecommunications tower to the property line;
      (2)   A minimum distance of one-half mile between telecommunications
towers measured from the base of one telecommunications tower to the base of
another; and
      (3)   Stealth design approved by the county planning director.
   (f)   Retailing or personal service as an accessory use when in conjunction
with a primary use of wholesaling or manufacturing.
   (g)    Medical cannabis dispensary.
      (1)   The facility shall provide proof of registration with the South
Dakota Department of Health or proof that registration has been sought and is
pending approval and shall at all times maintain a valid, accurate, and up-to-
date registration with the South Dakota Department of Health. Should
registration be denied or revoked at any time, any permitted special use or
conditional use shall immediately become void.
      (2)   The facility shall at all times operate in compliance will all
South Dakota Department of Health regulations pertaining to such facilities.
      (3)   The facility shall not be operated or maintained on a parcel within
1,000 feet measured by a straight line in all directions, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line
of a parcel containing a single-family dwelling, church, elementary, middle or
high school licensed by the state, day care, public use facility, park, or
other medical cannabis dispensaries.
      (4)   The facility must operate entirely within an indoor, enclosed, and
secure facility. No exterior sales, and no sidewalk displays, shall be
permitted. No drive-through, drop-off, or pickup services shall be permitted.
      (5)   The facility shall be limited to hours of operation not earlier
than 8:00 a.m. and not later than 10:00 p.m.
      (6)   There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors which
can be seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the
property where the facility is operating.
      (7)   No one under the age of 18 shall be permitted in the facility.
      (8)   No use of medical cannabis shall be permitted on the premises of
the facility.
      (9)   The facility shall submit a disposal plan to, and obtain approval
from the planning director or his or her designee. Medical cannabis remnants
and byproducts shall be disposed of according to an approved plan and shall not
be placed within an exterior refuse container.
      (10)   The facility shall submit a security and fire protection plan to,
and obtain approval from the planning director or his or her designee. The
facility shall demonstrate how it will maintain effective security and control.
The security plan shall specify the type and manner of 24-hour security,
tracking, recordkeeping, record retention, and surveillance system to be
utilized in the facility.
      (11)   The facility shall submit a site plan for approval by the planning
director or his or her designee and a floor plan for approval by the planning
director or his or her designee. The floor plan shall identify internal
security measures. All medical cannabis product, byproduct, and waste shall be
stored in an interior secure vault or receptacle in such a manner as to protect
against improper dissemination.
(1992 Code, App. C, §11.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 114-21, passed
9-28-2021)
§ 159.178 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
1 light industrial district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Asphalt mixing plant, ready-mix concrete plant;
   (b)   Extraction of rock, sand and gravel in conformance with §
159.297;
   (c)   Airport/heliport;
   (d)   Any conditional use listed in the C commercial district;
   (e)   Broadcast tower;
   (f)   Salvage operation in accordance with §
159.292;
   (g)   Recycling processing facility; and
   (h)   Solar energy conversion system.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 76-09, passed
8-17-2009; Ord. 37-14, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 159.179 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the I-1 light industrial district
are accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in
this district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.180 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the I-1 light industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.181 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the I-1 light industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.182 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the I-1 light
industrial district shall be as follows.
   (a)   General requirements.
 All Uses
               All Uses
Density        —
Front yard     30 ft.
Lot area       —
Lot width      —
Maximum height 45 ft.
Rear yard      20 ft.
Side yard      10 ft.
 
   (b)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double
frontage lot.
   (c)   There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner
lot.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 11.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 159.195 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses which may
create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with, nor compatible
with residential, office, institutional or planned or neighborhood commercial
establishments. All uses in this district shall comply with any state
regulations regarding noise, emissions, dust, odor, glare, vibration or heat
when applicable.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.196 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the I-2 general industrial district: any permissive use listed in
the I-1 light industrial district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.197 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
2 general industrial district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
herein, or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Warehousing, wholesale trade, repair services, light manufacturing
provided:
      (1)   For outside storage areas, a screening plan shall be submitted for
staff approval;
      (2)   There is no storage of a regulated substance on the premises; and
      (3)   The building contains 25,000 square feet of area or less.
   (b)   Off-premises signs in conformance with §§
159.350 through
159.355;
   (c)   Telecommunications tower, subject to:
      (1)   A minimum distance of 300 feet from the telecommunications tower to
any residentially zoned or used property measured from the base of the
telecommunications tower to the property line;
      (2)   A minimum distance of one-half mile between telecommunications
towers measured from the base of one telecommunications tower to the base of
another; and
      (3)   Stealth design approved by the county planning director.
   (d)   Retailing as an accessory use when in conjunction with a primary use
of wholesaling or manufacturing.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.198 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-
2 general industrial district if a conditional use permit for that use has been
obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   General manufacturing;
   (b)   Stockyards/slaughtering of animals;
   (c)   Rendering;
   (d)   Distillation of products;
   (e)   Refining;
   (f)   Sanitary landfill, solid waste receiving station;
   (g)   Paper manufacturing;
   (h)   Tank farm; petroleum products terminal;
   (i)   Salvage operation in accordance with §
159.292;
   (j)   Airport/heliport;
   (k)   Any conditional use listed in the I-1 light industrial district;
   (l)   Mineral exploration and development in accordance with §
159.289;
   (m)   Any similar use not heretofore specified;
   (n)   Broadcast tower; and
   (o)   Solar energy conversion system.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 76-09, passed
8-17-2009; Ord. 37-14, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 159.199 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the I-2 general industrial
district are accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted
uses in this district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.200 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the I-2 general industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.201 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the I-2 general industrial district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.202 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the I-2 general
industrial district shall be as follows; general requirements.
 All Uses
               All Uses
Density        —
Front yard     30 ft.
Lot area       —
Lot width      —
Maximum height 35 ft.
               All Uses
Rear yard      20 ft.
Side yard      10 ft.
 
(1992 Code, App. C, § 12.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RC RECREATION/CONSERVATION DISTRICT
§ 159.215 INTENT.
   This district is intended to protect natural drainage courses in their
capacity to carry run-off water, to limit permanent structures and uses of land
in areas subject to flooding, to prevent the pollution of underground water
supplies (aquifers), to provide open space and natural areas for recreation,
and add to the aesthetic quality of the area.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.216 PERMISSIVE USES.
   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the following
purposes in the RC recreation/conservation district:
   (a)   Agriculture. A building for the storage of agricultural equipment or
products shall be allowed provided the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   The parcel(s) consists of not less than 40 acres of unplatted land;
and
      (2)   The property’s principal use is devoted to agriculture.
   (b)   Public park; forest preserve;
   (c)   Public golf course;
   (d)   Historic sites; and
   (e)   (1)   A single-family dwelling if the following provisions for
building eligibility are met:
      (2)   Each quarter-quarter section shall have one building eligibility
when all the following conditions are met:
         A.   There are no other dwellings on the quarter-quarter section;
         B.   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on flood insurance administration maps;
         C.   The building site shall be a minimum of one acre;
         D.   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road; and
         E.   The remaining portion of the quarter-quarter section is retained
as agricultural land or in its present use.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004; Ord. 134-06, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 159.217 PERMITTED SPECIAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RC
recreation/conservation district in conformance with the conditions prescribed
herein, or by obtaining a conditional use permit for that use in conformance
with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   A single-family dwelling located on a lot of record in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   A lot of record consisting of less than 80 acres and containing no
other dwellings shall have one eligible building site;
      (2)   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the flood insurance rate map;
      (3)   A lot of record consisting of 80 acres or more shall qualify for
building eligibility as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the lot of record shall be divided by 40 acres.
The resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings shall
represent building eligibility;
         B.   If there is more than one building eligibility, each additional
building site shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit; and
         C.   Each building site shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
      (4)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto the public road; and
      (5)   Any parcel conveyed from a lot of record must be a minimum of one
acre. The remaining portion of the lot shall be retained as agricultural land
or in its present use.
   (b)   A building eligibility may be used within a farmstead provided:
      (1)   The building eligibility exists on property contiguous to and under
the same ownership as the farmstead;
      (2)   There will be no more than two dwellings within the farmstead;
      (3)   The farmstead is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified on
flood insurance administration maps; and
      (4)   The residential structure may be a single-family dwelling,
manufactured home or mobile home.
   (c)   Plant nursery or tree farm subject to:
      (1)   No retail sales allowed on the premises;
      (2)   No structures exceeding 500 square feet; and
      (3)   All structures meeting the requirements of §
159.292.
   (d)   Electric substations subject to:
      (1)   An opaque screen six feet in height must be erected on the side and
rear lot lines and on the front yard setback line; and
      (2)   The required side yard shall be 25 feet.
   (e)   Antenna support structure, subject to, stealth design approved by the
county planning director.
   (f)   Solar energy conversion system.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004; Ord. 37-14, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 159.218 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the RC
recreation/conservation district if a conditional use permit for that use has
been obtained in conformance with the requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399:
   (a)   Commercial recreation facility;
   (b)   Day or summer camp;
   (c)   Rifle and pistol range; trap shoot;
   (d)   Cemetery;
   (e)   Fairgrounds;
   (f)   Rock, sand and gravel extraction in conformance with §
159.297;
   (g)   A single-family dwelling on a parcel which is not a lot of record
provided:
      (1)   The deed to the land or the agreement to convey the parcel was
recorded with the Register of Deeds prior to September 27, 1988;
      (2)   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map;
      (3)   There are no other dwellings located on the parcel, except a parcel
of 80 acres or more shall have building eligibility determined as follows:
         A.   The acreage of the parcel shall be divided by 40 acres. The
resulting whole number minus the number of existing dwellings on the parcel
shall represent the building eligibility; and
         B.   Each building site shall consist of a minimum of one acre.
      (4)   The building site shall not conflict with other existing or
potential land use activities or the prevailing pattern of development;
      (5)   The soil conditions are acceptable for a building site; and
      (6)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road.
   (h)   Broadcast tower;
   (i)   Telecommunications tower;
   (j)   The transfer of a building eligibility from one parcel to another
parcel when all the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The transfer of a building eligibility may only occur between
contiguous parcels;
      (2)   Suitability as a building site based on the following factors:
         A.   Agricultural productivity of the soil;
         B.   Soil limitations; and
         C.   Orientation of the building site(s) with respect to road
circulation and access to public rights-of-way.
      (3)   The minimum lot size shall be one acre but a larger area may be
required when soil conditions warrant;
      (4)   The building site is not in the 100-year floodplain as identified
on the flood insurance rate map;
      (5)   The parcel from which the building eligibility is transferred shall
continue as agricultural land or remain in its present use;
      (6)   Approval has been granted by the appropriate governing entity for
access onto a public road; and
      (7)   When a transfer is proposed between contiguous parcels, the
transferring property owner and recipient property owner must both sign the
conditional use permit application for transfer of a building eligibility.
   (k)   Produce stand exceeding 400 square feet in area;
   (l)   Recreation facility;
   (m)   Farmer’s market;
   (n)   Public utility facility;
   (o)   Vacation home rental/short-term rental in accordance with §
159.303; and
   (p)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) in accordance with §
159.305.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004; Ord. 76-09, passed 8-17-2009; Ord. 64-23, passed 7-25-2023; Ord. 98-
23, passed 10-24-2023; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025; Ord. 19-25, passed 4-22-
2025)
§ 159.219 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses permitted in the RC recreation/conservation district are
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted uses in this
district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.220 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Parking within the RC recreation/conservation district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.221 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs within the RC recreation/conservation district shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.222 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the RC recreation/
conservation district shall be as follows; general requirements.
Front yard 30 ft.**
Lot area   1 acre*
Lot width  125 ft.
Maximum    35 ft.***
height
Rear yard  30 ft.
Side yard  7 ft.
*   Unless a larger lot size is required by the granting of a conditional
use permit.
**   The front yard on a major arterial street or section line road shall be
50 feet.
***   There shall be no height limit for accessory farm structures or wind
energy conversion systems except in the airport approach zone.
 
(1992 Code, App. C, § 13.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 159.235 INTENT.
   (a)   It is the intent of this district to provide flexibility from
conventional zoning regulations with increased public review for PD planned
development district projects in order to:
      (1)   Encourage well planned, efficient development;
      (2)   Allow a planned and coordinated mix of land uses which are
compatible and are harmonious, but previously discouraged by conventional
zoning procedures;
      (3)   Encourage the redevelopment of contiguous large lot parcels into an
integrated and orderly subdivision pattern, with particular attention to
developing an efficient and coordinated network of internal streets;
      (4)   Promote the clustering of residential structures and other uses
without increasing overall density of the development area in order to preserve
unique and natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, natural drainage
systems and scenic areas;
      (5)   Protect sensitive areas and areas with restrictive soil conditions
within development areas through clustering of uses on land more suited for
building;
      (6)   Reserve adequate public right-of-way within development areas for
the eventual extension of arterial and collector streets, including proper
width and spacing of those streets; and
      (7)   Improve communication and cooperation among the county, townships,
land developers and interested residents in the development of agricultural
land and redevelopment of existing areas.
   (b)   It is not the intent of the PD planned development district to
accommodate or encourage the development of isolated small tracts where
adjoining parcels are not considered within an overall development scheme.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.236 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Initial development plan.
      (1)   When a petitioner wants to request a rezoning to the planned
development district, it shall be submitted to the Minnehaha County planning
department, showing the information specified in §
159.237, a minimum of 30 days prior to the joint meeting of the county and city
planning commissions at which consideration is desired. After the planned
development request has been reviewed, the planning commissions shall make a
recommendation to the board of county commissioners and city council on the
requested rezoning. The board of county commissioners and city council shall
then act to approve or deny the request.
      (2)   This request for rezoning is subject to the requirements for
amendment of the zoning regulations specified in §§
159.410 through
159.414. No permit shall be issued within the development until the final
development plan is approved and the plat is filed.
   (b)   Final development plan.
      (1)   Prior to construction on any lots in the planned development, the
petitioner shall present a final development plan showing the information
specified in §
159.238, to the planning commissions, who shall have the sole authority to
approve, deny or amend the plan.
      (2)   The final development plan may be submitted in conjunction with the
initial development plan for concurrent approval on any subareas the developer
is ready to commit to a final plan. All the information required for both an
initial and final development plan must be shown for the area submitted for
concurrent approval, except that the developer may reference the requirements
of one of the traditional zoning districts as the development standard for a
particular subarea.
   (c)   Amendments.
      (1)   Major amendments. Major amendments to the initial and/or final
development plan shall be required to be approved as an amendment to the zoning
regulations, requiring the planning commissions’ review and board of county
commissioners and city council approval.
      (2)   Minor amendments. Minor amendments to the initial and/or final
development plan shall be required to be approved by the planning commissions
at a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the posting of a sign on
the property. Minor amendments to the initial development plan may also be made
by the submission and approval of a final development plan which is changed
from the approved initial development plan. Any amendments shall be shown as a
change from the initial development plan on the final development plan, and
further these changes shall be made on the initial development plan.
      (3)   Minimal amendments. Minimal amendments to the final development
plan shall be submitted to the planning director on a reproducible development
plan showing the requested changes. The planning director may then approve the
change in writing, if he or she deems it appropriate.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.237 INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   Upon application for rezoning to the planned development district, the
petitioner shall present an initial development plan to the planning
commissions for review and to board of county commissioners and city council
for their approval showing the following information:
   (a)   Project name and legal description;
   (b)   A preliminary subdivision plan; and
   (c)   The proposed development scheme showing the following information:
      (1)   The proposed land uses, including the number and type of proposed
residential buildings, the proposed number of dwelling units per building, the
number and type of any proposed nonresidential buildings and their square
footage;
      (2)   The proposed maximum density of the development, which shall not
exceed the density allowed in the traditional zoning districts for similar
uses, except where unique physical, environmental or design characteristics
make those densities undesirable;
      (3)   The proposed minimum setbacks which shall be no less than those
required in the traditional zoning districts for similar uses, except where
unique physical, environmental or design characteristics make the setbacks
undesirable;
      (4)   The proposed maximum height which shall be no greater than that
required in the traditional zoning districts for similar uses, except where
unique physical, environmental or design characteristics make the heights
undesirable;
      (5)   Proposed design features illustrating compatibility to the
surrounding environment and neighborhood; and
      (6)   Anticipated subarea development sequence.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.238 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (a)   Prior to construction on any lots in the Planned Development Zoning
district, the petitioner shall present a final development plan to the planning
commissions for their approval.
   (b)   The final development plan shall show the following information:
      (1)   The subdivision name, the legal description and the individual
project name (if any);
      (2)   Boundaries of the subarea or subareas submitted for approval
superimposed on the map of the initial development plan;
      (3)   A subdivision plat of the subarea or subareas submitted for
approval;
      (4)   A scale drawing showing the following information will be required
for everything except single-family detached dwelling subareas:
         A.   Size and location of proposed structures including height and
number of units;
         B.   Calculated floor area for each structure and a generic listing of
the uses within the structure;
         C.   Off-street parking lot arrangement designating all parking
spaces, off-street loading spaces and any outdoor trash container spaces;
         D.   Any sidewalks, bikeways or other paths;
         E.   Landscaping plans showing the type and location of any walls or
fences, the placement, size and species of any trees or shrubs, and berms in
areas that will be sod or seeded;
         F.   All existing and proposed utilities, drainageways, watercourses
and location of aboveground existing utilities on adjacent property;
         G.   Proposed final ground contours;
         H.   Existing and proposed uses adjacent to the area;
         I.   Documentation of the ownership and maintenance responsibility of
any common open spaces, structures or facilities including private streets;
         J.   Any subareas proposed for multiple residential development will
be required to provide an open area for recreation. The open spaces shall not
be included in any required yard, but shall be located in the same subarea it
is intended to serve;
         K.   Proposed parking and loading spaces which shall be in conformance
with §§
159.315 through
159.319, except where unique physical, environmental or design characteristics
make these requirements undesirable; and
         L.   Unless otherwise specified on the final development plan, all
development standards shall be the same as those set forth in the traditional
zoning districts, which shall be referenced for each subarea as a part of the
final development plan. For example: townhouses on Block X shall be developed
in conformance with the requirements of the RD residential district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.239 AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Major amendments. The following changes in an initial and/or final
development plan are considered major amendments:
      (1)   Any change in the proposed land uses;
      (2)   Any major change in the street pattern; and
      (3)   An increase in density above that provided for in division (b)(5)
below.
   (b)   Minor amendments. The following changes in an initial and/or final
development plan are considered minor amendments:
      (1)   Any adjustment in the size or shape of the building envelope
(increasing the height or reducing the building setback);
      (2)   Major decrease in density;
      (3)   Any decrease in the size of required open areas;
      (4)   A minor change in the street pattern.
      (5)   Any increase in density of a subarea:
         A.   Less than 25% for a subarea with less than eight units;
         B.   Less than 15% for a subarea with between nine and 20 units; and
         C.   Less than 8% for a subarea with 21 units or more.
      (6)   Any change in the number of parking spaces.
   (c)   Minimal amendments. The following changes in an initial and/or final
development plan are considered minimal amendments:
      (1)   Any adjustment of a building within a previously established
building envelope; and
      (2)   A minor reduction in density.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.240 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
   Planned development districts shall be as enumerated below.
   (a)   (PD-1) Willow Run Planned Development District. The regulations set
forth herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district regulations in
the Willow Run Planned Development District:
      (1)   Subarea A.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes: up to and including six single-family attached
units in any one structure.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of the RA-1 zoning district.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the RA-1 zoning district.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations. The same requirements
shall apply as in the RA-1 zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea A shall be:
private roads shall provide access to the development.
      (2)   Subareas B through E.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes: single-family dwelling
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of the RR zoning district.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the RR zoning district.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations. The same requirements
shall apply as in the RR zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations of Subareas B through E
shall be:
            1.   A second road access is needed to serve Subarea C and the
impact on the township road due to development of the subarea must be
addressed;
            2.   Private roads shall provide access to the developments; and
            3.   The development of Subareas D and E shall include a road
circulation plan that addresses access to abutting property.
      (3)   Subarea F.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes: golf course.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338.
         E.   Setback and height regulations. The setback and height
requirements for all structures shall be as follows:
            1.   Fifty feet from all public rights-of-way and seven feet from
all other property lines; and
            2.   Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea F shall be:
none.
   (b)   (PD-2) Thomas Planned Development District. The regulations set forth
herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district regulations in the
Thomas Planned Development District.
      (1)   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
         A.   Single-family dwelling; and
         B.   Agriculture limited to pasture and the production of crops.
      (2)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the
district and restricted as follows:
         A.   Accessory buildings limited to a total area of 2,500 square feet
with each building not to exceed 1,250 square feet;
         B.   Livestock not to exceed a total of ten head;
         C.   Horses not to exceed one horse per family member; and
         D.   Dog kennel limited to ten adult dogs.
      (3)   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the A-1 zoning district.
      (4)   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of the A-1 zoning district.
      (5)   Density, area, yard and height regulations. The same requirements
shall apply as in the A-1 zoning district.
      (6)   Other regulations. Other regulations shall be: driveway access
shall not enter onto County Highway 130.
   (c)   (PD-3) Willow Ridge Estates Planned Development District. The
regulations set forth herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district
regulations in the Willow Ridge Estates Planned Development District.
      (1)   Subarea A.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes: single-family dwelling.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the
district. No accessory building shall exceed 1,200 square feet in area.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of the RR zoning district.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the RR zoning district.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations. The same requirements
shall apply as in the RR zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea A shall be:
subdivision roads shall be hard surfaced.
      (2)   Subarea B.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes: single-family dwelling.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in the
district. No accessory buildings shall exceed 1,200 square feet in area.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of the RR zoning district.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the RR zoning district.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations. The same requirements
shall apply as in the RR zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea B shall be:
            1.   Subdivision roads shall be hard surfaced; and
            2.   Lots within the subarea shall not have driveway approaches
directly onto Highway 38.
      (3)   Subarea C.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes: park and recreation facilities.
         B.   Sign regulations. There shall be no on-premises or off-premises
signs permitted in the subarea.
         C.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea C shall be:
natural features in the subarea shall be retained to the greatest extent
possible.
   (d)   (PD-4) Powder House Road Planned Development District.
      (1)   Generally. The regulations set forth herein or elsewhere in these
regulations are the district regulations of the Powder House Road Planned
Development District.
      (2)   Subarea A.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Convenience store with gas dispensing facilities;
            2.   Bank with drive-through;
            3.   Office; and
            4.   Personal and custom services such as barber shop, beauty
salon, dry cleaning.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any use permitted in
division (d)(2)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319, parking and loading regulations of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning
Regulations for Minnehaha County and the city.
         D.   Sign regulations.
            1.   Signs shall be regulated in conformance with the provisions of
§§
160.570 et. seq. of this Code.
            2.   Exception: On-premises freestanding signage shall be monument
style and be limited to one sign per frontage and a maximum sign area totaling
100 square feet, and six feet in height.
            3.   A detailed sign plan shall be submitted as part of the final
development plan review.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations. The maximum height
and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows.
 
        Lot
Density Area  Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
        (Sq.  Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
        Ft.)
–     –   –          50 ft.         25 ft.        25 ft.        35 ft.
 
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea A shall be:
            1.   The developer shall agree to connect to the city water and
sewer when available for the property;
            2.   Prior to building permit application, an access plan shall be
approved by the county highway and city engineering departments and the state
department of transportation;
            3.   Total building area not to exceed 7,500 square feet;
            4.   Surface water runoff from the parking and vehicle service
areas shall remain on-site;
            5.   Prior to development of the gas dispensing use, an approved
spill containment plan shall be approved by Minnehaha County and the city;
            6.   Shoebox style lighting shall be used when illuminating
structures, including canopies and parking areas. All lighting systems shall be
designed to reduce glare and light trespass on to adjacent land uses;
            7.   Outdoor product display or storage is prohibited;
            8.   Outdoor trash dumpster areas shall be screened;
            9.   Off-premises signs are prohibited;
            10.   A landscaping plan shall be submitted as a part of the final
development plan;
            11.   All wastewater shall drain to holding tanks for disposal off-
site. No on-site absorption fields shall be allowed;
            12.   The petitioner’s development guidelines, dated July 5, 1995,
shall be adopted as part of the final development plan review process;
            13.   All driveways and parking areas shall be hard surfaced; and
            14.   A deceleration lane shall be provided for northbound traffic
accessing the driveway onto Powder House Road.
   (e)   PD-5 Wheatstem Meadows Planned Development District. The regulations
set forth herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district regulations
of the Wheatstem Meadows PD Planned Development District.
      (1)   Subarea A. This subarea is intended to provide for well designed
commercial and general business office/technology, including research and
development buildings, and light manufacturing uses accommodating management,
research, design, marketing and production needs of enterprises in the planned
development district. Uses shall generally be commercial and office, combined
with the light manufacturing uses and warehousing of products or materials
associated with the primary use. An emphasis will be put on the quality of the
development with regard to its landscaping, setbacks and site arrangements.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Those uses allowed as permitted special and conditional uses
in the C-4, planned commercial district, including on-sale alcohol
establishment as an accessory use;
            2.   General business office/technology uses, including associated
research and development buildings and light manufacturing uses, provided all
storage is placed indoors; and
            3.   Except telecommunications towers are not allowed.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to any permitted use in this
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
160.550 through
160.556 of this Code.
         D.   Sign regulations. On-premises sign types shall be limited to
ground mounted monument style, building identification signs and campus
identification signs and be regulated in conformance with §§
160.570 et seq. of this Code, on-premises sign regulations for the C-4, planned
commercial district, and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
for traffic control. A maximum of one campus identification sign, located along
Sixtieth Street at Saffron Trail intersection may be allowed and be a maximum
of 18 feet in height and 64 square feet in size.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations.
 
        Lot
Density Area  Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
        (Sq.  Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
        Ft.)
All uses same as the C-4 planned commercial district.*
*   Exceptions:
      Lots abutting Kiwanis Avenue shall have a minimum building setback of
93 feet from the Kiwanis Avenue centerline.
      Maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
 
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea A shall be:
            1.   Development shall be preceded by annexation and completion of
proper municipal street, sanitary sewer, water and storm water drainage
improvements;
            2.   Prior to development, a water and sanitary sewer service and
systems improvement plan shall be designed for the entire property and approved
by the city. The developer shall agree to connect to city water and sewer when
available for the property.
            3.   Development shall be coordinated with traffic signalization
plans and future street improvements on Kiwanis Avenue and Sixtieth Street
North;
            4.   The right-of-way for Reuben Goertz Boulevard be 100-foot
minimum width;
            5.   Curb cuts be limited to three on Kiwanis Avenue and three on
Sixtieth Street North, as depicted on the initial development plan;
            6.   A 30-foot wide minimum landscape setback shall be established
along Kiwanis Avenue, Sixtieth Street East and Reuben Goertz Boulevard; and
            7.   An avigation easement, acceptable to the city’s airport
authority, shall be filed with the county register of deeds prior to any
building development.
      (2)   Subarea B. This subarea is intended to provide for well designed
business and technology buildings, accommodating management, research, design,
marketing and production needs of enterprises in the planned development
district. Uses shall generally be office, institutional and light manufacturing
uses, combined with warehousing of products or materials associated with the
primary use. An emphasis will be put on the quality of the development with
regard to its landscaping, setbacks and site arrangements.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Those uses allowed as permissive, permitted special and
conditional uses in the O Office and S institutional districts;
            2.   General business office/technology uses, including associated
research and development buildings, and light manufacturing uses, provided all
storage is placed indoors; and
            3.   Except telecommunications towers are not allowed.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to any permitted use in this
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
160.550 through
160.556 of this Code.
         D.   ign regulations. On-premises sign types shall be limited to
ground mounted monument style, building identification signs and campus
identification signs and be regulated in conformance with §§
160.570 et seq. of this Code, on-premises sign regulations for the O office
district, and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for traffic
control.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations.
 
        Lot
Density Area  Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
        (Sq.  Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
        Ft.)
All uses same as the O office district.*
*   Exception: Lots abutting Kiwanis Avenue shall have a minimum building
setback of 93 feet from the Kiwanis Avenue centerline.
 
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea B shall be:
            1.   Development shall be preceded by annexation and completion of
proper municipal street, sanitary sewer, water and storm water drainage
improvements;
            2.   Prior to development, a water and sanitary sewer service and
systems improvement plan shall be designed for the entire property and approved
by the city. The developer shall agree to connect to city water and sewer when
available for the property;
            3.   Development shall be coordinated with traffic signalization
plans and future street improvements on Kiwanis Avenue and 60th Street North;
            4.   The right-of-way for Reuben Goertz Boulevard be 100-foot
minimum width;
            5.   Curb cuts be limited to three Kiwanis Avenue, as depicted on
the initial development plan. The proposed Saffron Trail and Kiwanis Avenue
intersection, however, shall be aligned with the main roadway for the Redstone
Village PD Planned Development District located to the west, across Kiwanis
Avenue;
            6.   A 30-foot wide minimum landscape setback shall be established
along Kiwanis Avenue and Reuben Goertz Boulevard; and
            7.   An avigation easement, acceptable to the city’s airport
authority, shall be filed with the county register of deeds prior to any
building development.
      (3)   Subarea C. This subarea is intended to provide for well designed
business and technology buildings, accommodating management, research, design,
marketing and production needs of enterprises in the planned development
district. Uses shall generally be limited commercial, office, institutional and
light manufacturing uses, combined with warehousing of products or materials
associated with the primary use. An emphasis will be put on the quality of the
development with regard to its landscaping, setbacks and site arrangements.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Those uses allowed as permissive, permitted special and
conditional uses in the O Office and S institutional districts, except
telecommunications towers are not allowed;
            2.   General business office/technology uses, including associated
research and development buildings, and light manufacturing uses, provided all
storage is placed indoors;
            3.   Hotel/motel, including on-sale alcohol establishment as an
accessory use;
            4.   Light manufacturing, provided all manufacturing and storage
takes place indoors;
            5.   Warehouse or mini warehouse, provided all storage must be
indoors;
            6.   Wholesale trade or merchandising;
            7.   Antenna support structure, subject to stealth design approved
by the director of planning and building services;
            8.   Farm/feed store; and
            9.   Wind energy conversion systems.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to any permitted use in this
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
160.550 through
160.556 of this Code.
         D.   Sign regulations. On-premises sign types shall be limited to
ground mounted monument style, building identification signs and campus
identification signs and be regulated in conformance with §§
160.570 et seq. of this Code, on-premises sign regulations for the O office
district, and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for traffic
control. A maximum of two campus identification signs, located along 60th
Street at Reuben Goertz Boulevard and Thyme Drive intersections may be allowed
and each campus id sign being a maximum of 18 feet in height and 64 square feet
in size.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations.
 
Lot Area  Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
Density   Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
(Sq. Ft.)
All uses same as the O office district.
            
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea C shall be:
            1.   Development shall be preceded by annexation and completion of
proper municipal street, sanitary sewer, water and storm water drainage
improvements;
            2.   Prior to development, a water and sanitary sewer service and
systems improvement plan shall be designed for the entire property and approved
by the city. The developer shall agree to connect to city water and sewer when
available for the property;
            3.   Development shall be coordinated with traffic signalization
plans and future street improvements on Kiwanis Avenue and Sixtieth Street
North;
            4.   The right-of-way for Reuben Goertz Boulevard be 100-foot
minimum width;
            5.   Curb cuts be limited to three on Sixtieth Street North as
depicted on the initial development plan;
            6.   A 30-foot wide minimum landscape setback shall be established
along Sixtieth Street East and Reuben Goertz Boulevard; and
            7.   An avigation easement, acceptable to the city’s airport
authority, shall be filed with the county register of deeds prior to any
building development.
   (f)   PD-6 Resurrection Planned Development District. The regulations set
forth herein or set forth elsewhere in these regulations are the district
regulations of the Resurrection Planned Development District.
      (1)   Subarea A.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Mortuary/funeral home;
            2.   Crematory;
            3.   Mausoleum;
            4.   Columnbarium;
            5.   Private lake(s);
            6.   Parking lot;
            7.   Naturalized tree, prairie and wetland plantings;
            8.   Service building; and
            9.   Manager/caretaker residence.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to any permitted use in this
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319 of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning Regulation for Minnehaha County and
the City of Sioux Falls.
         D.   Sign regulations.
            1.   Signs shall be regulated in conformance with the provisions of
§§
159.330 through
159.338 of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning Regulation for Minnehaha County and
the City of Sioux Falls.
            2.   Exception: On-premises freestanding signage shall be limited
to one monument style building identification sign 48 square feet maximum in
size and six feet maximum in height. Traffic signs shall be regulated in
conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for
traffic control.
            3.   Concurrent with the first final development plan submittal, a
master signage plan for Subarea A shall be submitted for the planning
commission’s review and approval. Directional and building identification wall
signs shall be permitted in accordance with the master signage plan adopted as
part of the Resurrection Planned Development District subarea regulations.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations.
 
        Lot
Density Area  Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
        (Sq.  Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
        Ft.)
–     5,000 –          50 ft.         10 ft.        –           35 ft.
 
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea A shall be:
            1.   Prior to development, a water service, system improvement and
fire protection plan shall be approved by Minnehaha County and the City of
Sioux Falls. The developer shall agree to connect to city water when available
for the property;
            2.   Prior to development, a sanitary sewer and systems improvement
plan shall be approved by Minnehaha County and the City of Sioux Falls. An
approved private septic system may be utilized on a temporary basis. Embalming
fluids from the funeral home shall be kept in a holding tank and disposed of
properly. The developer shall agree to connect to city sanitary sewer service
when available for the property;
            3.   When possible, natural storm water drainage shall be
preserved. Storm water shall be retained on-site in either existing or new
wetlands or retention pond;
            4.   A final development plan shall not be required for the
naturalized tree, prairie and wetland plantings;
            5.   A 50-foot wide landscape setback along 267th Street must be
established during the initial construction phase. A site landscape improvement
plan for Subarea A shall be submitted concurrent with the first final
development plan and include wetlands, ponds and plant material selections and
locations for trees, shrubs, hedges and fencing for county and city review and
approval; and
            6.   An access control plan for 267th Street shall be submitted
concurrent with the first final development plan for county and city review and
approval. The funeral home may use a temporary approach from the highway until
the permanent gated main entrance is developed during the first phase of
cemetery construction. The main gated entrance road shall be hard-surfaced.
      (2)   Subarea B.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Cemetery;
            2.   Chapel;
            3.   Private lake(s);
            4.   Parking lot;
            5.   Mausoleum;
            6.   Columnbarium;
            7.   Music tower;
            8.   Naturalized tree, prairie and wetland plantings;
            9.   Service building; and
            10.   Manager/caretaker residence.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to any permitted use in this
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319 of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning Regulation for Minnehaha County and
the city.
         D.   Sign regulations.
            1.   Signs shall be regulated in conformance with the provisions of
§§
159.330 through
159.338 of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning Regulation for Minnehaha County and
the city.
            2.   Exception: On-premises freestanding signage shall be limited
to one monument style sign along each street frontage, measuring 48 square feet
maximum in size and eight feet maximum in height. Traffic signs shall be
regulated in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) for traffic control.
            3.   A master signage plan for Subarea B shall be submitted for the
planning commission’s review and approval. Cemetery identification and cemetery
directional signs shall be permitted in accordance with the master signage plan
adopted as part of the Resurrection Planned Development District subarea
regulations.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations.
 
        Lot
Density Area   Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
        (Sq.   Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
        Ft.)
–     1 acre 150 ft.      50 ft.         15 ft.        25 ft.        35 ft.
 
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea B shall be:
            1.   Prior to development, a water service, system improvement and
fire protection plan shall be approved by Minnehaha County and the city. The
developer shall agree to connect to city water when available for the property;
            2.   Prior to development, a sanitary sewer and systems improvement
plan shall be approved by Minnehaha County and the city. The developer shall
agree to connect to city sanitary sewer service when available for the
property;
            3.   When possible, natural storm water drainage shall be
preserved. Storm water shall be retained on-site in either existing or new
wetlands or retention pond;
            4.   A final development plan shall not be required for the
naturalized tree, prairie and wetland plantings;
            5.   A 50-foot wide landscape setback along 267th Street must be
established during the initial construction phase. A site landscape improvement
plan for Subarea B shall be submitted concurrent with the first phase of
cemetery development and include wetlands, ponds and plant material selections
and locations for trees, shrubs, hedges and fencing for county and city review
and approval; and
            6.   An access control plan, including traffic control from 267th
Street and 467th Avenue, shall be submitted for county and city review and
approval. The main gated entrance road shall be hard-surfaced.
      (3)   Subarea C.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Recreation center;
            2.   Educational facilities;
            3.   Retreat center;
            4.   Conference center;
            5.   Private lake(s);
            6.   Parking lot;
            7.   Tree farm/orchard;
            8.   Church;
            9.   Office;
            10.   Naturalized tree, prairie and wetland plantings;
            11.   Caretaker’s residence; and
            12.   Statue gardens/stations of the cross.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory uses and buildings customarily incident to any permitted use in this
district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319 of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning Regulation for Minnehaha County and
the city.
         D.   Sign regulations.
            1.   Signs shall be regulated in conformance with the provisions of
§§
159.330 through
159.338 of the Comprehensive Joint Zoning Regulation for Minnehaha County and
the city.
            2.   Exception: On-premises freestanding signage shall be limited
to one monument style sign along 467th Avenue frontage, measuring 32 square
feet maximum in size and six feet maximum in height. Traffic signs shall be
regulated in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) for traffic control.
            3.   A master signage plan for Subarea C shall be submitted for the
planning commission’s review and approval. Cemetery identification, cemetery
directional and building identification signs shall be permitted in accordance
with the master signage plan adopted as part of the Resurrection Planned
Development District subarea regulations.
         E.   Density, area, yard and height regulations.
 
        Lot
Density Area  Req’d. Lot Req’d. Front Req’d. Side Req’d. Rear Maximum
        (Sq.  Width        Yard           Yard          Yard          Height
        Ft.)
–     5,000 –          50 ft.         10 ft.                      55 ft.
 
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea C shall be:
            1.   Prior to development, a water service, system improvement and
fire protection plan shall be approved by Minnehaha County and the city. The
developer shall agree to connect to city water when available for the property;
            2.   Prior to development, a sanitary sewer and systems improvement
plan shall be approved by the city. The developer shall agree to connect to
city sanitary sewer service before development of this subarea;
            3.   When possible, natural storm water drainage shall be
preserved. Storm water shall be retained on-site in either existing or new
wetlands or retention ponds;
            4.   A final development plan shall not be required for the
naturalized tree, prairie and wetland plantings and statue gardens/stations of
the cross;
            5.   A site landscape improvement plan for Subarea C shall be
submitted for county and city review and approval and include wetlands, ponds
and plant material selections and locations for ponds, trees, shrubs, hedges
and fencing; and
            6.   An access control plan, including traffic control from 467th
Avenue, shall be submitted for county and city review and approval. The gated
entrance road shall be hard-surfaced.
   (g)   Reserved.
   (h)   Reserved.
   (i)   (PD-9) Emerald Pines Planned Development District. The regulations set
forth herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district regulations in
the Emerald Pines Planned Development District:
      (1)   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
   A maximum of one (1) primary structure not to exceed 8,000 square feet. The
following uses are permitted within the primary structure: weddings, hosting
wedding receptions, prewedding events and dinners, photography office/business,
events space rental, and law office.
      (2)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use
allowed in the A-1 Agricultural District.
      (3)   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the Parking and Loading Regulations.
      (4)   Driveway regulations. The first 100 feet of driveway off of Maple
St. shall be at least 20 feet wide and hard surfaced.
      (5)   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of the On-Premise Sign Regulations.
      (6)   Density, area, yard, and height regulations. Density, area, yard,
and height shall be regulated in conformance with the provisions of the A-
1 Agricultural District.
   (j)   (PD-10) Laurel Ridge Planned Development District. The regulations set
forth herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district regulations in
the Laurel Ridge Planned Development District:
      (1)   Subarea A.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes.
            1.    Banquet/reception hall and events facility.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Article 16.00 of the Revised Joint Zoning Ordinance for
Minnehaha County and the City of Sioux Falls. No parking shall be allowed on
Slip Up Creek Road.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Article 17.00 of the Revised Joint Zoning Ordinance for
Minnehaha County and the City of Sioux Falls.
         E.   Density, area, yard, and height regulations. The same
requirements shall apply as in the C Commercial zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea A shall be:
            1.   Subdivision roads shall be private and privately maintained.
            2.   A property association shall be created and include all
property within the subarea to assure maintenance of the private roads and
common areas.
            3.   That all connections onto the Mapleton Township road system
must be approved by Mapleton Township.
            4.   The hours of operation shall be between 8 a.m. and midnight
with the exception of New Year's Eve, which must be between 8 a.m. and 1 a.m.
            5.   No outdoor music shall be allowed after 10 p.m.
            6.   All outdoor lighting shall be of a full cutoff and fully
shielded design to prevent direct spillage of light beyond the property
boundaries.
            7.   Dust control shall be applied by the applicant from the
approach west to the pavement on Slip Up Creek Road.
         G.   Final develop plan.
            1.   Prior to construction in Subarea A, a Final Development Plan
shall be presented to the Planning Commissions for their approval.
      (2)   Subarea B.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
      Those uses permitted in the A-1 Agricultural zoning district.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
detached accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted
use in the A 1 Agriculture zoning district.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of the A-1 Agricultural zoning district.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the A-1 Agricultural zoning district. One business sign for
the events facility not exceeding 200 square feet.
         E.   Density, area, yard, and height regulations. The same
requirements shall apply as in the A-1 Agriculture zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea B shall be:
            1.   Subdivision roads shall be private and privately maintained.
            2.   A property association shall be created and include all
property within the subarea to assure maintenance of the private roads and
common areas.
            3.   That all connections onto the Mapleton Township road system
must be approved by Mapleton Township.
         G.   Final develop plan.
            1.   Prior to construction in Subarea B, a Final Development Plan
shall be presented to the Planning Commissions for their approval.
   (k)   (PD-11) Perry Planned Development District. The regulations set forth
herein or elsewhere in these regulations are the district regulations of the
Perry Planned Development District:
      (1)   Subarea A.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            Those uses permitted as permissive uses in the RC Recreational/
Conservation zoning district, except for single-family dwelling.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use permitted in
subsection (k)(1)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Sections 159.315–159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Sections 159.330–159.338.
         E.   Yard and height regulations. The maximum height and minimum yard
requirements shall be the same as the RC zoning district.
      (2)   Subarea B.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Agriculture.
            2.   Single-family dwelling.
            3.   Park.
            4.   Historic site.
            5.   Greenhouse and nursery provided there is no retail sale of
products conducted on the premises.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use permitted in
subsection (k)(2)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Sections
159.315–
159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Sections
159.330–
159.338.
         E.   Yard and height regulations. The maximum height and minimum yard
requirements shall be the same as the RR zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea B shall be:
            1.   The residential density shall not exceed two dwelling units
for the subarea. Location of the building sites shall be included in the final
development plan and situated in such a manner to pose the least impact on
access to the park in Subarea A.
            2.   No dwelling shall be located within the 100-year floodplain as
shown on the county's flood insurance rate map.
      (3)   Subarea C.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Agriculture.
            2.   Park.
            3.   Greenhouse and nursery provided there is no retail sale of
products conducted on the premises.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use permitted in
subsection (k)(3)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Sections
159.315–
159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Sections
159.330–
159.338.
         E.   Yard and height regulations. The maximum height and minimum yard
requirements shall be the same as the A-1 zoning district.
      (4)   Subarea D and E.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Agriculture.
            2.   Single-family dwelling.
            3.   Park.
            4.   Greenhouse and nursery provided there is no retail sale of
products conducted on the premises.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use permitted in
subsection (k)(4)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Sections
159.315–
159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Sections
159.330–
159.338.
         E.   Yard and height regulations. The maximum height and minimum yard
requirements shall be the same as the RR zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subareas D and E shall
be:
            1.   The residential density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for
Subarea D and two dwelling units for Subarea E.
            2.   The driveway approach serving Subarea E shall not directly
access 481st Ave.
            3.   No dwelling shall be located within the 100-year floodplain as
shown on the county's flood insurance rate map.
      (5)   Subarea F.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Convenience store with gas dispensing.
            2.   Restaurant with drive-thru.
            3.   Bank with drive-thru.
            4.   Office.
            5.   Personal services including barber shop, beauty salon, dry
cleaning, coin- operated laundry, photographic and art studio, and shoe repair.
            6.   Custom services including woodworking, hobby, and craftmaking.
            7.   Garden center, greenhouse, and nursery.
            8.   Group day care and day care center.
            9.   Veterinarian clinic provided there is not outside kenneling of
animals.
            10.   Retail sales and trade, wholesale, personal services,
communication facilities, and warehousing provided:
               a.   There is no storage of a regulated substance.
               b.   The building contains 10,000 square feet of area or less.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use permitted in
subsection (k)(5)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Sections
159.315–
159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Sections
159.330–
159.338, except as allowed by section 6) (h) and (i).
         E.   Yard and height regulations. The maximum height and minimum yard
requirements shall be the same as the C zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea F shall be:
            1.   All parking areas and driving lanes shall be hard surfaced.
            2.   Outdoor product display is prohibited.
            3.   Outdoor storage of parts, equipment, supplies, or similar
material is prohibited.
            4.   Outdoor trash dumpster areas shall be screened.
            5.   Off-premise signs are prohibited in all cases except for:
               Multi-Tenant Signs in Commercial Centers:
               a.   One multi-tenant sign shall be allowed within a commercial
center to act as a directory for the businesses located within the commercial
center.
                  i.    The sign area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
                  ii.    The maximum height shall be 30 feet.
                  iii.    No part of the sign face or structure shall be
located in or overlap into the required side or rear yard setbacks or public
right-of-way.
            6.   The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shielded,
shaded, or directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely affect
surrounding or facing premises or the safe vision of operators of vehicles on
public roads.
            7.   Access and landscaping plans shall be submitted as part of the
Final Development Plan.
      (6)   Subarea G.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Single-family dwellings.
            2.   Horse stable, private recreation facility.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use permitted in
subsection (k)(6)A. above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of Sections
159.315–
159.319.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of Sections
159.330–
159.338, except as allowed by section 6) (h) and (i).
         E.   Yard and height regulations. The maximum height and minimum yard
requirements shall be the same as the RR zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations for Subarea G shall be:
            1.   Accessory buildings shall not be issued a building permit
prior to approval as specified by the restrictive covenant of record.
            2.   The horse stable and private recreation facilities shall be
for the use of subarea residents only.
            3.   A berming plan shall be submitted as part of the Final
Development Plan for the south side of the three lots in the southeastern
portion of the subarea.
   (l)   (PD-12) Mapleton Golf Planned Development. The regulations set forth
herein or elsewhere are the district regulations in the Mapleton Golf Planned
Development District. (In Sections 23, 25, & 26 T102N-R49W):
      (1)   Subarea.
         A.   Uses permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be
used for the following purposes:
            1.   Golf Course.
            2.   Golf Clubhouse including restaurant, bar, golf shop and other
normal golf club related operational uses.
            3.   Overnight Lodging Accommodations, limited to a total of 24
bedroom units, for rent to golf club members and golf club sponsored guests.
            4.   Maintenance Facility.
            5.   Golf Cart Storage Facility.
            6.   Comfort station.
            7.   Agriculture production limited to crops and pasture.
         B.   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings permitted are those
accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to permitted uses in
subsection A. listed above.
         C.   Parking regulations. Parking shall be regulated in conformance
with the provisions of the C zoning district.
         D.   Sign regulations. Signs shall be regulated in conformance with
the provisions of the C zoning district.
         E.   Density, area, yard, and height regulations. The same
requirements shall apply as in the C zoning district.
         F.   Other regulations. Other regulations shall be:
            1.   Only one driveway access shall be allowed onto Slip Up Creek
Road.
            2.   The driveway access onto Slip Up Creek Road requires approval
from Minnehaha County Highway Department.
            3.   The hours of operation for the bar shall be between 7:00 a.m.
to and 1:00 a.m.
            4.   All outdoor lighting shall be of a full cutoff and fully
shielded design to prevent direct spillage of light beyond the property
boundaries.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 96-18, passed
10-23-2018; Ord. 18-19, passed 2-26-2019; Ord. 68-19, passed 6-25-2019;Ord. 71-
22, passed 6-28-2022; Ord. 51-23, passed 6-27-2023 )
WS WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 159.255 INTENT.
   (a)   This district is intended to preserve the quality and quantity of the
area’s water resources so as to ensure a safe and adequate supply of drinking
water for present and future generations. Restrictions shall apply to land use
activities which have the potential to contaminate water resources, including
aquifers and wellhead sites currently in use and those having the potential for
future use as a public water supply.
   (b)   The purpose of these regulations is to prohibit certain uses which
pose the greatest threat to groundwater contamination and to impose reasonable
and adequate safeguards on other uses which exhibit a potential to contaminate
the groundwater.
   (c)   The water source protection overlay district is an overlay whose
boundaries are superimposed on all districts established by this subchapter. It
is not intended that these regulations interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other rules or regulations of this subchapter, except that if the water source
protection overlay district imposes a greater restriction than the underlying
zoning district regulations, they shall control.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14A.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.256 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT.
   The boundaries of the water source protection overlay district are shown
upon the maps which have been made a part hereof by reference. The maps shall
be signed by the chairperson of the board of county commissioners and the mayor
and filed with the county auditor and city clerk. The maps shall have the same
force and effect as if they were all fully set forth herein.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14A.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.257 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use permit shall be required for any use which involves the
storage and/or use of a regulated substance as defined by this chapter. All
available practical methods of preventing and controlling the contamination of
groundwater from waste and other contaminants shall be employed.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14A.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.258 STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to uses in the water source protection
overlay district:
   (a)   Tanks used for the storage of a regulated substance shall be governed
as follows:
      (1)   A zoning permit shall be issued by the county planning department
prior to placement or installation of any tank described below;
      (2)   All metallic tanks installed underground must be of double-wall
construction and cathodically protected;
      (3)   All nonmetallic tanks installed underground must be of double-wall
construction;
      (4)   All underground tanks must be equipped with a continuous leak
detection system capable of immediately detecting a leak and giving audible and
visible alarms;
      (5)   All underground tanks and all aboveground stationary tanks must be
equipped with overfill protection devices. These devices must alert the
transfer operator that the tank is 90% full or automatically shut off flow to
the tank when the tank is no more than 95% full. All tanks must be equipped
with an impervious spill containment basin;
      (6)   All fluid handling piping shall be of double-walled construction
and shall include double-wall containment at the tank and to grade under any
dispensing device;
      (7)   Piping on pressure systems shall be equipped with leak detection
devices that will promptly notify the operator of a problem in the system in
one or more of the following manners:
         A.   Give an audible and visible warning through the tank alarm panel;
and
         B.   Completely stop the flow of the material to the dispenser.
      (8)   Secondary containment shall be provided around and under all
aboveground stationary tanks and consist of native soils, clays, bentonites or
artificially constructed material equivalent to 60 mil high density
polyethylene or greater. An impermeability of at least ten (-6) centimeter/
second is required to permit containment and detection of a release. Secondary
containment must be constructed and maintained to meet impermeability
requirements for the operational life of the tank(s). Secondary containment
must be capable of containing 110% of the volume of the largest tank;
      (9)   Storage of petroleum products in stationary aboveground tanks as
part of an agricultural activity shall be governed as follows:
         A.   A tank with a capacity of 55 gallons or less shall be exempt from
these standards; and
         B.   A tank with a capacity in excess of 55 gallons or a series of
tanks with a total capacity exceeding 100 gallons shall provide secondary
containment as set forth in division (a)(8) above.
      (10)   Propane tanks shall be exempt from these standards.
   (b)   Sewer lines must be of PVC material and the joints must be sealed.
   (c)   When pastured animals are confined for winter feeding and the number
exceeds 200 animal units, measures shall be employed to contain all wastes on-
site. Winter feeding of pastured animals shall not constitute a concentrated
animal feeding operation.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14A.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.259 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses shall not be allowed in the water source protection
overlay district:
   (a)   Sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer facility;
   (b)   Waste disposal except the spreading of solid and liquid animal waste;
   (c)   Sewage disposal pond except when in conjunction with a concentrated
animal feeding operation which is a nonconforming use. In this case, a
conditional use permit shall be required for the disposal pond;
   (d)   Disposal of radioactive waste;
   (e)   Disposal of snow containing de-icing chemicals;
   (f)   Concentrated animal feeding operation;
   (g)   Injection well (class V well);
   (h)   Petroleum products terminal;
   (i)   Junk or salvage yard;
   (j)   Manufacture of a regulated substance;
   (k)   Unenclosed storage of road salt; and
   (l)   Cemetery.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14A.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
RRC RED ROCK CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 159.270 INTENT.
   The Red Rock Corridor Overlay District is a new zoning district which adds
development standards and guidelines to the existing base zoning districts. The
purpose of this overlay district is to maximize the corridor’s potential
development and ensure compatibility with the existing and future land uses.
This district is intended to increase the quality of development by applying
design and development standards developed by county staff and the Red Rock
Corridor task force.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14B.01) (Ord. 86-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 159.271 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICT.
   The boundaries of the Red Rock Corridor Overlay District are shown upon the
maps which have been made a part hereof by reference. The maps shall be signed
by the chairperson of the board of county commissioners and mayor and filed
with the county register of deeds. The maps shall have the same force and
effect as if they were all fully set forth herein.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14B.02) (Ord. 86-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 159.272 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to any development or
redevelopment of property located within the Red Rock Corridor.
   (a)   Site plan approval required.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the site plan is to show all information
needed to enable the planning director and the board of adjustment to determine
if the proposed development meets the requirements of this RRC Overlay District
and 2002 Revised Joint Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Nonresidential/agricultural development; site plan approval
required.
         A.   All nonresidential/agricultural development located within the
Red Rock Corridor shall require site plan approval. Completed submittals that
meet the requirements of this section may be approved administratively by the
planning director. The planning director may waive minor requirements based on
site conditions for the given property.
         B.   1.   Submittals not able to meet the requirements of this section
shall be reviewed by the board of adjustment.
            2.   A written notice shall be sent to all adjacent property owners
no less than ten days prior to the board of adjustment’s consideration of a
site plan containing a modification or waiver of the requirements.
      (3)   Information required. The site plan shall include the following
information concerning the proposed development:
         A.   Names of all persons having an interest in the property, legal
description of property, point of compass, scale and date;
         B.   Applicant’s name, address, project location, proposed land use
and present zoning, location and names of adjoining subdivisions, the numbers
of the adjoining lots therein, and the names and addresses of adjoining
landowners;
         C.   If the applicant is other than the legal owner, the applicant’s
interest shall be stated; and
         D.   Name and address of persons who prepared the site plan.
      (4)   Required illustrations. The site plan shall clearly set forth the
following information concerning the proposed development:
         A.   Property boundary lines, dimensions and total area of the
proposed development;
         B.   The proposed use of building materials, location, size, height,
shape, use, elevation, building sign type and illustration of all buildings or
structures in the proposed development;
         C.   1.   Location of the proposed on-site wastewater system; and
            2.   All on-site wastewater systems shall be constructed and
operated in conformance with state regulations and with the Minnehaha County
on-site wastewater treatment ordinance. No dumping of any wastewater shall be
allowed at the site unless disposed into a properly sized and maintained
wastewater system.
         D.   The total square footage of building floor area, both
individually and collectively in the proposed development;
         E.   Existing buildings, rights-of-way, street improvements,
railroads, utility easements, drainage courses, streams and wooded areas;
         F.   Location, number, dimensions and design of off-street parking in
the proposed development, including:
            1.   Driveways, islands and planters;
            2.   Striping and curbs;
            3.   Loading facilities;
            4.   Type and location of lighting; and
            5.   Surface treatment.
         G.   Facilities for the collection and disposal of garbage and trash
and screening structures;
         H.   Walls, fences or other artificial screens to be used as buffers
shall be shown in elevation and prospective with proposed height and structural
material indicated;
         I.   Location and type of all plants, grass, trees or ground cover to
be used in the landscape. Landscaping to be used for screening purposes shall
be illustrated with the size of trees to be planted clearly indicated. The
planting location shall not adversely affect utility easements or service
lines. On all site plans, the following requirements shall be met:
            1.   Implementation. The landscaping plan shall be submitted for
approval as part of site plan submittal. The landscaping plan is to show the
following information in accordance with the requirements of division (a)(3)
above.
               a.   Location of trees;
               b.   Size and species of trees; and
               c.   Number of each size and species of trees.
            2.   Approval of landscaping. Landscaping is to be in place at the
start of operation. Should completion of landscaping be delayed because of the
season of year, extension of time may be granted by the planning director;
            3.   Maintenance. All landscaping, buffering and screening shall be
maintained at all times to conform to the regulations established in this
chapter. Landscaping which is not maintained in a manner consistent with this
chapter shall be replaced, as follows:
               a.   Replacement includes, but is not limited to, replacing
plants damaged by insects, soil conditions, disease, vehicular traffic,
vandalism and acts of nature; and
               b.   Replacement landscaping shall be installed following
notification by the planning director that a violation of this chapter has
occurred or proper guarantees provided.
   (b)   Exterior building materials; color. Exterior colors shall be low
reflectance, subtle and of earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity
fluorescent colors is prohibited.
   (c)   Signs.
      (1)   A.   On-premises signage within the Red Rock Corridor shall be
regulated in conformance with the provisions of §§
159.330 through
159.338, except for:
         B.   Only monument signs shall be allowed as freestanding signs when:
            1.   The sign area shall not exceed 200 square feet; and
            2.   The maximum height shall be ten feet.
      (2)   Off-premises signage is prohibited in all cases except for:
         A.   Multitenant signs in commercial centers.
            1.   One multitenant sign shall be allowed within a commercial
center to act as a directory for the businesses located within the commercial
center.
               a.   The sign area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
               b.   The maximum height shall be 30 feet.
               c.   No part of the sign face or structure shall be located in
or overlap into the required side or rear yard setbacks or public right-of-way.
               d.   The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shielded,
shaded or directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely affect
surrounding or facing premises or the safe vision of operators of vehicles on
public roads.
         B.   Directional sign. In conformance with the provisions of §
159.351.
         C.   Maintenance and removal. Every sign shall be maintained in good
structural and aesthetic condition at all times. Any abandoned, unsafe or
unsightly sign shall be removed or renovated within 60 days upon written
notice. If the owner fails to remove or renovate the sign within the required
time period, the county may remove the sign at the owner’s expense.
         D.   Permit fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit,
shall pay a fee. For any sign erected or placed without a permit, the fee shall
be double the established fee.
   (d)   Buffer requirements.
      (1)   A buffer or other form of visual screening shall be provided when
certain identified land uses or districts abut other identified land uses or
districts.
         A.   The uses or districts necessitating a buffer as defined in this
section are identified in Table 1. A buffer should be provided between any
nonresidential and residential use, except for when agricultural and
residential uses abut.
         B.   Any outdoor storage area and/or garbage storage.
      (2)   Where required, the buffer shall consist of the widths identified
in Table 1 and Table 2. Materials required in each buffer are identified in
Table 3.
      (3)   For each bufferyard, the required materials in Table 3 shall be
spaced evenly on center to the length of the required bufferyard.
 
Table 1: Bufferyards (width in feet)
              Neighboring Use
Developed Use Agricultural Residential Commercial Industrial
Agricultural
Commercial                 30          15         10
Industrial                 40          20         15
Residential
 
 
Table 2: Specific Use Bufferyards (width in feet)
              Neighboring Use
Developed Use Parks Schools
Agricultural
Commercial    30    30
Industrial    40    50
Residential
 
Table 3: Bufferyard Materials
Buffer Width Required Materials Per 100 Linear Feet*
Table 3: Bufferyard Materials
Buffer Width Required Materials Per 100 Linear Feet*
10 feet wide 4 trees
15 feet wide 5 trees
20 feet wide 6 trees
25 feet wide 7 trees
30 feet wide 8 trees
35 feet wide 9 trees
40 feet wide 10 trees
50 feet wide 12 trees
*   All commercial uses which are allowed within the industrial zoned areas
must meet the requirements set forth within the industrial zoning districts.
 
   (e)   Fencing.
      (1)   The location of the fence within the bufferyard shall be determined
between the applicant and the adjacent property owners.
      (2)   The “good side” of the fence shall always face the adjacent
properties.
      (3)   The fence shall be six feet in height, opaque and constructed of
treated wood, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), galvanized or vinyl-coated chain-link
fence with privacy slats of an earth tone color (90% opacity required). Posts
shall be anchored appropriately for material used and designed to support fence
height.
   (f)   Lighting. All lighting used for illumination outdoors shall be
arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining property and from
public streets through full cut-off fixture type and location (i.e., there
should be no light trespass).
   (g)   Parking.
      (1)   All parking within the Red Rock Corridor shall be regulated in
conformance with the provisions of §§
159.315 through
159.319.
      (2)   The planning director may require a buffer if vehicle headlights
from any vehicles entering, parking, standing or exiting would shine onto
residentially used property. If the site cannot be screened from residentially
used property, the hours of operation may be restricted to preclude operation
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or any portion thereof as
determined by the planning director.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14B.03) (Ord. 86-11, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 159.273 VARIANCE.
   Application for a variance may be made to the zoning board of adjustment as
outlined in §§
159.425 through
159.434.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 14B.04) (Ord. 86-11, passed 11-21-2011)
ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 159.285 FENCES.
   Regulations regarding fences shall be as follows.
   (a)   Fences up to four feet in height may be located on any part of the lot
except that such a fence may not be more than 30% solid if located within 30
feet of a street intersection, measuring along the property line.
   (b)   (1)   Fences up to six feet in height may be erected on those parts of
a lot that are as far back or farther back from the street than the main
building.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         A.   Fences up to six feet in height may be placed in the side-street-
side front yard where:
            1.   The side-street-side front yard abuts an arterial street shown
on the major street plan;
            2.   The side-street-side front yard is not adjacent to a side
yard;
            3.   The fence is located no closer to the front yard than the rear
wall of the main building; and
            4.   No driveways exit on to the arterial street.
         B.   In the C, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, fences not more than
eight feet in height may be located on any part of a lot other than the
required front yard except when the lot is adjacent to a residential district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.286 ADULT USES.
   (a)   In the development and execution of these regulations, it is
recognized that there are some uses which because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation
of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood.
These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or
regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in
any one area.
   (b)   None of the following permitted uses may be established, operated or
maintained within 1,320 feet of a residence, residential district, public
playground, child welfare agency, place of worship, private or public school
meeting all the requirements of the Compulsory Education Laws of the State of
South Dakota, or public recreation facility:
      (1)   Adult bookstore and/or video/DVD store;
      (2)   Adult theater;
      (3)   Adult photo studio;
      (4)   Any use which has as a part of its operation adult entertainment or
amusement including, but not limited to, a restaurant or eating place, bar,
lounge or tavern;
      (5)   Any use intended to provide adult amusement or entertainment; and
      (6)   Adult mini motion picture theater.
   (c)   Not more than two of the following permitted uses may be established,
operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of each other:
      (1)   Adult bookstore and/or video/DVD store;
      (2)   Adult theater;
      (3)   Adult photo studio;
      (4)   Any use which has as a part of its operation adult entertainment or
amusement including, but not limited to, a restaurant or eating place, bar,
lounge or tavern;
      (5)   Any use intended to provide adult amusement or entertainment;
      (6)   Bar;
      (7)   Liquor store; and
      (8)   Adult mini motion picture theater.
   (d)   The 1,000-foot restriction provided for in division (c) above may be
waived and a conditional use permit issued upon proper application if the
county and city find:
      (1)   The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or
injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of these
regulations will be observed;
      (2)   The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a
“skid row” area; and
      (3)   All applicable regulations will be observed.
   (e)   None of the uses listed in division (b) above may remain open at any
time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday
and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 104-08, passed
8-18-2008)
§ 159.287 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
   The regulations regarding wind energy conversion systems (hereafter referred
to as WECS) shall be as follows.
   (a)   Limited use. No WECS installed in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations shall generate power as a commercial enterprise as defined by
the public utility commission.
   (b)   Setback requirements.
      (1)   The minimum distance between the property line, overhead utility
lines or another wind turban, and any tower support base of a WECS shall be
equal to the proposed tower height (plus the radius of the rotor for the
horizontal access machines).
      (2)   Contiguous property owners and planned developments may construct a
WECS for their use in common. If property held by more than one single owner is
used to meet the setback requirements, a site plan establishing easements or
reserved areas must be submitted to the planning commissions for their
approval.
   (c)   Tower access. Climbing access to the WECS tower shall be limited
either by means of a fence six feet high around the tower base with a locking
portal, or by limiting tower climbing apparatus so there is access to it no
lower than 12 feet from the ground.
   (d)   Electromagnetic interference. If a WECS is installed in any location
along or within the major access of an existing microwave communications link,
the person desiring to install the WECS shall be required to provide a letter
from the business whose link they are within or adjacent to stating that the
business whose link is affected would have no objection to the installation of
the WECS.
   (e)   Air space. A WECS shall be located or installed in compliance with the
guidelines of the Federal Aviation Administration Regulations with regard to
airport approach zones and clearance around VOR stations.
   (f)   Interconnect. The WECS, if interconnected to an electric utility
distribution system, shall meet the interconnect requirements of the electric
utility company.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.288 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   The regulations regarding home occupations shall be as follows.
   (a)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling.
   (b)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
   (c)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be
employed by or participate in the home occupation.
   (d)   The entrance to the space devoted to the occupation must be from
within the building.
   (e)   There shall be no display of products visible in any manner when
viewed from outside the dwelling.
   (f)   No advertising or display signs shall be permitted other than a
nameplate attached to the dwelling. The nameplate shall not be illuminated and
shall not be more than two square feet in area. No off- premises signs shall be
used.
   (g)   The occupations shall not required substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
   (h)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
   (i)   The occupation shall not generate more than four visits per day from
clients, customers and delivery vehicles. Delivery vehicles shall be limited to
auto, pickup or service truck.
   (j)   The occupation shall not result in additional off-street parking
spaces for clients or customers.
   (k)   Toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive or
other restricted materials are prohibited.
   (l)   No equipment or process shall be used in the occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the normal senses off the
property.
   (m)   No equipment or process shall be used in the occupation which creates
visual or audible electrical interference in any radio or television receiver
or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the property.
   (n)   A zoning permit shall be secured for all home occupations in
conformance with the procedure outlined in §§
159.465 through
159.474.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.289 MINERAL EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT.
   The regulations regarding mineral exploration and development shall be as
follows:
   (a)   Exploration for minerals may be approved by conditional use permit
only as long as the following minimum requirements are met:
      (1)   The applicant shall provide:
         A.   A description of the mineral or minerals which are the subject of
the exploration;
         B.   Maps showing the general area within which the exploration
operation will be conducted;
         C.   A detailed description of the regional environmental conditions,
to include surface land use and vegetation, as well as a detailed description
of the area’s geologic formations and hydrology from the best available
scientific sources;
         D.   Maps indicating the location of the drill sites to the nearest
section of land, a technical description of the exploration process, the types
of equipment to be used, and the estimated time table for each phase of work
and for final completion of the program;
         E.   A description of the major environmental impacts upon air
quality, water quality and quantity, and land use modification presented by the
proposed exploration;
         F.   A description of the proposed plan to address the identified
environmental impacts to include all measures to be taken to prevent soil
erosion, water contamination, air contamination, disruption of the areas
ecological balance, and any other related hazard to public health and safety;
         G.   A plan for reclamation of the land to its original condition
after exploration is completed. Measures to be taken for surface reclamation
shall take into account the impact on adjacent land uses and natural resources
and the proposed future use of the lands explored and adjacent lands. The
reclamation plans include:
            1.   Reclamation schedule;
            2.   Methods of plugging drill holes;
            3.   Methods of severing and returning topsoil and subsoil;
            4.   Methods of grading, backfilling and contouring of exploration
sites and access roads;
            5.   Methods of waste management and disposal, including liquid and
solid wastes; and
            6.   Methods of revegetation.
         H.   A surety performance bond in an amount to be determined by the
city council and board of county commissioners to assure that sufficient funds
will be available to carry out required reclamation and, if necessary,
decontamination of the affected ground and surface waters. The amount shall be
set by the city council and board of county commissioners based on an estimate
of the cost of reclamation and decontamination. The bond shall be released five
years after exploration has ceased unless the governing bodies find for good
cause shown, that the water quality of the affected area has not been restored
or the reclamation plan has not been completed. The amount of the surety bond
may be reduced by the governing bodies, if a bond is held by the state for the
same purpose, by the same amount of the latter bond.
      (2)   The applicant shall identify specific phases when monitoring and
inspection of the exploration activities shall be conducted by city, county,
state, federal or independent personnel to assure compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. If a conditional use permit is granted, the
permit shall identify the inspection agency and it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to notify the agency when monitoring or inspection is
required. The applicant shall bear the burden of the cost of the monitoring and
inspection program as determined by the governing bodies; and
      (3)   A conditional use permit shall be issued only after all of the
conditions specified herein have been met. Evidence of violation of the
regulations, including, but not limited to, air and water contamination, shall
be cause for an immediate cessation of exploration activities.
   (b)   Mineral extraction and/or mining may be approved by conditional use
permit only as long as the following minimum requirements are met:
      (1)   The applicant shall provide:
         A.   A description of the mineral or minerals to be mined or milled;
         B.   Maps showing the area within which the mining or milling
operations will be conducted;
         C.   A description of the surface land use and vegetation, as well as
a description of the nature and depth of the top soil and subsoil;
         D.   An environmental assessment which establishes base line
conditions for radioactive intoxicant materials and air, ground and surface
waters, soils, vegetation and animals;
         E.   A description of the overburden, mineral seams and other geologic
formations, their conductivities and hydraulic gradients, known to exist above
the deepest projected depth of the mining operation;
         F.   A description of the hydrology to the deepest projected depth of
the mining operation, including mapping of the depth, water table level, extent
and flow characteristics of groundwater and aquifers for the hydrologic regime
of the groundwater and drainage basins affected by the mining or milling
operation;
         G.   A technical description of the mining or milling, types of
equipment to be used, detailed site plan of all anticipated construction, an
estimated timetable for each phase of work and for final completion of the
program, a statement of source, quality and quantity of water to be used in the
mining or milling operations, as well as the chemical and radioactive
characteristics of all mined or milled products, waste products and emissions
to the environment;
         H.   A description of the major environmental impacts upon air
quality, water quality and quantity and land use modification presented by the
mining or milling operations;
         I.   A description of the proposed plan to address the identified
environmental impacts to include:
            1.   Methods of separating the topsoil, subsoil and soil piles,
protecting them from erosion before reclamation begins, and keeping the topsoil
free from acid or toxic materials;
            2.   Plan for ensuring that acid forming or toxic materials
constituting a hazard uncovered or created during mining or milling are
promptly treated in a manner to prevent water and air contamination;
            3.   Measures to maintain the quantity and quality of ground and
surface water, hydrologic balance, productivity of farmland, and soil and water
recharge capacity; and
            4.   Procedures to prevent water and air contamination through
radioactive or toxic seepage of runoff from tailings, ponds, mine wastes, mine
dewatering discharge or other mining and milling related operations.
         J.   A plan for the reclamation of the land after mining is completed.
Measures to be taken for surface reclamation shall take into account the impact
on adjacent land uses and natural resources, and the proposed future use of the
lands mined and adjacent lands, and shall include:
            1.   A reclamation schedule;
            2.   Methods of grading, backfilling and contouring of disturbed
areas and access roads;
            3.   Methods of waste management and disposal, including liquid and
solid wastes; and
            4.   Methods of revegetation.
         K.   A surety performance bond in an amount to be determined by the
city council and board of county commissioners to assure that sufficient funds
will be available to carry out required reclamation and, if necessary,
decontamination of affected ground and surface waters. The amount shall be set
by the city council and board of county commissioners based on an estimate of
the cost of reclamation and decontamination. The bond shall be released five
years after mining and milling has ceased unless the governing bodies find, for
good cause shown, that the water quality of the affected area has not been
restored or the reclamation plan has not been completed. The amount of the bond
may be reduced by the commissioners if a bond is held by the State of South
Dakota for the same purpose, by the same amount of the latter bond.
      (2)   The applicant shall identify specific phases when monitoring and
inspection of the mining and milling process shall be conducted by city,
county, state, federal or independent personnel to assure compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. If the conditional use permit is granted, the
permit shall identify the inspection agency and it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to notify the agency when monitoring or inspection is
required. The applicant shall bear the burden of the cost of the monitoring and
inspection program as determined by the governing bodies.
      (3)   A conditional use permit shall be issued only after all conditions
specified therein have been met. Evidence of violation of the regulations,
including but not limited to air and water contamination, shall be cause for an
immediate cessation of the mining and milling.
   (c)   Solution mining and/or in situ mining of an ore body with the
circulation of chemicals through injection and recovery wells for minerals is
prohibited.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.290 MOBILE HOMES/ MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   Regulations regarding mobile homes and manufactured homes shall be as
follows.
   (a)   A park intended for the placement of mobile homes and manufactured
homes on rented lots and where the roads are not publicly dedicated shall meet
the following minimum standards:
      (1)   A plan shall be prepared showing the layout of the park, including
lot lines and road system. Upon approval of the conditional use permit for the
park, the plan shall be filed in the county planning department and govern all
future development;
      (2)   Each lot shall have a minimum size required for the zoning district
in which the park is located. However, a smaller lot size may be approved as
part of the conditional use permit;
      (3)   No dwelling or any structure, addition or appurtenance thereto
shall be located less than the minimum setback required by the district in
which the park is located. The setback requirements may be changed as part of
the approval of the conditional use permit;
      (4)   Each lot shall abut or face a clear unoccupied space, roadway or
street having a width of at least 34 feet where parking is permitted on both
sides, 27 feet in width where parking is restricted to one side only and 24
feet wide where parking is prohibited, or be connected to the street or roadway
by a private driveway not less then 12 feet in width, serving no more than four
lots. A hard surfaced material shall be used on all roadways except in the RR
district, in which case gravel may be used; and
      (5)   The park shall be a minimum of ten acres in size.
   (b)   A subdivision for manufactured homes shall be required to meet the
subdivision regulations and the density, area and yard requirements for the
district in which it is located. The subdivision shall be a minimum of ten
acres in size.
   (c)   A conditional use application for a manufactured home, when located
outside a park or subdivision, will be judged on the compatibility of the
structure compared to neighboring dwelling units, including, but not limited
to, width; length; area; number of stories; siding and roofing materials; roof
style and pitch; and condition. In no instance shall the minimum width of the
structure, exclusive of overhangs, be less than 22 feet.
   (d)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes existing prior to the effective
date of adoption of these regulations may be replaced with another structure by
making application for a conditional use permit. The compatibility of the
replacement dwelling with neighboring dwellings shall be considered in
reviewing the conditional use request.
   (e)   A mobile home or manufactured home may be located on land owned by the
residents during the construction of a dwelling thereon, and must be removed
upon completion of the dwelling or after one year, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   All mobile homes and manufactured homes as defined in §
159.486 must be located in conformance with these requirements.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.291 ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES.
   The regulations regarding accessory buildings and uses shall be as follows.
   (a)   Limited use. Accessory buildings and uses are buildings and uses
customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the district in which it
is located. In the A-1, RC, RR, RS, RD and RA districts, accessory buildings
and uses are limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building;
      (2)   A private residential structure used only for the storage of
noncommercial vehicles and other related material;
      (3)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbeque oven, fireplace and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses;
      (4)   Home occupation in conformance with §
159.288; and
      (5)   Temporary storage and distribution of seed and similar type
products provided the use is located within a farmstead, the product is stored
within a completely enclosed building typical of farm buildings and the use is
limited to the seasonal sale of products from the premises.
   (b)   Time of construction. No accessory buildings shall be constructed upon
a lot until the construction of a main building has been actually commenced,
and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main building on the lot is
also being used.
   (c)   Setback requirements.
      (1)   Accessory buildings which are attached to or located within 10' of
the main building shall be considered a part of the main building and shall
comply with the same yard requirements as the main building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings not a part of the main building, when located
in the required rear yard, shall be no closer than 3' to the side and rear
property lines.
   (d)   Location of accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall not occupy
more than 30% of the rear yard, subject further to the following limitations:
      (1)   In the A-1 and RC districts, the total area of accessory buildings
shall be limited based on the size of the parcel as depicted in Table 1. Total
Permissible Area of Accessory Buildings when the buildings are located in a
subdivision of more than four lots unless a conditional use permit has been
approved;
      (2)   In all residential districts, the total area of accessory buildings
shall be limited based on the size of the parcel as depicted in Table 1. Total
Permissible Area of Accessory Buildings unless a conditional use permit has
been approved; and
      (3)   In a planned development district, the total area of accessory
buildings shall be limited based on the size of the parcel as depicted in Table
1. Total Permissible Area of Accessory Buildings unless a minor amendment has
been approved.
 
Table 1
Total Permissible Area of Accessory Buildings
Size of Parcel    Total Permissible Area
                  of Accessory Building Footprint
1.0 acres or less 1,600 Square Feet
1.1 to 3.0 acres  2,400 Square Feet
3.1 acres or more 3,600 Square Feet
 
   (e)   Intermodal shipping/storage containers. An intermodal shipping/storage
container larger than 120 square feet in size and placed on a parcel for longer
than 90 days or used as a building component is a permanent accessory building
allowed in the following manner:
      (1)   General requirements for permanent freestanding intermodal
shipping/storage containers.
         A.   All other accessory building rules and setback requirements must
be met.
         B.   An engineered design for a foundation and anchorage system of the
wall to the foundation must be provided when a permanent intermodal shipping/
storage container meets or exceeds any of the following criteria:
            1.   Exceeds 320 square feet in floor area; or
            2.   Exceeds ten feet in height; or
            3.   Is used for any purpose other than as a private storage
building; or
            4.   Is accessed by the public; or
            5.   Must meet conditions attached to approval of any conditional
use permit.
         C.   Any exposed portion of an intermodal shipping/storage container
must be painted or covered to prevent corrosion and to cover any words visible
from the outside.
         D.   No permanent freestanding intermodal shipping/storage container
may be placed on a parcel without a principal building.
         E.   Any intermodal shipping/storage container placed before the
effective date of this section must comply with the provision of this section
if the intermodal shipping/storage container is to remain longer than 90 days.
      (2)   General requirements for intermodal shipping/storage containers
used as building components.
         A.   An engineer must evaluate the plans for compliance with minimum
site-specific wind, snow, flood, and seismic load requirements any time one or
more shipping containers are used as components of a structure.
         B.   Structure must comply with any zoning and setback requirements
for the zoning district.
         C.   Any exposed portion of an intermodal shipping/storage container
must be painted or covered to prevent corrosion and to cover any words visible
from the outside.
      (3)   In A-1 Agricultural and RC Recreation/Conservation Zoning
Districts.
         A.   Parcels three acres or less in size are limited to no more than
one intermodal shipping/storage container to be permitted on a parcel unless a
conditional use permit is obtained to allow additional intermodal shipping/
storage containers or to utilize one or more intermodal shipping/storage
containers as components of a structure.
         B.   Structures must comply with any zoning and setback requirements
for the zoning district.
      (4)   In all residential zoning districts, no more than one intermodal
shipping/storage container shall be permitted on a parcel unless a conditional
use permit is obtained to allow additional freestanding intermodal shipping/
storage containers or to utilize one or more intermodal shipping/storage
containers as components of a structure.
      (5)   In all industrial and commercial zoning districts, permanent
freestanding intermodal shipping/storage containers must be placed behind the
principal building or behind a six-foot-tall opaque privacy fence, unless the
intermodal shipping/storage container is used in whole or as a component of the
principal building.
      (6)   A freestanding intermodal shipping/storage container may be placed
temporarily in any zoning district for longer than 90 days while an active
building permit is issued for the property.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 4-18, passed
1-23-2018; Ord. 24-24, passed 3-26-2024)
§ 159.292 SALVAGE OPERATION OR JUNKYARD.
   A business may be operated within a permanent building which complies with
the adopted building code, or in a yard enclosed by a solid fence, which must
totally screen the salvage material from view from outside the property. The
fence must extend from grade level to a height equaling the maximum height to
which fences may be built under §
159.285 for the district where the property is located.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 76-09, passed
8-17-2009)
§ 159.293 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY.
   (a)   There shall be no obstructions, such as buildings, structures, grain
bins, baled agricultural products, farm machinery, vehicles or other objects,
not including vegetation, within 50 feet from a state, county or section line
highway right-of-way or 30 feet from a platted right-of-way.
   (b)   Traffic visibility triangle requirements.
      (1)   At every intersection of two roads or a road and a railroad right-
of-way, there shall be a traffic visibility triangle. Within the triangle, no
obstructions such as structures, parking or vegetation shall be allowed between
two and one-half feet and ten feet above the elevation of the roadway.
Agricultural crops, such as corn, are exempt from this regulation. Fences shall
conform to §
159.285.
      (2)   The traffic visibility triangles shall be formed by the
intersection centerlines and a line connecting points on the centerlines of the
intersection roads or railroad right-of-way 100 feet distant from the
intersecting centerlines.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.10) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 126-07, passed
7-16-2007)
§ 159.294 ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Number of main buildings on tract. No more than one main building
shall be located on a tract or lot when used for residential purposes. When a
tract or lot is used for commercial purposes, more than one main building may
be located on the tract or lot provided the buildings conform to all yard
requirements around the lot for the district in which the tract or lot is
located.
   (b)   Adjustments to front yard requirements. Where, on the effective date
of these regulations, 40% or more of a frontage was occupied by two or more
buildings, then the front yard is established in the following manner:
      (1)   Where the building furthermost from the street provides a front
yard not more than ten feet deeper than the building closest to the street,
then the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then
existing front yards;
      (2)   Where this division (b)(1) above is not the case and a lot is
within 100 feet of a building on each side, then the front yard is a line drawn
from the closest front corners of these two adjacent buildings; and
      (3)   Where neither division (b)(1) nor (b)(2) is the case, and the lot
is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, then the front
yard is the same as that of the existing adjacent building.
   (c)   Adjustment to side yard requirements. Buildings with side yard
setbacks less than required by this chapter, may have additions erected in line
with the existing building and provided further that the addition will be
erected no closer to the lot line then the existing building.
   (d)   Projections from buildings. Every part of any required yard shall be
open to the sky and unobstructed except:
      (1)   Eaves may project into a front or rear yard 36 inches, exclusive of
gutters;
      (2)   Eaves may project into a side yard 24 inches, exclusive of gutters;
      (3)   Ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical
solar screen and ornamental features which may project 12 inches;
      (4)   Air conditioners, not to exceed five-ton unit or parts thereof, may
project into a required side yard, provided that the projections shall be
distant at least three feet from the adjacent lot line and shall not extend
more than three feet from the building. The air conditioners may project into a
required front yard, but shall not extend more than three feet from the
building, and the air conditioner may extend into one side of a corner lot; and
      (5)   Solar collectors which are a part of the main building may extend
into a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet.
   (e)   Porches and terraces in front yards. An open, unenclosed porch may
project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet.
Balconies and paved terraces may project into a required front yard for a
distance not exceeding six feet. An enclosed vestibule containing not more than
40 square feet may project into a required front yard for a distance not to
exceed four feet.
   (f)   Projection of terraces, porches, platforms and ornamental features.
Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not
extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story
may project into a required side or rear yard, provided these projections be
distanced at least three feet from the adjacent side lot line.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.11) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.295 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Exceptions. The height regulations established in these regulations shall
not be applied to:
   (a)   Flag poles, domestic television antennas, church spires, chimneys or
water towers, except when the structures shall be located in the airport
approach zones;
   (b)   Mechanical appurtenances and elevator penthouses which are located on
top of a building shall not exceed 12 feet in height above the maximum
permitted in the district in which they are located;
   (c)   The maximum height for telecommunications towers and wireless
communications facilities shall not exceed 100 feet for single users or 200
feet for two or more users. When the structure is located in an airport
approach zone, Federal Aviation Administration approval will be required prior
to permit issuance; and
   (d)   Broadcast towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.12) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.296 AIRPORT APPROACH ZONES.
   (a)   Approach zone.
      (1)   Within the air space above the approach zone to each end of a
runway designed to be used for instrument landings, no building, structure or
growth shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a plane with a
slope of one (vertical) to 50 (horizontal) projected from a point 200 feet
beyond the end of a runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, the plane to be in
the shape of symmetrical trapezoid 1,000 feet in width at its lowest point and
4,000 feet in width at its highest point; combined with a second plane with a
slope of one (vertical) to 40 (horizontal) extending from the upper edge of the
first plane for an additional distance of 40,000 feet, the plane to be in the
shape of a symmetrical trapezoid 4,000 feet in width at its lowest point and
16,000 feet in width at its highest point.
      (2)   Within the air space above the approach zone to each end of a
runway not designed to be used for instrument landings, no building or
structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with a slope of
one (vertical) to 40 (horizontal) projected from a point 200 feet beyond the
end of the runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, the plane to be a symmetrical
trapezoid (*) feet wide at its lowest point and (*) feet wide at its highest
point.
   (b)   Transition zones. Within the established transition zones adjacent to
each instrument and non-instrument runway and approach zone, no building,
structure or growth shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a
plane with a slope of one (vertical) to seven (horizontal). Transition zones
extend outward and upward from a line (*) feet on either side of the centerline
of non-instrument runways for the length of the runway plus 200 feet on each
end; to a height 150 feet above the elevation of the airport reference point.
In addition, transition zones are established adjacent to both instrument and
non-instrument approach zones which flare outward and upward symmetrically
along the entire length of each approach zone to where they intercept to the
surfaces of the horizontal and conical zones.
   (c)   Conical zone.
      (1)   Within (*) feet from the established airport reference point, no
building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a horizontal
plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation. This horizontal zone
does not include the approach or transition zones.
      (2)   Within the conical zone, which commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and extends outward there from a distance of (*) feet, no
building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with
a slope of one (vertical) to 20 (horizontal).
      (3)   Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to
a height up to 20 feet above the surface of the land.
*   The applicable distance in feet must be based on runway length as set forth
in § 77.27 of Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.13) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.297 ROCK, SAND AND GRAVEL EXTRACTION.
   (a)   Intent.
      (1)   This section addresses the application, review and regulation of
extraction and on-site processing of rock, sand and gravel. An applicant must
meet certain requirements as specified in division (c) below when filing for a
conditional use permit in addition to the general requirements contained in
other sections of the zoning regulations.
      (2)   The developmental and operational criteria contained in division
(f) below are intended to assist in the formulation of conditions to be imposed
on individual extraction operations. The criteria have been designed to
eliminate potential health risks and minimize the adverse impact on other land
uses due to extraction operations.
      (3)   The county and city will have the discretion of requiring more or
less stringent conditions based upon the location of a proposed operation. It
is also recognized that the operations will not be appropriate throughout all
areas of the joint zoning jurisdiction.
   (b)   Submission of application. The application for rock, sand or gravel
extraction shall be filed with the office of planning and zoning on the
prescribed conditional use form at least 30 days in advance of a regularly
scheduled joint meeting of the planning commissions.
   (c)   Application. The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
the following:
      (1)   Maps showing the area within which the extraction operations will
be conducted, including areas to be disturbed, setbacks from property lines and
the location of all structures, equipment and access and haul roads;
      (2)   A description of the surface land use and vegetation, including all
pertinent physical characteristics;
      (3)   A hydrologic study which shall include all available information
from the State Geological Survey and other information pertinent to the
application. If the applicant believes a study is not warranted, documentation
shall accompany the application in support of this position;
      (4)   A reclamation plan which takes into consideration the criteria
listed in division (f) below, reclamation; and
      (5)   The applicant shall meet with the township supervisors of the
affected township to discuss repair and maintenance responsibilities on
township roads to be used as haul routes. A summary of the meeting(s) shall be
presented with the application.
   (d)   Fee. If a conditional use permit is granted, the operator shall pay to
the county an annual fee of $10 per acre of land which is being disturbed by
the extraction activities and has not been reclaimed. The fee shall be used to
defray the direct and indirect costs associated with general administration and
enforcement of this section. The fee shall be payable by January 20 of each
year and deposited in the general fund of the county. The disturbed land area
existing on January 1 of each year shall be used in calculating the fee.
   (e)   Notification requirements. In addition to the notification
requirements of §§
159.390 through
159.399, the planning director shall notify by United States mail all property
owners of record within one mile of the proposed conditional use area or the
owners of the 30 properties nearest to the affected property, whichever affects
the least number of owners, of the time, date, place and purpose of the public
hearing. The notice shall be mailed not less than 15 days prior to the public
hearing.
   (f)   Developmental and operational criteria. The following criteria shall
be considered in developing conditions for applications involving rock, sand
and gravel extractions. More stringent requirements may be imposed by the
county and city or the applicant may present arguments to relax the
requirements based on specific characteristics of the site.
      (1)   Buffer area. A minimum distance of 1,000 feet should be maintained
between an existing residence and a rock, sand or gravel operation, except in
those instances when the operator secures a waiver from the affected landowner.
      (2)   Hours of operation.
         A.   Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 12:00 noon. Operations should not be conducted on legal holidays.
Activities such as office or maintenance operations which produce no noise off-
site should not be restricted by the hours of operation.
         B.   Blasting should be scheduled on weekdays at 12:00 noon. There
should be no blasting on legal holidays. Area residents should be notified of
the date and time of each blast.
      (3)   Visual considerations.
         A.   Earth berms and vegetation should be employed to minimize visual
impacts and reduce the effects of noise.
         B.   The need for and placement of berms should be determined by the
orientation and position of the excavation site with respect to residences and
roadways. Berms should be located in such a way as to restrict the public’s
view of the property. Consideration should be given to placing the berms as
close to the public point of view as practical. Generally, berms should be six
feet in height and seeded immediately after construction to avoid soil erosion.
Berms should be maintained and kept reasonably free of weeds.
         C.   The operator should work with the county conservation district
and county planning director to develop a planting program. Consideration
should be given to planting one or more of the following: evergreen, Russian
olive, ash, caragana, crab apple, lilac and buffalo berry. The plants should be
properly cared for to ensure the highest survival rate and all dead plants
replaced during the current planting season. As a minimum, the program should
include trees of varying maturity. The planting program should be reduced to
writing and kept on file in the county planning department.
         D.   At a minimum, berms should be constructed prior to blasting or
the extraction of rock, sand or gravel.
      (4)   Blasting. Ground vibration and over pressure (air blast) should be
monitored for each blast and not exceed guidelines established by the U.S.
Bureau of Mines.
      (5)   Noise.
         A.   The noise level produced from rock, sand and gravel operations
should not exceed an average of 55 decibels recorded over a ten-minute period
measured at the nearest existing residence to the extraction operation.
         B.   Off-site activities which contribute to background noise levels
should be taken into consideration when monitoring an operation. Blasting
should not be recorded as part of the noise level.
      (6)   Air quality.
         A.   Air quality monitoring should be conducted at the operator’s
expense when conditions warrant.
         B.   Ambient air quality: total suspended particulate matter–150
micrograms per cubic meter of air as a 24-hour average not to be exceeded more
than once per year, and 60 micrograms per cubic meter of air as an arithmetic
mean; PM10 (ten micrometers or less in size) consistent with the regulations of
the state.
         C.   Employ techniques that minimize the release of particulate matter
created by material stockpiles, vehicular movement and process operations.
         D.   Dust control agents should be applied to township gravel roads
designated as haul routes and all driving surfaces within the extraction area.
      (7)   Hydrology, dewatering and drainage.
         A.   Existing wells should be monitored at the operator’s expense to
document changes in hydrologic conditions around extraction sites.
         B.   Dewatering of the extraction site should not result in downstream
flooding.
         C.   Berms should not interrupt the natural drainage of the area,
unless the diversion is part of an approved drainage control system.
      (8)   Haul roads.
         A.   In order to minimize the negative impact of truck traffic on area
residents, extraction operations should be located on or near existing hard
surfaced roads. Consideration should be given to the number of residents
located along gravel surfaced roads intended for use as haul roads.
         B.   Identify repair and maintenance responsibilities through a haul
road agreement.
         C.   Consider the potential impact on county highways to be used as
haul routes.
      (9)   Operator surety.
         A.   A surety performance bond may be required in an amount to be
determined by the planning commissions to assure that sufficient funds will be
available to protect the county and city in the event the operator abandons a
site without completing the conditions imposed by the conditional use permit,
including reclamation, fulfillment of the agreement with the township
concerning repair of designated haul roads and, if necessary, decontamination
of affected ground and surface waters.
         B.   In lieu of the required surety, the operator may deposit cash
with the county in the amount equal to the required surety.
      (10)   Reclamation.
         A.   The type and extent of reclamation should be based on the type of
material extracted on the intended post-mining land use, but in all cases the
reclamation procedures should result in the rehabilitation of affected land
through contouring and soil stabilization, revegetation and other appropriate
means so as to create the least amount of unsightliness and most appropriate
future use of the reclaimed area. Bodies of water may be incorporated into an
acceptable reclamation plan.
         B.   Provide maps, including cross sections, showing the existing
natural topography and anticipated topographic conditions upon completion of
reclamation.
         C.   Grading should achieve a contour that is most beneficial to the
proposed future land use. All berms should be removed where sand and gravel
operations were conducted. In most cases involving quarry operations, the berms
should remain in place unless their removal would serve a more useful purpose.
         D.   Topsoil should remain on-site and be used during reclamation.
         E.   A seeding and revegetation plan should be developed for the
affected area in consultation with the county conservation district.
         F.   All required reclamation activities should be completed and a
compliance inspection performed by the county planning director prior to the
release of the surety.
      (11)   Additional considerations.
         A.   The maximum height of a bench in a quarry should be 30 feet.
         B.   The property should be secured during nonworking hours by means
of gates and fencing. The property should continue to be secured until all
required reclamation activities have been completed.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.14) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003)
§ 159.298 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES AND WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (a)   Intent. Regulations regarding development of telecommunications
towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities are
intended to encourage the development of a competitive wireless communications
marketplace while protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public and
maintaining the aesthetic integrity of the community. The regulations cover the
placement, construction and modification of telecommunications towers, antenna
support structures and wireless communications facilities. The specific intent
of this section is:
      (1)   To regulate the location of telecommunications towers, antenna
support structures and wireless communications facilities;
      (2)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impact of telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities;
      (3)   To minimize adverse visual impact of telecommunications towers,
antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities through
careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques;
      (4)   To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of
telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities;
      (5)   To avoid potential damage to property caused by telecommunications
towers, antenna support structure and wireless communications facilities by
ensuring that the structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or when determined to be
structurally unsound;
      (6)   To ensure that telecommunications towers, antenna support
structures and wireless communications facilities are compatible with
surrounding land uses;
      (7)   To facilitate the provision of wireless communications services to
residents and businesses in an orderly fashion; and
      (8)   To promote the location of telecommunications towers in
nonresidential areas.
   (b)   Application required. The following item must be satisfactorily
addressed in a formal application to obtain a building permit at any given
location in any zoning district: compliance with all applicable building codes,
Federal Aviation Administration Regulations and §
159.296.
   (c)   Location/setbacks.
      (1)   Where a telecommunications tower is located within 300 feet of any
residential zoning district, existing residential use except a farmstead, or
future residential area designated on the adopted land use plan, the minimum
distance from the telecommunications tower base to the nearest existing
residential structure or building setback line is not less than the proposed
height of the tower.
      (2)   Where a telecommunications tower is required to meet Federal
Aviation Administration paint and/or lighting regulations, the distance between
the telecommunications tower and any residential zoning district or use, or any
recreation/conservation district, shall not be less than one-half mile.
   (d)   Design character.
      (1)   Telecommunications towers and antenna support structure design
shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that create
compatibility with the natural setting and surrounding structures.
      (2)   Telecommunications towers shall be protected from corrosion or
rusting, and if painted, be a neutral color, unless otherwise required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
   (e)   Stealth. Telecommunications towers in any nonresidential district
where located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district or existing
residential use except a farmstead shall be monopole design.
   (f)   Interference with public safety radio services. In order to ensure
that public safety radio services will be free from harmful or destructive
interference, any applicant requesting a permit to site a telecommunications
tower, antenna support structure or wireless communications facility shall
provide documented Federal Communications Commission approval prior to permit
issuance.
   (g)   Illumination. Telecommunications towers shall not be artificially
lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (h)   Maintenance.
      (1)   All telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and
wireless communications facilities shall be maintained in good condition, order
and repair so that they shall not endanger the life or property of any person.
      (2)   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless
communications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association Standard EIA/
TIA 222 (latest revision), all applicable laws, and so as not to interfere with
the use of other property. Upon the county planning director’s determination
that a tower structure is a hazard to public safety, the owner shall be
required to perform an inspection by a registered professional engineer and
make all recommended corrections.
      (3)   All maintenance or construction on telecommunications towers,
antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities shall be
performed by persons employed by, or under contract to the owner.
      (4)   If an owner discontinues use of a telecommunications tower, or if
an owner files notice with the Federal Communications Commission of its intent
to cease operating the tower, the owner shall give written notice to the county
planning director of the date of the discontinuance.
   (i)   Abandonment.
      (1)   If the county receives notice of discontinuance, or if any
telecommunications tower is not used for 365 consecutive days, the owner may be
notified that a determination of abandonment has been made. If, within 30 days
of receipt of notice, the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or
under repair during the period, the county planning director may determine that
the site has been abandoned.
      (2)   Within 75 days of notice of the determination of abandonment, the
owner shall remove the tower from the site. If an owner fails to do so, the
county may remove the tower and recover the cost from the owner.
   (j)   When conditional use permit required for approval of telecommunication
towers and antenna support structures. Where a conditional use permit is
required for approval of telecommunication towers and antenna support
structures, the following will be considered.
      (1)   Design character.
         A.   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and
equipment buildings shall be compatible with the architectural style of the
surrounding built environment, considering exterior materials, roof form,
scale, mass, color, texture and character. Equipment buildings may be located
underground where feasible. To prevent undue concentration of
telecommunications towers, consideration should be given to co-location as a
first alternative.
         B.   Wireless communications facilities on new telecommunications
tower structures, antenna support structures or co-located on existing
telecommunications towers shall minimize visual impact.
      (2)   Screening.
         A.   A telecommunications tower site and tower base adjacent to
residential property, except when located in a farmstead, shall be provided
with a fence, wall, berm or shrubbery of sufficient height and of a character
necessary to provide adequate visual screening. Where the adjacent property is
across public right-of-way from a telecommunications tower site, screening
shall be provided in all cases except when the right-of-way is an arterial
street.
         B.   Existing vegetation and grades on the site shall be preserved as
much as possible. Natural growth around the property perimeter on large, wooded
lots may be considered a sufficient buffer to telecommunications towers. In
locations where the visual impact of the telecommunications tower would be
minimal, the screening requirement may be reduced or waived.
      (3)   Fencing. Adjacent to a residentially used or zoned property,
natural materials shall be used for fence screening. If chain-link fencing is
needed for safety and security, additional landscape screening shall be
required outside the chain-link fence to screen public view of the
telecommunications tower site.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.15) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 76-09, passed
8-17-2009)
§ 159.299 BROADCAST TOWER.
   (a)   Location of the tower shall be done with consideration for public
safety in the event that the tower would fall, and to minimize adverse visual
impact of broadcast towers through careful design, siting and screening.
   (b)   Care should be taken to avoid interference with any similar broadcast
use and in no event shall the tower be located in any airport approach zone.
   (c)   The tower shall be constructed in a manner that will make it
inaccessible for unauthorized persons to climb.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.15-1) (Ord. 76-09, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 159.300 TEMPORARY USES.
   (a)   Intent. The requirements of this section are intended to provide for
the regulation and permitting of uses and associated improvements on private
property which are not so recurring in nature as to constitute a permanent use.
These requirements are not intended to regulate temporary uses on public
property, including public rights-of-way.
   (b)   Permit required. No person shall operate a temporary use without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the county planning department as prescribed
in this section. If an objection is filed pursuant to division (f) below or if
the county planning department determines that a hearing should be held due to
the scope of the proposed use, the temporary use application shall be referred
to the planning commissions for action. A date for public hearing shall be set
at which time the county and city planning commissions shall meet jointly to
consider the application. At the joint meeting, the planning commissions shall
decide by a vote of each body whether to grant the temporary use permit. When
the planning commissions are not in agreement, the application shall be
considered denied.
   (c)   Applications.
      (1)   Submission deadline. All applications for a temporary use permit
shall be made to the county planning department at least 60 days prior to the
proposed commencement date of the use, provided a lesser time may be allowed
consistent with the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Temporary use plan. All temporary uses shall be subject to approval
of a temporary use plan. The plan shall describe the nature and location of all
temporary improvements and activities, the location of any permanent buildings
intended to be used, the time period for which the temporary use permit is
requested, and such other information in sufficient detail as the county
planning department determines is reasonably necessary to adequately review the
application and to ensure the use will be conducted in a manner consistent with
the requirements of this section.
   (d)   Fee. A fee of $250 shall accompany the application for a temporary use
permit.
   (e)   Standards for review. The following standards shall be used in
determining the suitability and compatibility of a temporary use:
      (1)   The temporary use will have no adverse effect on nearby properties
or jeopardize public health, safety and general welfare;
      (2)   The temporary use will not create hazardous traffic conditions or
result in traffic in excess of the capacity of the roads serving the use;
      (3)   The site is adequate to accommodate the proposed use, including the
provision for on and off-site parking;
      (4)   Adequate sanitation facilities will be available on the site;
      (5)   The time period and hours of operation for the temporary use are
clearly specified;
      (6)   Provision is made for the removal, cleanup and restoration of the
site;
      (7)   The temporary use will not adversely impact the natural
environment;
      (8)   The site is suitable for the proposed temporary use, considering
flood hazard, drainage, soils and other conditions which may constitute a
danger to life, health or property; and
      (9)   All temporary improvements and any permanent structures proposed to
be used will comply with all applicable provisions of the county’s building
code.
   (f)   Notice. The county planning department shall send written notice of
the temporary use permit application to the owners of all property located
within 600 feet of the property involved. Written notice shall also be sent to
the city planning department. The notice shall be sent at least 14 days before
the county planning department makes its determination on the temporary use
permit. If any property owner so notified files a written objection prior to
the time the county planning department makes its determination regarding the
application, the application shall be referred to the planning commissions for
action.
   (g)   Conditions of approval. Reasonable conditions may be required in
connection with the approval of any temporary use permit which are deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the social and
economic well-being of those who will use the temporary use, residents and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed use, and the community as a
whole. Any condition imposed must be clearly specified in writing on the
temporary use permit.
   (h)   Appeal of planning department or planning commission decision. Any
person aggrieved by an action of the county planning department in granting,
denying, revoking or suspending a temporary use permit may appeal the action to
the planning commissions. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
county planning department within five working days of the decision. The action
of the planning commissions may be appealed to the board of county
commissioners and city council in the same manner.
   (i)   Hearing by board and city council. In the case of an appeal of a
decision of the planning commissions, a date for public hearing shall be set at
which time the board of county commissioners and city council shall meet
jointly to consider the temporary use application. At the joint meeting, the
board of county commissioners and city council shall decide by a vote of each
body whether to grant the temporary use permit.
   (j)   Exemptions. The following uses shall not require a temporary use
permit:
      (1)   Estate or real estate sales involving the property or items from
the property where the sale is held;
      (2)   Garage, yard or rummage sales provided:
         A.   Sales last not longer than three days;
         B.   Sales are held no more than twice yearly; and
         C.   Sales are conducted on the owner’s property or one of the owner’s
properties in case of a multi-party sale.
      (3)   Weddings, purely social parties or similar family events where the
function or event involves the owner or lessor of the property and where no
monetary consideration or fees for the use of the property or attendance is
involved.
      (4)   An intermodal shipping/storage container placed on a parcel for
fewer than 90 days.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.16) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 104-05, passed
10-17-2005; Ord. 24-24, passed 3-26-2024)
§ 159.301 VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Intent.
      (1)   It is the intent of this section to limit the impact of commercial
vehicles and equipment, recreational vehicles and agricultural vehicles and
equipment upon those areas of the county in which the land use is residential
or agricultural in nature. Fire, law enforcement, emergency vehicles and those
vehicles designed for persons with disability are exempt from this section of
the chapter.
      (2)   This section shall apply to the agricultural, recreation/
conservation and residential zoning districts. Commercial vehicles,
agricultural vehicles, recreational vehicles and equipment are prohibited
unless in compliance with this section.
   (b)   Commercial vehicles and equipment. It is not the purpose of the
section to prohibit commercial vehicles as described herein from residential
parcels when actually engaged in a business activity which requires their
presence for a specific purpose and limited time period.
      (1)   One commercial vehicle per resident, not to exceed a maximum of two
commercial vehicles, shall be permitted on a property with an occupied
residence provided that:
         A.   In a residential development area, the vehicle shall be currently
licensed, fully functional, and have a gross vehicle weight of 12,000 pounds or
less and not exceed 22 feet in length. Exclusive of a residential development
area, the vehicle shall be currently licensed, fully functional, and have a
gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or less and not exceed 22 feet in length;
         B.   A semi-tractor is exempt from the gross vehicle weight
requirement for division (b)(1)A. above;
         C.   The vehicle shall be operated by a person residing on the
premises, and shall provide primary transportation for the resident to and from
their place of employment;
         D.   The vehicle shall not be parked or stored within the right-of-
way; and
         E.   No attached vehicle, equipment or trailer shall be allowed.
      (2)   Commercial vehicles and equipment that are currently licensed (if
required) and fully functional and are in use as part of a permitted
construction project shall be allowed for the duration of the project. Should
the construction project cease for a period of six months, the commercial
vehicles and equipment shall be removed from the property. Commercial vehicles
and equipment shall not be stored or parked for longer than 72 hours upon any
right-of-way;
      (3)   Commercial equipment that is fully functional, owned by the
resident, and used by the resident for regular or ongoing maintenance of the
property (i.e., lawn care, driveway maintenance, snow removal) and not for
profit, shall be allowed on properties used for residential and agricultural
uses; and
      (4)   Commercial vehicles or equipment shall not be used for human or
animal occupancy. Semi-trailers shall not be used for storage.
   (c)   Recreational vehicles and equipment.
      (1)   The parking and storage of recreational vehicles shall be allowed
provided that:
         A.   The vehicle title holder for any and all recreation vehicles
parked or stored on the property shall be the property owner or permanent
resident of the dwelling; or
         B.   If the property owner or permanent resident of the dwelling does
not hold vehicle title to all of the recreational vehicles on the property, no
more than three recreational vehicles shall be allowed to be stored or parked
on the property, regardless of ownership.
      (2)   The vehicle and equipment shall be fully functional and licensed if
required.
      (3)   No recreational vehicles shall be stored or parked for longer than
72 hours upon any right-of-way in a residential development district.
      (4)   No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be connected to gas,
water, septic or sewer service unless approved by a county-issued permit.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles shall not be used as accessory structures nor
shall they be used for human or animal occupancy.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles shall not have their wheels removed or be
affixed to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of the vehicle.
   (d)   Agricultural vehicles and equipment. Agricultural vehicles and
equipment shall meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Shall be fully functional and currently licensed if required;
      (2)   Shall be owned by the property owner or tenant; and
      (3)   Shall be presently used in the activity of agricultural operations
or used for regular or ongoing maintenance of the property.
   (e)   Township road maintenance vehicles and equipment. Those persons
employed by and/or operating township road maintenance vehicles and equipment
shall be allowed to store the vehicles and equipment on their property. If the
property is located within a residential development area, the vehicles and
equipment shall be screened from public view.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 15.17) (Ord. 26-10, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 159.302 SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM.
   The regulations regarding commercial Solar Energy Conversion Systems
(hereafter referred to as SECS) to read:
   (a)   Intent.
      (1)   The intent of regulations for Solar Energy Conversion Systems is to
encourage the development of alternative sources of energy while protecting the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
   (b)   SECS standards. The following standards apply to Commercial SECS:
      (1)   Commercial SECS shall be permitted only on lands zoned A-
1 Agricultural, C-Commercial, I-1 or 1-2 Industrial, or RC Recreation/
Conservation with the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Signs. No advertising signs or logos shall be permitted on the
SECS. One project identification sign, not to exceed 20 square feet, shall be
allowed.
      (3)   An interconnection agreement must be completed with an electric
utility.
      (4)   Public roads. The permittee shall obtain all locally required road
permits for construction. Prior to commencement of construction, the permittees
shall identify all state, county or township "haul roads" that will be used for
the SECS project and shall notify the governing body having jurisdiction over
the roads to determine if the haul roads identified are acceptable. The
governmental body shall be given adequate time to inspect the haul roads prior
to use of these haul roads. Where practical, existing roadways shall be used
for all activities associated with the SECS. Where practical all-weather roads
shall be used to deliver all other heavy components to and from the SECS site.
The permittees shall, prior to the use of approved haul roads, make
satisfactory arrangements with the appropriate governmental body having
jurisdiction over approved haul roads for construction of the SECS for the
maintenance and repair of the haul roads that will be subject to extra wear and
tear due to transportation of equipment and components. The permittees shall
notify the County Planning Department of such arrangements.
      (5)   Private roads. The permittee shall promptly repair private roads,
easements, or lanes damaged when moving equipment or when obtaining access to
the site, unless otherwise negotiated with the affected landowner.
      (6)   Dust control. The permittees shall utilize all reasonable measures
and practices of construction to control dust.
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan.
The permittees shall develop a SWPPP and Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
prior to construction and submit the plan to the County Planning Department.
The SWPPP and Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall address the erosion
control measures for each project phase, and shall at a minimum identify plans
for grading, construction and drainage of roads; necessary soil information;
detailed design features to maintain downstream water quality; a comprehensive
revegetation plan to maintain and ensure adequate erosion control and slope
stability and to restore the site after temporary project activities; and
measures to minimize the area of surface disturbance. Other practices shall
include containing excavated material, protecting exposed soil, stabilizing
restored material and removal of silt fences or barriers when the area is
stabilized. The plan shall identify methods for disposal or storage of
excavated material.
      (7)   Other standards and codes. All solar farms shall be in compliance
with any applicable local, state, and federal regulatory standards for solar
energy systems.
Standards (9) through (11) must be provided as part of a complete Conditional
Use Permit Application.
      (8)   Application contents. Every application for a commercial SECS
permit shall include the following information:
         A.   Name and address of the applicant.
         B.   Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the property involved
or has written permission of the owner to make such application.
         C.   Site plan. A plot and development plan drawn in sufficient detail
to clearly describe the following:
            1.   Physical dimensions and locations of the property, existing
structures, and proposed structures.
            2.   Location of electrical lines and facilities.
            3.   Existing topography.
            4.   Proposed grading and removal of natural vegetation.
            5.   Setbacks.
         D.   General information on the typical type, size, height, rated
power output, performance, and safety, of each SECS model, and electrical
transmission equipment.
         E.   A location map to scale of all occupied structures within one-
half mile of the boundary of the property upon which the SECS is to be located.
         F.   An application including any SECS which is located within a 100-
year flood plain area, as such flood hazard areas are shown on the maps
designated by FEMA, shall be accompanied by a Flood Plain Development Permit.
         G.   Project schedule with anticipated construction date and
completion date.
         H.   A Staging Area Plan depicting properties where materials and
construction equipment will be stored during the installation process.
      (9)   If the Planning Director determines it is necessary, the
application shall be accompanied by a photograph or detailed drawing of each
model of SECS; and one or more detailed computer or photographic simulation
drawing showing the site fully developed with all proposed SECS and accessory
structures. Such additional information as shall be required by the Planning
Director.
      (10)   Decommissioning/ Restoration/ Abandonment.
         A.   Decommission Plan. Within 120 days of completion of construction,
the permittees shall submit to the County Planning Department a decommissioning
plan describing the manner in which the permittees anticipate decommissioning
the project in accordance with the requirements of paragraph B. below. The plan
shall include a description of the manner in which the permittees will ensure
that it has the financial capability to carry out the restoration requirements
when they go into effect. The permittee of the SECS shall ensure that it
carries out its obligation to provide the resources necessary to fulfill these
requirements. The County Planning Department may at any time request the
permittee of the SECS to file a report with the County Planning Department
describing how the permittee is fulfilling this obligation. A commercial SECS
shall be deemed inoperable if it has not generated power for 12 consecutive
months.
         B.   Site restoration. Upon expiration of this permit, or upon earlier
termination of operation of the SECS, the permittee shall have the obligation
to dismantle and remove from the site all electrical generating equipment,
overhead and underground cables, foundations, buildings and ancillary equipment
to a depth of four feet. To the extent possible, the permittee shall restore
and reclaim the site to its pre-project topography and topsoil quality. All
access roads shall be removed unless written approval is given by the affected
landowner requesting that one or more roads, or portions thereof, be retained.
Any agreement for removal to a lesser depth or for no removal shall be recorded
with the County Planning Department and shall show the locations of all such
foundations. All such agreements between permittee and the affected landowner
shall be submitted to the County Planning Department prior to completion of
restoration activities. The site shall be restored in accordance with the
requirements of this condition within 18 months after expiration.
         C.   Providing surety. The Planning Director shall decide if it is
prudent to include provisions that ensure financial resources will be available
for decommissioning. This may include establishing an escrow account into which
the project developer/ permittee will deposit funds on a regular basis over the
life of the project. The unit of government shall then have access to the
escrow account for the explicit purpose of decommission. Financial provisions
shall not be so onerous as to make SECS projects unfeasible.
   (c)   Application review.
      (1)   Conditional use permit. A conditional use permit is required for a
Commercial SECS.
      (2)   Technical issues and expert review.  Solar Energy Conversion
Systems may involve complex technical issues that require review and input that
is beyond the expertise of County staff. The Planning Director may require the
applicant to pay reasonable costs of a third-party technical study of a
proposed facility. Selection of expert(s) to review the proposal will be in the
sole discretion of the County.
      (3)   Building permit. Conditional use permit approval of solar energy
conversion systems is separate from the building permit process. Building
permits for the construction of facilities cannot be issued until the facility
is approved through the conditional use permit process.
(Ord. 37-14, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 159.303 VACATION HOME RENTAL/SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
   The regulations regarding vacation home rental/short-term rental shall be as
follows:
   (a)   Maximum occupancy shall not exceed three people per bedroom.
   (b)   The vacation home rental/short-term rental shall register with the
state of South Dakota as a vacation home.
   (c)   Minimum off-street parking requirements shall be one parking space per
guest bedroom.
   (d)   The contact information for the owner and any manager of the vacation
home rental/short-term rental shall be provided to the Planning and Development
Services Department. Any changes in ownership or management shall require new
contact information be submitted to the Planning and Development Services
Department.
   (e)   The contact information for the owner and manager shall be clearly
posted both inside and outside of the vacation home rental/short-term rental.
(Ord. 98-23, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 159.304 LONG-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.
   It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit long-term lease or rental
of property so long as such use is otherwise lawful.
(Ord. 55-24, passed 6-25-2024)
§ 159.305 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADU).
   The regulations regarding accessory dwelling units shall be as follows:
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   The ADU must be accessory to a primary dwelling, and the primary
dwelling and ADU must be located together on one platted lot.
      (2)   Only one ADU is allowed per parcel where zoning allows.
      (3)   The ADU must be built on permanent frost protective footings.
      (4)   The parcel must be able to handle additional wastewater potential
for the ADU. Proof of capacity of wastewater compliance must be provided before
approval of any conditional use permit.
      (5)   No additional access from a township, county or state highway may
be constructed for separate use of the ADU.
      (6)   Two additional off-street parking spaces must be provided for the
ADU.
      (7)   If the ADU is located within a regulated floodplain, then the
lowest floor of the ADU must be elevated at or above the base flood elevation.
No ADU can be located within a regulated floodway.
      (8)   The ADU must comply with all other county ordinances.
   (b)   Attached accessory dwelling unit. An ADU may be constructed within or
attached to an existing single-family dwelling in the following manner:
      (1)   Floor area. The finished floor area of the ADU must not exceed 75%
of the finished floor area of the primary dwelling.
      (2)   Setbacks. The ADU must meet all required setbacks.
      (3)   Construction. The ADU must be constructed in compliance with the
building code for Minnehaha County.
   (c)   Detached accessory dwelling units. An ADU may be constructed as a
separate structure from a single-family dwelling in the following manner:
      (1)   Floor area.  The finished floor area of the ADU must not exceed 50%
of the finished floor area of the primary dwelling. Exception: An existing
single-family dwelling constructed more than 30 years ago may be adaptively
reused as the ADU up to 100% the size of the primary dwelling. Wastewater
requirements must be met for both the primary single-family dwelling and the
ADU.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         A.   When located in front of the main building, the ADU must comply
with the same required setbacks as the main building.
         B.   When located in the required rear yard of the parcel, the ADU
shall be no closer than seven feet to the side and rear property lines.
         C.   The ADU must maintain a minimum ten-foot setback from any other
building.
      (3)   Construction. The ADU must be constructed in compliance with the
building code for Minnehaha County and the Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards (HUD Code), if applicable.
(Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
§ 159.315 LOCATION.
   All parking required by this subchapter shall be located in conformance with
the following requirements:
   (a)   The parking lot shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front
property line; and
   (b)   Parking spaces for all structures shall be located on the same site as
the structure the parking is intended to serve; except that by conditional use
permit, parking may be located within 300 feet of the use it is intended to
serve.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 16.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.316 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking for specific uses shall be required as follows:
Use Required Spaces
Use                                                                           Required Spaces
All nonresidential buildings, except those specified below                    1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area
Auditoriums, theaters, other places of public assembly                        1 parking space for each 4 seats
Bowling alley                                                                 3 spaces per alley
Church or temple                                                              1 parking space for each 4 seats in the main auditorium
Community center, library, museum or similar public or semi-public buildings  10 parking spaces plus 1 additional space for each additional 300
                                                                              square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet
Hospital                                                                      1.5 parking spaces for each bed
Hotel or motel                                                                5 parking spaces plus 1 space for each sleeping room or suite
Manufacturing or industrial establishments, research or testing laboratory,   2 parking spaces for each 3 employees on the maximum shift, plus
bottling plant, warehouse or other similar establishments                     space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in
                                                                              connection therewith
                                                                              Buildings in which 20% or more of the gross area is occupied by
Medical office building                                                       members of healing profession; 1 parking space for each 200 square
                                                                              feet of the gross area used for medical purposes
Mortuary                                                                      1 space for each 50 square feet of floor area in slumber rooms or 1
                                                                              for each four seats in chapel, whichever is greater
Multiple dwellings                                                            1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit of one bedroom or less; 2 spaces
                                                                              for each dwelling unit of 2 bedrooms or more
Multiple dwellings for the elderly and handicapped                            0.75 spaces for each dwelling unit
                                                                              1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area except
Other retail uses                                                             for planned shopping centers of 100,000 square feet of floor area or
                                                                              more who may reduce their requirement to 1 space for each 400 square
                                                                              feet of floor area
Personal services                                                             1 parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area
Private club or lodge                                                         1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area
Restaurant, bar, café or recreation or amusement establishment Not specified 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area or 1 parking
herein                                                                        space per 3 fixed seats, whichever is greater
Retail stores selling furniture, appliance or home improvement products (i.e. 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area
carpet, paint, wallpaper and the like)
Rooming and boardinghouses, sororities and fraternities                       1 space per 2 beds
Sanitarium or institutional home                                              1 parking space for each 3 beds
School
                                                                              Because of the unique parking needs of colleges and universities, a
                                                                              permit application for new construction must include a parking study
   Colleges and universities                                               prepared by the applicant of the parking needs of the entire campus
                                                                              including the new use and the study must address a plan to meet the
                                                                              parking needs of the staff and students
   Elementary school                                                       5 spaces plus 1 parking space for each teacher and staff member
   High schools                                                            1 parking space for each 3 students based on the building’s design
                                                                              capacity
   Junior high school                                                      25 spaces plus 1 parking space for each teacher and staff member.
Single-family and two-family dwellings                                        1 space for each dwelling unit
 
(1992 Code, App. C, § 16.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.317 RULES FOR COMPUTING PARKING SPACES.
   In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces, the following
rules shall be applied:
   (a)   FLOOR AREA shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use,
excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking as herein defined;
   (b)   Where fractional spaces result, the number of parking spaces required
shall be the nearest whole number;
   (c)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after March 27,
1970, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of
dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided
on the basis of the enlargement or change;
   (d)   Whenever a building or use existing prior to March 27, 1970, is
reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of 20% or more in floor area, the
building or use in its entirety shall than and thereafter comply with the
parking requirements set forth herein. Any enlargement or change in use of less
than 20% of the gross floor area shall be provided with parking based on the
enlargement or change.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 16.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.318 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   Driveways, parking lots and loading/unloading areas shall conform with the
following improvement and maintenance standards:
   (a)   (1)   Any driveways, parking lots or loading/ unloading areas in a
commercial or industrial zoning district shall be constructed with a hard
surface when the property is accessed from a hard surface road.
      (2)   Hard surfacing shall consist of:
         A.   Concrete;
         B.   Asphalt;
         C.   Crushed asphalt. Crushed asphalt shall be applied to the
following specifications:
            1.   A minimum of three inches packed gravel base;
            2.   Recycled asphalt packed to four and one-half inches;
            3.   Chip seal shall be applied two times; and
            4.   Two to four inches of hot mix asphalt shall be applied when
the recycled asphalt material begins to breakdown
      (3)   Exception: Truck terminals, heavy equipment display, service and
rental, concrete and paving plants, construction yards and similar
establishments need not hard-surface areas maintained as maneuvering or
parking/storage areas for heavy equipment when those areas are not adjacent to
a front yard setback or otherwise screened from the public right-of-way.
   (b)   If a driveway, parking lot or loading/ unloading area is not required
to be hard surfaced as outlined in division (a) above, a gravel surface shall
be provided. The gravel surface shall be maintained to a minimum thickness of
at least four inches.
   (c)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm water from
a driveway, parking lot or loading/unloading area and the owner shall ensure
that the water does not flow onto adjoining property in a quantity or manner
that would be detrimental thereto.
   (d)   An opaque fence, wall, berm or landscaping of a height and character
necessary for adequate screening of the parking lot from adjacent residentially
used property shall be provided. Where there is a difference in elevation
between the property which needs the screening and the property receiving the
benefit of the screening, the height of the screen barrier shall be measured on
the high side.
   (e)   The entrances and exits to and from any parking lot shall be approved
by the director. Proper directional signs shall be provided.
   (f)   The entrances and exits to and from any parking lot or loading/
unloading area shall be approved by the director. Proper directional signs
shall be provided.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 16.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 25-10, passed
3-15-2010)
§ 159.319 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   There shall be provided at the time any building is erected or
structurally altered, off-street loading spaces in accordance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Office buildings.
 
5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. of GFA* One 12 ft. × 20 ft. loading space
25,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. of GFA One 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading space
50,001 to 200,00 sq. ft. of GFA Two 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading spaces
   Add one additional 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading space for each 75,000 square
feet of gross floor area above 200,000 square feet
* GFA means gross floor area
 
      (2)   Retail or service establishment.
 
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. of GFA   One 12 ft. × 20 ft. loading space
5,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA   One 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading space
20,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. of GFA Two 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading spaces
   Add one additional space for each 75,000 square feet of gross floor area
above 1,000,000 square feet
 
      (3)   Wholesale, commercial use.
 
2,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. of GFA   One 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading space
20,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. of GFA Two 14 ft. × 35 ft. loading spaces
   Add one additional space for each 75,000 square feet of gross floor area
above 100,000 square feet
 
      (4)   Manufacturing or industrial use. One 14 ft. × 35 ft. space for each
10,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one 14 ft. × 35 ft. space for each
portion thereof in excess of 50,000 square feet.
   (b)   Loading spaces are to be provided on each lot in compliance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The loading space shall be completely contained on the lot it is
intended to serve;
      (2)   The loading space shall be arranged on the lot in such a way as to
allow normal movement of traffic in and around the loading area; and
      (3)   No loading space shall be permitted to extend into any public
right-of-way.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 16.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
ON-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 159.330 INTENT.
   (a)   These regulations provide standards for the erection and maintenance
of private signs. The principal feature of this section is the restriction on
the total sign area permissible per site. All private signs shall be erected
and maintained in accordance with the following standards.
   (b)   The general objectives of these standards are to promote health,
safety, welfare and in part to achieve the following:
      (1)   Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing
that signs:
         A.   Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or
abandonment; and
         B.   Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting
motorists, or by impairing the driver’s ability to see pedestrians, obstacles
or other vehicles, or to see and interpret any official traffic sign, signal or
device.
      (2)   Communications efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of
information by providing that:
         A.   Businesses and services may identify themselves;
         B.   Customers and persons may locate a business or service; and
         C.   No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight
line from public rights-of-way for communication purposes.
      (3)   Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare
and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing
that signs:
         A.   Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-
way; and
         B.   Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and
contiguous property by their brightness, size, height or movement.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.331 PERMITTED SIGNS AND SIGN AREA.
   In the following districts, the sign area and height set forth shall apply
to all signs on the premises except as provided in §
159.334:
   (a)   A-1 agricultural and RC recreation/conservation districts.
      (1)   Signs advertising the use of a particular breed, type, variety,
hybrid or brand of plant, chemical or tillage. No one sign shall exceed 16
square feet in area per face;
      (2)   Uses which are governed by conditional use may have signs on the
premises in accordance with the stipulations of the permit; and
      (3)   No hunting, no trespassing and similar signs.
   (b)   C commercial, I-1 and I-2 industrial.
      (1)   Wall, roof or projecting signs:
         A.   The total sign area on structures which are two stories or less
in height shall not exceed two square feet for each linear foot of building
frontage; and
         B.   The total sign area on structures which are greater than two
stories in height shall not exceed either two square feet for each linear foot
of building frontage, or 15% of the area of the frontage wall, whichever is
greater.
      (2)   Freestanding signs having a total sign area not to exceed one
square foot for each linear foot of road frontage or 200 square feet, whichever
is less; and
      (3)   The maximum sign height shall be 30 feet.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.332 REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF PERMITTED SIGNS.
   The regulations and limitations of permitted signs shall be as spelled out
below:
   (a)   Wall signs. Wall signs may be located anywhere on the wall of a
building.
   (b)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   Projecting signs may project no more than five feet from the
building face.
      (2)   Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade level about any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road or drive.
      (3)   Projecting signs may project no more than five feet above the top
of a parapet or roof line including the framework or support.
   (c)   Roof signs. Roof signs shall rise no higher than five feet above the
top of a parapet or roof line and shall not exceed the height limits for the
zoning district.
   (d)   Freestanding signs.
      (1)   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per street frontage
except that businesses on frontages of 300 feet, or more, may erect two
freestanding signs; however, the total sign area for both signs may not exceed
that allowed for the street frontage.
      (2)   Freestanding signs shall be located only in the front or side yard.
      (3)   Freestanding signs shall not project over public property.
      (4)   A.   Freestanding signs shall not be erected within the area of a
corner of two intersecting streets or a street and railroad. Area of a corner,
in this case, shall be the triangular area formed by measuring 40 feet from the
intersection along both roads and connecting these two points with a straight
line.
         B.   Exceptions. Freestanding signs may be located in the area of a
corner when the sign and sign structure comply with the following:
            1.   The sign face is located 12 feet above grade level; and
            2.   The sign structure is of such a size and spacing as to not
obstruct the view of the intersection.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.333 SPECIAL SITUATIONS.
   This section contains the sign regulations for the following special
situations.
   (a)   Shopping centers. A freestanding sign shall be allowed on each street
frontage stating the name of the center and the major tenants provided no other
freestanding signs are erected. The sign area shall be determined independently
from the sign area allowed under §§
159.331 and
159.332. A sign area of one square foot for each one lineal feet of street
frontage or 200 square feet per frontage, whichever is smaller, shall be
allowed. The height shall not exceed 40 feet.
   (b)   Interstate highway interchange. In the C, I-1 and I-2 districts,
businesses which are adjacent to both the interstate and the intersecting cross
street may by conditional use permit erect one additional on- premises
freestanding sign not to exceed 200 square feet or 60 feet in height.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.334 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs may be allowed in addition to the signs permitted in §
159.331, but signs must be in conformance with all other state and local laws.
   (a)   Construction signs. Building contractors, lending institutions and
professional firms may post temporary signs on-site under construction. The
total sign area shall not exceed 100 square feet or 20 feet in height and shall
be removed upon completion of the project.
   (b)   Neighborhood identification signs. In any zone, a masonry wall,
landscaping and other similar material or feature may be combined to form a
display for neighborhood or tract identification, provided that the legend of
the signs or display shall consist only of the neighborhood or tract name.
   (c)   Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance
of his or her duty shall be permitted.
   (d)   Integral signs; name. Names of building, dates of erection, monumental
citations, commemorable tablets and the like, of permanent type construction
and made an integral part of the building structure shall be permitted.
   (e)   Private traffic directional signs. Signs directing traffic movement
onto and out of a commercial premises may be located at each vehicular entrance
onto a public street.
   (f)   Real estate signs. Temporary real estate signs shall be permitted.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.335 ILLUMINATION.
   Regulations regarding the illumination of signs shall be as follows:
   (a)   Shading. The light from any illuminated sign or billboard shall be so
shielded, shaded or directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely
affect surrounding or facing premises or safe vision of operators of vehicles
on public or private roads; and
   (b)   Blinking and flashing. Blinking, flashing, pulsating or fluttering
lights, or other illuminated devices which have a changing light shall not be
located closer than 300 feet from any residential district. This restriction
shall not apply to signs displaying the date, time and temperature exclusively.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.336 TEMPORARY AND PORTABLE SIGNS.
   (a)   Temporary and portable signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and may
be displayed for 60 days per calendar year in the C and I districts.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the user of the sign to:
      (1)   Notify and obtain approval from the county planning director prior
to placement of the sign;
      (2)   Notify the county planning director upon removal of the sign. The
county planning director shall continue to deduct one day from the 60 days
allowed per calendar year until notice of removal is received or a total of 60
days has elapsed; and
      (3)   Place the signs in locations so that the provisions of this
subchapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances are complied with.
   (c)   Temporary and portable signs in the A-1 district, when used in
conjunction with roadside stands and fireworks stands, shall be authorized as
part of the conditional use permit granted to those uses.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.337 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited.
   (a)   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited. No person shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way, or public property, or on private
property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached
thereto or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the basic
purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business or activity located on the same premises or any other premises. This
is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign
attached to a bus or lettering on a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Nuisance signs. Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal
or which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device or which hide from view any traffic, street sign or signal shall be
removed upon notice.
   (c)   Banners. Banners shall be prohibited except on a temporary basis for a
maximum of 21 days during any calendar year.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.338 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   Every on-premises sign, including any exempt from this Code in respect to
permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good structural and aesthetic
condition at all times. Any abandoned, unsafe or unsightly sign shall be
removed or renovated within 60 days upon written notice. If the owner fails to
remove or renovate the sign within the required time period the county may
remove the sign at the owner’s expense.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17.09) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 159.350 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent the uncontrolled use of off-
premises signs so as to promote the health, safety and general welfare of those
persons using the public rights-of-way. These regulations are intended to
preserve the overall landscape quality of the county while allowing the
reasonable use of signs to inform the traveling public. This is accomplished
through the application of standards for size, illumination and separation.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17A.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.351 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   In the A-1 and RC districts, off-premises signs shall be limited to
those which provide direction to a business or use and shall be constructed in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   A maximum sign area of nine square feet;
      (2)   The sign shall contain the business name and directional
information only;
      (3)   There shall be no more than one sign face per direction of facing;
      (4)   A sign shall not be within a 500-foot radius of any other off-
premises sign intended to be read from the same right-of-way. The sign shall
not be within a 300-foot radius of any other off-premises sign intended to be
read from a different right-of-way. All spacing measurements in this division
(a)(4) shall refer to a measurement made along the edge of the right-of-way and
shall apply only to structures located on the same side of the highway. These
spacing provisions do not apply to signs separated by buildings or other
obstructions in a manner that only one sign facing located within the above
spacing distance is visible from the road right-of-way at any one time.
      (5)   A sign shall not be illuminated nor shall blinking or flashing
lights be used; and
      (6)   A maximum height of 16 feet.
   (b)   The following regulations shall apply to off- premises signs in the C,
I-1 and I-2 districts except as permitted in §
159.352:
      (1)   A maximum sign area of 288 square feet;
      (2)   There shall be no more than one sign face per direction of facing;
      (3)   The maximum height shall be 40 feet;
      (4)   No part of the sign face or structure shall be located in or
overlap into the required side or rear yard setbacks or public right-of-way;
      (5)   A sign shall not be within a 500-foot radius of any other off-
premises sign intended to be read from the same right-of-way. The sign shall
not be within a 300-foot radius of any other off-premises sign intended to be
read from a different right-of-way. All spacing measurements in this division
(b)(5) shall refer to a measurement made along the right-of-way and shall apply
only to structures located on the same side of the highway. These spacing
provisions do not apply to signs separated by buildings or other obstructions
in a manner that only one sign facing located within the above spacing distance
is visible from the road right-of-way at any one time; and
      (6)   The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shielded, shaded or
directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely affect surrounding or
facing premises or the safe vision of operators of vehicles on public roads.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17A.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004)
§ 159.352 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use permit in conformance with §§
159.390 through
159.399 shall be obtained for the following off-premises signs:
   (a)   Off-premises signs over 288 square feet to a maximum of 672 square
feet and signs with more than one sign face per direction of facing in the C
and I districts; and
   (b)   A conditional use permit shall be required for off-premises signs
within 500 feet of a park, school, church or designated historic site.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17A.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 34-04, passed
3-15-2004)
§ 159.353 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Directional signs for nonprofit organizations not to exceed four
square feet per sign face;
   (b)   Political campaign signs provided the signs are removed within five
days after the election; and
   (c)   Directional signs, street name signs or other signs which have been
authorized and directed by a governmental unit.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17A.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.354 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited:
   (a)   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited. No person shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way, or public property, or on private
property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached
thereto or located thereon, any sign or advertising device for the basic
purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business or activity located on the same premises or any other premises. This
is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign
attached to a bus or lettering on a motor vehicle; and
   (b)   Nuisance signs. Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal
or which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device or which hide from view any traffic, street sign or signal shall be
removed upon notice.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17A.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.355 MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   Every off-premises sign shall be maintained in good structural and aesthetic
condition at all times. Any abandoned, unsafe or unsightly sign shall be
removed or renovated within 60 days upon written notice. If the owner fails to
remove or renovate the sign within the required time period, the county may
remove the sign at the owner’s expense.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 17A.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
NONCONFORMING AND NONSTANDARD USES
§ 159.370 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to specify those
circumstances under which they shall be permitted to continue.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.371 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the lawful use of a premises
existing immediately prior to the effective date of this subchapter may be
continued although the use does not conform to the provisions hereof.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.372 USE BECOMING NONCONFORMING BY CHANGE IN LAW OR BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever the use of a premises becomes a nonconforming use through a change
in zoning ordinance or district boundaries, the use may be continued, although
the use does not conform to the provisions thereof.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.373 CHANGE IN NONCONFORMING USE.
   (a)   If no structural alterations or additions are made, a nonconforming
use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more
restrictive classification. For the purposes of this subchapter, each of the
following classifications shall be considered to be “more restrictive” than
those it precedes:
RC   Recreation/conservation
RR   Rural residential
RS-1 Residential
RS-2 Residential
RD   Residential
RA-1 Residential
C    Commercial
I-1  Light industrial
I-2  General industrial
 
   (b)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restrictive
use or to a permitted use, the use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restrictive use.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.374 EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT.
   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, converted,
reconstructed or structurally altered unless the use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which the premises is located except that a
conditional use permit may be authorized after the following criteria are given
specific consideration:
   (a)   Effect on surrounding property values;
   (b)   The density of land use zoning for the subject and adjacent
properties;
   (c)   The degree of hardship upon the applicant which would be caused by
failure to grant the permit; and
   (d)   It can be demonstrated that it was the owner’s intent to use the
entire premises for the use prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
this subchapter.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.375 RESTORATION AFTER DAMAGE.
   (a)   When the use of a building is nonconforming as defined by this
subchapter and the building is damaged by a fire, explosion, act of God, or the
public enemy to the extent of more than 60% of its fair market value, it shall
not be restored except in conformity with the provisions of the district in
which the building is located.
   (b)   Exception: Single-family dwellings may be restored if damaged less
than 100%.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.376 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   In the event that a nonconforming use is discontinued for more than one
year, any subsequent use shall thereafter be in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which it is located.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.377 EFFECT ON USE WHICH IS ILLEGAL UNDER PRIOR LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as authorization for, or
approval of, the continuance of the use of a premises in violation of zoning
regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.378 CONTINUATION OF NONSTANDARD USES.
   (a)   Nonstandard uses existing immediately prior to the effective date of
this subchapter may be continued, although the uses do not conform to the
provisions hereof.
   (b)   Nonstandard buildings or structures may be enlarged or extended,
converted, reconstructed or structurally altered as follows:
      (1)   Enlargements, extensions, conversions or structural alterations may
be made as required by law or ordinance;
      (2)   Structural alteration of buildings or structures may otherwise be
made if the changes do not encroach into an existing front yard, side yard or
rear yard which is less than the minimum required yards for the district in
which they are located; and
      (3)   Enlargement, extension, conversion of buildings or structures may
otherwise be made if the changes comply with the minimum required yards, lot
area, height, landscaping, parking and density for the district in which they
are located.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 18.09) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 159.390 APPLICATION TO THE COUNTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a conditional use permit in
any zoning district shall file a written application with the Minnehaha County
planning department requesting a conditional use permit.
   (b)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Legal description of the land on which the conditional use is
requested;
      (2)   Name, address, phone number and signature of the owner of the
property which is the subject of the application;
      (3)   Name, address and phone number of the person making the application
if made by anyone other than the owner;
      (4)   Zoning district classification under which the property is
regulated at the time of the application; and
      (5)   Any other information concerning the property as may be requested
by the Minnehaha County planning department or the county and city planning
commissions.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 126-07, passed
7-16-2007)
§ 159.391 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a conditional use permit, the
applicant shall pay to Minnehaha County a fee as designated in §§
159.445 through
159.452. This fee is utilized to help defray necessary administrative costs of
processing the application as required.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.392 SITE PLAN.
   (a)   Except when waived by the planning director, each application for a
conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the
following information:
      (1)   The legal description of the property;
      (2)   The name of the project and/or business;
      (3)   The scale and north arrow;
      (4)   All existing and proposed buildings and additions;
      (5)   Dimensions of all buildings;
      (6)   Distance from all building lines to the property lines at the
closest points;
      (7)   Building height and number of stories;
      (8)   Dimensions of all property lines;
      (9)   Parking lot or spaces, designating each space, lot dimensions,
stalls and aisles;
      (10)   Screening; showing the height, location and type of material to be
used; and
      (11)   Name and location of all adjacent roads, waterways and other
public places.
   (b)   Any conditional use permit which has been approved shall conform in
all ways to the site plans submitted. In the event that changes have been
stipulated on the plan as part of the approval of the conditional use permit,
the conditional use permit shall conform to the plan in all ways except for the
stipulated changes.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.393 HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSIONS.
   Upon the filing of an application for a conditional use permit, the planning
director shall set a date for public hearing, at which time and place the
county and city planning commissions shall jointly meet to consider the
conditional use permit request.
   (a)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the Minnehaha County planning
department shall be posted on the property at least five days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
   (b)   Action. At the joint meeting, the county and city planning commissions
shall decide whether to grant the conditional use permit with those conditions
and safeguards as are appropriate or to deny the conditional use permit when
not in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations. The decision
of the planning commissions shall be final unless an appeal is filed in
accordance with §
159.394. In the event the planning commissions are not in agreement on a
decision whether to grant a conditional use permit, the following shall apply:
      (1)   When one planning commission votes to grant a conditional use
permit and the other planning commission votes to deny, the permit is deemed to
be denied and the petitioner may appeal the decision to the governing bodies in
accordance with §
159.394;
      (2)   When both planning commissions vote to grant a conditional use
permit but the conditions are not identical, the application shall be presented
to a joint meeting of the county commission and city council for final action.
The requirements of §
159.394 shall apply; and
      (3)   When one or the other planning commission votes to defer action on
a conditional use permit, the application shall be considered at a future joint
meeting of the planning commissions.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003)
§ 159.394 APPEAL OF DECISION OF PLANNING COMMISSIONS.
   The decision rendered by the planning commissions on a conditional use
permit may be appealed to the board of county commissioners and the city
council. To appeal the decision of the planning commissions, the applicant or
any other person aggrieved by the decision shall file a written appeal with the
Minnehaha County planning department within five working days of the planning
commissions’ decision.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.04A) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.395 HEARING BY BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND CITY COUNCIL.
   When an appeal has been filed in accordance with §
159.394 or the decision by each planning commission is not in agreement, the
board of county commissioners and the city council shall jointly conduct a
public hearing and take final action on the conditional use application.
   (a)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the Minnehaha County planning
department shall be posted on the property at least five days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
   (b)   Hearing. At the public hearing, the board of county commissioners and
city council shall review the decisions of the respective planning commissions
on the applications coming before them. In making their determination of the
applications, they need not be bound by the actions of the planning
commissions.
   (c)   Action. The board of county commissioners and the city council shall
decide whether to grant the conditional use permit with the conditions and
safeguards as are appropriate or to deny the conditional use permit when not in
harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations. The board and the
city council, in making their determinations on the applications, may make
changes in accordance with or in rejection or modification of the decisions of
the respective planning commissions. In order for any conditional use permit to
be approved, the board of county commissioners and the city council must each
vote in favor of the application.
   (d)   Protest. The conditional use permit shall take effect 20 days after
approval unless a written protest is filed with the county auditor, signed by
at least 40% of the owners of equity in the lots or parcels located within 250
feet of the property granted a conditional use permit. A corporation shall be
construed to be a sole owner; and when parcels of land are in the name of more
than one person, ownership representation shall be in proportion to the number
of signers who join in the petition in relation to the number of owners. If a
protest is filed, the conditional use permit shall not become effective unless
it is approved by two-thirds of the board of county commissioners and two-
thirds of the city council.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.396 EXPIRATION.
   (a)   A conditional use permit which has been approved shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building, work or use authorized by
the conditional use permit is not commenced within one year from the date of
approval. This provision shall not apply to a conditional use permit approved
for a residential use in the A-1 or RC zoning districts.
   (b)   Upon written request to the planning director and prior to the
conditional use permit expiration date, a one-year time extension for the
conditional use permit may be granted by the planning director, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   There was no public objection presented during the public hearing
process for the original conditional use permit; and
      (2)   The land uses for the surrounding properties have not significantly
been altered since the original approval date for the conditional use permit.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.397 CONDITIONAL USE CRITERIA.
   The following considerations shall be employed when acting upon requests for
conditional uses:
   (a)   The impact of the proposed use on adjacent properties shall be a major
consideration. The proposed use should be generally compatible with adjacent
properties and other properties in the district;
   (b)   Measures shall be taken to ensure that the proposed use does not alter
the general character of the area or neighborhood;
   (c)   The effects of noise, odor, traffic, air and water pollution and other
negative factors shall be eliminated or controlled through the use of
screening, setbacks and orientation; and
   (d)   The proposed use shall not adversely affect the public.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.398 REAPPLICATION.
   No applicant requesting a conditional use permit whose application includes
the same or substantially the same requirements for the same of substantially
the same property as that which has been denied by the planning commissions or
the board of county commissioners and city council shall be again considered by
the planning commissions before the expiration date of six months from the date
of the final action on the application.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.399 REVOCATION.
   If the planning director finds that at any time that the terms, conditions
or requirements of the conditional use permit have not been complied with, or
that any phase thereof has not been completed within the time required under
the permit or any amendment thereto, the planning director shall report this
fact to the permittee, landowner, and/or operator and the county and city
planning commissions. The county and city planning commissions may, after
conducting a public hearing, of which the permittee, landowner and/or operator
shall be notified, make a recommendation to the board of county commissioners
and the city council for their consideration and action. The board of county
commissioners and the city council may, after conducting a public hearing, of
which the permittee, landowner and/or operator shall be notified, revoke the
conditional use permit for failure to comply with the terms, conditions or
requirements of the permit.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 19.09) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS
§ 159.410 APPLICATION TO COUNTY FOR ZONING AMENDMENT.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a change in regulations,
restrictions or boundaries of the zoning map of any property from one zoning
district classification to another zoning district classification, shall make
application for the change to the Minnehaha County planning department. The
application shall be provided by the department and be completed in full by the
applicant.
   (b)   The board of county commissioners and the city council may from time
to time on their own motion, after public notice and hearing, and after a
report by the planning commissions amend, supplement, or change the boundaries
or regulations herein or subsequently established.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 20.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.411 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a zoning district classification
change, the applicant shall pay to Minnehaha County the appropriate fee as
designated in §§
159.445 through
159.452. These fees shall be utilized to help defray necessary administrative
costs of processing the application as required, including publication and
printing of required notices.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 20.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.412 HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSIONS.
   Upon the filing of an application for a request of zoning district
classification change, the Minnehaha County planning department shall set a
date for public hearing, at which time and place the county and city planning
commissions shall meet jointly to consider the zoning classification changes.
   (a)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the Minnehaha County planning
department shall be posted on the property at least five days prior to the
scheduled hearing.
   (b)   Recommendations from planning commissions. The county and city
planning commissions shall, respectively, make a recommendation to the board of
county commissioners and city council on those applications for zoning district
classification changes which have been considered and all other amendments to
these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 20.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.413 HEARING BY BOARD AND CITY COUNCIL.
   The board of county commissioners and the city council shall jointly conduct
a public hearing to act on all applications which have been processed and
forwarded to them for public hearing as provided in these regulations. The
county auditor shall cause to be published a notice of the time and place when
and where all persons interested shall be given a full, fair and complete
hearing.
   (a)   Supplementary notice. Supplementary to the published notice, a sign(s)
to be provided by the Minnehaha County planning department shall be posted on
the property at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing.
   (b)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the board of county
commissioners and the city council shall review the decisions and
recommendations of their respective planning commissions on all applications
coming before them as provided in these regulations. The board of county
commissioners and the city council must each vote in favor of the proposed
action before any changes or modifications are made in the regulations,
restrictions or zoning map.
   (c)   Protest. Twenty days after publication of the board of county
commissioners’ and city council’s approval, the zoning district classification
change shall take effect unless the referendum be invoked, or unless a written
protest is filed with the county auditor, signed by at least 40% of the owners
of equity in the lots or parcels located within 250 feet from any part of the
proposed district. A corporation shall be construed to be a sole owner; and
when parcels of land are in the name of more than one person, ownership
representation shall be in proportion to the number of signers who join in the
petition in relation to the number of owners. If a protest is filed, the
ordinance shall not become effective unless the ordinance is approved by a
resolution by two-thirds of the board of county commissioners and two-thirds of
the city council.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 20.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.414 REAPPLICATION.
   Not application requesting a zoning district classification change on any
property whose application includes any property either entirely or
substantially the same as that which has been denied by the board of the county
commissioners and city council, shall again be considered by the planning
commissions before the expiration of six months from the date of the final
action of the board of county commissioners and city council.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 20.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 159.425 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The zoning board of adjustment shall consist of the planning commissions of
Minnehaha County and Sioux Falls. The board may, in appropriate cases and
subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, grant variances and hear
appeals to the terms of these regulations in harmony with the general purpose
and intent and in accordance with general and specific rules herein contained.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.426 OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The board shall meet at the regularly scheduled joint meetings of the
county and city planning commissions. Special meetings may be held at the call
of the chairpersons. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and
all business coming before the board shall be transacted at the meetings.
   (b)   The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, records of
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the
county planning department and shall be a public record.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.427 APPEALS.
   The board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the county
planning director in the enforcement of these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.428 VARIANCES.
   The zoning board of adjustment shall not vary the regulations unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case that all of the following conditions are present:
   (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
   (b)   The conditions upon which the application for a variance is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification or other property substantially similar in use;
   (c)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the area in which the
property is located;
   (d)   The proposed variance will not unreasonably impair: an adequate supply
of light and air to adjacent property; increase the congestion in the public
streets; increase the danger of fire; endanger the public safety; or diminish
or impair property values within the area;
   (e)   That because of circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility
that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of
the zoning regulations and that the authorization of a variance is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
   (f)   The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that
will afford reasonable relief and will represent the least modification
desirable of the zoning regulations;
   (g)   The board shall hear and make determinations on variance to exceed the
height limits as established by these regulations; and
   (h)   The board of adjustment, under its authority to grant variances may
impose reasonable conditions on the grant, and one accepting those conditions
is bound by them.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.429 APPLICATION TO COUNTY FOR VARIANCE.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a variance or wishing to appeal a
decision of the county planning director or his or her authorized
representatives shall make application for the request to the county planning
department. The application shall be provided by the department and completed
in full by the applicant.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.430 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a variance or appeal by the board,
the applicant shall pay to Minnehaha County the appropriate fee as designated
in §§
159.445 thorugh
159.452. These fees shall be utilized to help defray necessary administrative
costs of processing the application as required.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.431 HEARING.
   Upon the filing of an application, the county planning department shall set
a date for public hearing, at which time and place the zoning board of
adjustment shall meet to consider the request for variance or appeal.
   (a)   Signs. A sign(s) to be provided by the county planning department
shall be posted on the property at least five days prior to the scheduled
hearing.
   (b)   Decision. All requests under this subchapter shall be acted upon at a
joint meeting of the county and city planning commissions. The planning
commissions shall vote on the requests independently, and a favorable vote by a
majority of the members of each planning commission shall be required to
approve each request.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.432 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF BOARD.
   Appeals may be taken to the circuit court by any person or persons, jointly
or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer, or any
officer, department, board or bureau of the county, aggrieved by any decision
of the board, in the manner and form provided by the statutes of the state, in
the cases made and provided.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.433 LIMITATIONS.
   Any order of the board granting a variance may be declared invalid by the
board unless substantially completed within two years from the date of the
order. The county planning director shall notify the property owner of record
upon invalidation of a variance.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.09) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.434 JURISDICTION TO HEAR REQUESTS OR GRANT VARIANCES.
   The board of adjustment shall have no jurisdiction to hear requests or grant
variances of the height limitations for broadcast towers, telecommunications
towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities
regulated by this subchapter.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 21.10) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
FEES
§ 159.445 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   All fees required by this chapter shall be the property of the county and
shall be deposited with the county treasurer and credited to the general fund.
The fees shall be paid at the time of filing the application with the county
planning department. No action shall be taken on any application until all
applicable fees have been paid in full. Under no conditions shall any fee
required hereunder be refunded after the application has been heard by the
planning commissions. Under no conditions shall any fee required hereunder be
refunded to an applicant who withdraws their application after the application
deadline has passed.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.01) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 139-07, passed
8-20-2007)
§ 159.446 CHANGE OF ZONE.
   A fee of $350 shall be charged for filing an application to change the
zoning classification of property, except to the planned development district.
If any use, for which a rezoning is required, is commenced prior to the
application for a rezoning, the application fee shall be double the regular
fee.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.02) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 104-05, passed
10-17-2005)
§ 159.447 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   A fee of $350 plus $50 for each subarea shall be charged for the filing of
an application to change to the planned development district. If any use, for
which a rezoning is required, is commenced prior to the application for a
rezoning, the application fee shall be double the regular fee.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.03) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 104-05, passed
10-17-2005)
§ 159.448 MAJOR AMENDMENT.
   A fee of $100 shall be charged for the filing of an application for a major
amendment to a planned development district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.04) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004)
§ 159.449 MINOR AMENDMENT.
   A fee of $50 shall be charged for the filing of an application for a minor
amendment to a planned development district.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.05) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004)
§ 159.450 CONDITIONAL USE.
   A fee of $250 shall be charged for filing an application for a conditional
use permit in any district. If any use, for which a conditional use permit is
required, is commenced prior to the application for a conditional use permit,
the application fee shall be double the regular fee.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.06) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 104-05, passed
10-17-2005)
§ 159.451 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   A fee of $250 shall be charged for filing a variance application or an
appeal to the zoning board of adjustment.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.07) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 104-05, passed
10-17-2005)
§ 159.452 ZONING PERMITS.
   A fee of $50 shall be charged for filing an application for a zoning permit.
However, this fee shall be waived when the proposed construction is subject to
the requirements and fees of the International Building Codes as adopted and
revised by Minnehaha County.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 22.08) (Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 104-05, passed
10-17-2005; Ord. 139-07, passed 8-20-2007)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.465 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The following general regulations shall apply to all zoning districts:
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, no building shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any structure or
land be used:
      (1)   Except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the
structure or land is located;
      (2)   Except in conformance with the height and minimum lot requirements,
and the parking and sign regulations, and any other applicable requirements of
the district in which the structure or land is located; and
      (3)   Except in conformance with any federal, state or county codes as
may be applicable. Where these regulations and any other rules and regulations
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
   (b)   The density and yard requirements of these regulations are minimum
regulations for each and every building existing at the effective date of these
regulations and for any building hereafter erected or structurally altered. No
land required for yards or other open spaces about an existing building or any
building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be considered a yard
or lot area for more than one building.
   (c)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one
main building on a lot except as otherwise provided in these regulations.
   (d)   Cooperatives, condominiums and all other forms of property ownership
do not affect the provisions of these regulations and all requirements shall be
observed as though the property were under single ownership.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.466 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or repair a building
or structure or to commence the construction, alteration or repair of a
building or structure, without first having obtained a building permit from the
county planning department. This requirement shall not apply to minor
nonstructural changes involving no change of use.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 139-07, passed
8-20-2007) Penalty, see §
159.999
§ 159.467 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
   Enforcement and administration of these regulations shall be as follows.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the county planning director, herein referred
to as the director, to enforce these regulations.
   (b)   The director or an authorized representative shall be charged with the
following:
      (1)   Receive applications required by these regulations;
      (2)   Issue permits;
      (3)   Make necessary inspections to assure compliance; and
      (4)   Issue notices or orders as may be necessary to assure compliance.
   (c)   An application for a building permit shall be submitted in a form as
the director may prescribe. The application shall be made by the owner or
lessee, or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder employed in
connection with the proposed work. If the application is made by a person other
than the owner in fee, when required by the director, it shall be accompanied
by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee, or the person making the
application that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that
the person making the application is authorized to make the application. Such
shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner,
and if the owner is a corporate body, of its responsible officers. The
application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give additional
information as may be required by the director for an intelligent understanding
of the proposed work.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.03) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 139-07, passed
8-20-2007)
§ 159.468 SITE PLAN.
   All site plans shall provide the following information.
   (a)   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site
plan showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape
and location of the building to be erected, and other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A record of
applications and site plans shall be kept in the office of the director.
   (b)   Nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the filing of amendments
to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time
before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought. The
amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the
original application.
   (c)   The director or authorized representative shall examine applications
for building permits within a reasonable time after filing. If, after
examination, it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with all
applicable laws, the application shall be approved and a permit issued as soon
as practicable. If the examination reveals otherwise, the application shall be
rejected, with the findings attached to the application, and a copy delivered
to the applicant.
   (d)   Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prevent the
director or authorized representative from issuing a building permit for the
construction of footings before the entire plans and detailed statements of the
building or structure have been submitted or approved, if adequate plans and
detailed statements have been presented for the same and have been found to
comply with the requirements.
   (e)   All work performed under a permit issued by the director or authorized
representative shall conform to the approved application and plans, and
approved amendments thereof. The location of all new construction as shown on
the approved site plan, or an approved amendment thereof, shall be strictly
adhered to. It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or
tract of which a site plan has been filed and has been used as the basis for a
permit, unless a revised site plan showing the proposed change in conditions
shall have been filed and approved, provided that this shall not apply when the
lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public
improvement.
   (f)   Every permit issued by the director under the provisions of these
regulations shall have his or her signature affixed thereto; but this shall not
prevent him or her from authorizing a subordinate to affix their signature.
   (g)   A permit under which no work is commenced within 180 days after
issuance shall expire by limitation.
   (h)   The director may revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of these regulations in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.04) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 139-07, passed
8-20-2007)
§ 159.469 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Violations shall be treated in the manner specified below.
   (a)   The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of these regulations has been committed or shall
exist; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or
upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent,
architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or
assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon
which the violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of these regulations, the appropriate
authorities of Minnehaha County, in addition to other remedies, may institute
injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure or land.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 126-07, passed
7-16-2007) Penalty, see §
159.999
§ 159.470 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (a)   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will
occur, and floor heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (b)   These regulations do not imply that land outside the flood zone or
uses permitted within the areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
These regulations shall not create liability on the part of Minnehaha County or
the city or on any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.06) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.471 INTERPRETATION, ABROGATION AND SEVERABILITY.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of these regulations, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
the intent to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where these regulations and other regulations,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. All other regulations
inconsistent with these regulations are hereby repealed to the extent of this
inconsistency only. If any section, clause, provision or portion of these
regulations is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of these regulations shall not be affected thereby.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.07) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.472 SAVING CLAUSE.
   These regulations shall in no manner affect pending actions either civil or
criminal, founded on or growing out of any regulations hereby repealed. These
regulations shall in no manner affect rights or causes of action, either civil
or criminal, not in suit that may have already accrued or grown out of any
regulations repealed.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.08) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.473 PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS.
   The catch heads appearing in connection with the sections of these
regulations are inserted simply for convenience to serve the purpose of an
index. The introductory statements found at the beginning of each subchapter
are to serve as general references only. The catch heads, introductory
statements and illustrative examples of zoning terms shall be wholly
disregarded by any person, office, court or other tribunal in construing the
terms and provisions of these regulations.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.09) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.474 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication as provided by law.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.10) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
DEFINITIONS
§ 159.485 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall
include the word “structure” and “premises;” the word “shall” is mandatory and
not directory; the words “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended,”
“designed” or “arranged to be used or occupied;” the word “lot” includes the
words “plot,” “parcel” or “tract” and the word “person” includes a firm,
association organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as
an individual. Any word not herein defined shall be as defined in any
recognized standard English dictionary.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 24.01) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002)
§ 159.486 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign or sign structure which contains no sign copy,
contains obliterated or obsolete sign copy, or is maintained in an unsafe or
unsightly condition for a period of three months shall be considered an
ABANDONED SIGN.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. An ACCESSORY BUILDING is a subordinate building
or portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to and
customary in connection with the main building or the main use of the premises
and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use. An
ACCESSORY USE is one which is incidental to the main use of the premises.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A subordinate residential dwelling unit on
the same parcel with a larger primary single-family dwelling. The ADU provides
complete independent living facilities for one family. It may take various
forms: a detached unit; a unit that is part of an accessory structure, such as
a detached garage; or a unit that is part of an expanded or remodeled dwelling.
   ADAPTIVE REUSE. The modification of an existing single-family dwelling into
an accessory building or use.
   ADULT AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT. Amusement or entertainment which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or
which features topless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators, or similar entertainment.
   ADULT BOOKSTORES. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of those materials.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than 50 persons used for presenting material for observation by patrons
and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT PHOTO STUDIO. An establishment which, on payment of a fee, provides
photographic equipment and/or models for the purpose of photographing specified
anatomical areas.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes including farming,
dairying, raising, breeding or management of livestock, poultry or honey bees,
forestry, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and the necessary accessory
uses for packaging, treating or storing the produce providing that the
operation of any accessory use shall be secondary to the normal agricultural
activities. This definition shall not include intensive agricultural activities
such as feedlot operations and agribusiness activities.
   AIRPORT. A place where aircraft can land and takeoff, usually equipped with
hangers, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for
passengers, including heliports.
   ANIMAL UNIT.
      (1)   One ANIMAL UNIT is equivalent to:
1 beef cow, steer, feeder or fat beef animal
0.5 horse
0.7 dairy cow
1.7 swine
6.7 sheep
33 hens, cockerels, capons, broilers
10 geese or turkeys
5 ducks
 
      (2)   Example: 200 animal units × 0.7 = 140 dairy cattle or 200 animal
units × 1.7 = 340 swine.)
   ANTENNA. Any device that radiates or captures electromagnetic wave signals,
including digital voice and data signals, analog voice and data signals, video
signals or microwave signals, and is mounted on a structure that allows freedom
from obstruction for the radiation and capture of the electromagnetic signals.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any existing structure that supports wireless
communications facilities, such as but not restricted to, telecommunications
and broadcast towers, buildings, clock towers, steeples and light poles.
   AQUIFER. A zone stratum or group of strata that can store and transit water
in sufficient quantities for specific use.
   ARCADE. A building or structure, open to the public, which contains coin
operated games and similar entertainment and amusement devices, as the primary
use or with five or more games as an accessory use.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises which provides for the
retail sale of gasoline, oil, tires, batteries and accessories for motor
vehicles and for certain motor vehicle services, including washings, tire
changing, repair service, battery service, radiator service, lubrication, brake
service, wheel service and testing or adjusting of automotive parts. Automobile
repair work may be done at a service station provided that no rebuilding of
engines, spray paint operations or body or fender repair is permitted. Gasoline
pumps and gasoline pump islands shall be located more than 12 feet from the
nearest property line.
   AUTOMOBILE STORAGE YARD. The temporary storage of vehicles which are
impounded, licensed and operable in an unroofed area.
   BAR/LOUNGE. An establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages,
including low point beer, by the drink.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A BED AND BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION may
provide no more than ten bedrooms for guests (exclusive of the living quarters
of the owner or operator). Guests at a BED AND BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION may stay
up to 14 consecutive days provided that the BED AND BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION may
only offer a daily rate and shall not offer weekly or bi-weekly rates. A BED
AND BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION may include kitchen and dining facilities to
furnish meals for guests only. Food preparation within a guest bedroom is
prohibited. A BED AND BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATION may not include a restaurant,
banquet facilities or similar services.
   BILLBOARD. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service
or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of Minnehaha County.
   BOARDINGHOUSE. A building, other than a hotel or apartment hotel, where for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging, meals or
lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons.
   BROADCAST TOWER. A structure, not including offices or studio, for the
transmission of radio or television broadcast communications.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of the lot that can be occupied by the principal
use, thus excluding the front, rear and side yards.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is completely
separated from every other portion by masonry or fire wall without any window,
which wall extends from the ground to the roof, then the portion shall be
deemed to be a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
   BUILDING ELIGIBILITY. See ELIGIBLE BUILDING SITE.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the grade to:
      (1)   The highest point of a flat roof;
      (2)   The deck line of a mansard roof; or
      (3)   The average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE. A line on the lot running parallel to the required horizontal
distance from the nearest property line.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   BUS/TRUCK TERMINAL. An area and building where buses, trucks and cargo is
stored; where loading and unloading is carried on regularly; and where minor
maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.
   CAMPGROUND. A plot of ground consisting of two or more campsites where
camping units can be located and occupied as temporary living quarters.
   CATHODIC PROTECTION. A technique to prevent corrosion of a metal surface by
making that surface the cathode of an electrochemical cell; protection of a
tank through the application of either galvanic anodes or impressed current.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Sioux Falls.
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION. The members appointed by the city to serve in an
advisory capacity on planning and zoning matters.
   CLUB. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted long-range plan intended to guide the growth
and development of the area, including analysis, recommendations, and proposals
of economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use.
   CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION. A lot, yard, corral, building or
other area where animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined for a
total of 90 days or more during any 12-month period; and where crops,
vegetation, forage growth or post-harvest residues are not sustained over any
portion of the lot or facility.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zoning district, but which if controlled, would
promote the public health, safety and welfare.
   CONTAINMENT FACILITY.
      (1)   PRIMARY. The tank, pit, container, pipe, enclosure or vessel of
first containment of a regulated substance.
      (2)   SECONDARY. A second level of containment outside the primary
containment facility designed to prevent a regulated substance from reaching
land or waters outside the containment area.
   CONTAMINATION, AIR. A concentration of any radioactive or toxic material
which is a product, by-product or otherwise associated with any exploration,
mining or milling operation that increases ambient air radiation levels by 50
mrems from the background levels established prior to the commencement of the
activity, measured at the perimeter of the mining or milling site or at the top
of an exploration hole.
   CONTAMINATION, WATER. A concentration of any radioactive or toxic material
which is a product, by-product or otherwise associated with any exploration,
mining or milling operation that exceeds the maximum contaminate levels
established by the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et
seq. and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CONTRACTOR’S SHOP AND STORAGE YARD. Use of land or building(s) for storage
and preparation of materials used by that same individual(s) in conducting the
business of construction and repair work, generally completed at some other on-
site location.
   COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION. The members appointed by the board of county
commissioners to serve in an advisory capacity on planning and zoning matters.
   DAY CARE. The providing of care and supervision of a child or children as a
supplement to regular parental care, without transfer of legal custody or
placement for adoption, with or without compensation, on a regular basis for a
part of a day.
   DAY CARE, CENTER. Is normally in a facility used only for providing day care
nursery or pre-kindergarten services, and is limited in number over 12 by the
square footage of useable space available. The ratio is presently 35 square
feet per child indoors and 50 square feet per child outdoors.
   DAY CARE, FAMILY. Care is done in a family home and the number of children
cared for is limited to a maximum of six children under 14. Included in that
count are the provider’s own children six years and under. See HOME OCCUPATION.
   DAY CARE, GROUP. Is normally in a family home. The number of children cared
for is seven to 12 children under the age of 14 including the provider’s own
children six years and under.
   DENSITY. The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing
structures per unit of land.
   DISTRICT. An area for which regulations governing the use of buildings and
premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use
are uniform.
   DRIVE-UP SERVICE WINDOW/DEVICE. An establishment which accommodates the
patron’s motor vehicles, from which the occupants may obtain or receive a
service or obtain a product through a service window or automated device.
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, constructed in conformance with
the Uniform Building Code, and used exclusively for human habitation, including
single-family, two-family and multiple- family dwellings, but not including
hotels, motels or lodging houses. This definition does not include a mobile
home or manufactured home. See mobile HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME as defined herein.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three
or more families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by
one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two
families. This definition does not include a permitted attached accessory
dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling occupied or intended to be
occupied as separate living quarters by a single-family as defined herein.
   ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION. A premises which may or may not contain buildings,
where the interconnection and usual transformation of electrical service takes
place between systems. An ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION shall be secondary,
supplementary, subordinate and auxiliary to the main system.
   ELIGIBLE BUILDING SITE (BUILDING ELIGIBILITY). A site which fulfills the
requirements for the construction or placement of a residential dwelling. To
compute the number of eligible building sites on a lot of record of 40 acres or
more, the total acreage of the parcel shall be divided by 40 acres. The
resulting whole number is the number of building sites eligible on the lot of
record.
   EXPLORATION. The act of searching for or investigating a mineral deposit. It
includes, but is not limited to, sinking shafts, tunneling, drilling core and
bore holes, and digging pits or cuts and other works for the purpose of
extracting samples prior to commencement of development of extraction
operations, and the building of roads, access ways and other facilities related
to the work. Any and all shafts, tunnels or holes shall not exceed 18 inches in
diameter unless the conditional use for EXPLORATION provides for a larger
diameter. The term does not include those activities which cause no or very
little surface disturbance, such as airborne surveys and photographs, use of
instruments or devices which are hand-carried or otherwise transported over the
surface to make magnetic, radioactive or other tests and measurements, boundary
or claim surveying, location work or other work which causes no greater land
disturbance than is caused by ordinary lawful use of the land by persons not
involved in EXPLORATION.
   FAMILY.
      (1)   One or more individuals, related by blood or law, occupying a
dwelling unit and living as a single household unit.
      (2)   A FAMILY shall not include more than three adults who are unrelated
by blood or law, in addition to persons actually related by blood or law. The
following persons shall be considered related by blood or law for the purposes
of this chapter:
         A.   A person residing with the FAMILY for the purpose of adoption;
         B.   Not more than six persons under 18 years of age, residing in a
foster home licensed or approved by a governmental agency;
         C.   Not more than four persons 19 years of age or older residing with
the FAMILY for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by a
governmental agency; and
         D.   Any person who is living with the FAMILY at the direction of a
court.
   FARMER’S MARKET. An area where space is rented to individual vendors who
grow farm products such as agricultural and horticultural goods, or who produce
food specialty products such as baked goods, candies, jams, jellies, spices,
condiments, cheeses, eggs, milk, honey, meats, fish and pasta. This definition
does not include the sale of arts and crafts products.
   FARMSTEAD. An area consisting of a farm dwelling or dwellings and
agricultural buildings and structures devoted to and used in connection with an
agricultural operation. A FARMSTEAD is generally bounded on one or more sides
by a tree belt but does not include crop and pasture land.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of Minnehaha County on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood
hazard and their potential for flooding.
   FLOODPLAIN. A land area adjoining a river, creek, watercourse or lake which
is likely to be flooded and which is designated as Zone A, AO or A1-A30 on the
FIRM
   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area.
   FLOOR AREA. The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls
and includes the total of all space on all floors of a building. It does not
include porches, garages or space in a basement or cellar when the space is
used for storage or incidental uses.
   FOWL. Birds of the order Galliformes gallus, Gallinaceous, and Anseriformes.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street or highway, between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) or for a distance of 400 feet on
either side of a proposed building or structure, measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street, but not
including property more than 400 feet distant on either side of a proposed
building or structure.
   FROZEN FOOD LOCKER. A place where the animal is dressed and packaged, where
no rendering or refining is done.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory or portion of a main building housing
the automobiles of the occupants of the premises, but not commercial vehicles.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling, storing or parking motor-driven vehicles. The term repairing shall not
include an automobile body repair shop nor the rebuilding, dismantling or
storage of wrecked or junked vehicles.
   GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building or premises, used for housing only motor-
driven vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles.
   GENERAL MANUFACTURING. Those manufacturing processes including light
manufacturing which have the potential to be a nuisance due to dust, odor,
noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat, glare or the operation of the
processes outside the building.
   GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
   GROUNDWATER. Subsurface water that fills available openings in rock or soil
materials so that it may be considered water saturated.
   GROUP HOME. A supervised living or counseling arrangement in a family home
context providing for the care of children or adults.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for
profit and located entirely within a dwelling, which use is accessory,
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes
and does not change the essential residential character or appearance of the
dwelling.
   HYDROLOGIC BALANCE. The relationship between the quality and quantity of
inflow to and outflow from the storage in hydrologic units, such as a drainage
base and aquifer, soil zone lake or reservoir it encompasses, the quantity and
quality relationships between precipitation, runoff, evaporation and the change
in ground and surface water storage.
   HYDROLOGIC REGIME. The entire state of water movement in a given area which
is a function of the climate and includes the entire water cycle for the
drainage area.
   INTERMODAL SHIPPING/STORAGE CONTAINER. A six-sided metal unit constructed as
a general cargo container used for the transport and storage of goods and
materials. Intermodal shipping/storage containers do not include railroad cars,
bus bodies, semi-trailers, and similar items designed to be permanently
attached to a chassis.
   JOINT ZONING JURISDICTION. The area beyond the Sioux Falls city limits where
the county commission and city council jointly exercise the zoning powers
granted by SDCL 11-2, 11-4 and 11-6.
   JUNKYARD. Any facility used for the storage, wrecking, dismantling, salvage,
collection, processing, purchase, sale or exchange of abandoned or discarded
vehicles, goods, waste and scrap materials including, but not limited to, two
or more abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles, glass, tires, appliances,
machinery or automotive and mechanical parts.
   KENNEL. Any premises or portion thereon where dogs, cats or other household
pets are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept for remuneration.
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals and animal shelters are specifically
excluded.
   LIGHT MANUFACTURING. Those manufacturing processes which are not obnoxious
due to dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat or glare. These
commercial and industrial uses are characterized by generally having all
aspects of the process carried on within the building itself.
   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot for the
standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having a minimum area of 540 square
feet, a minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum depth of 35 feet and a vertical
clearance of at least 14.5 feet.
   LOT. A parcel or tract of land having specific boundaries and which has been
recorded in the register of deeds office. A LOT used for residential purposes
shall include only one main building together with its accessory buildings,
open spaces and parking spaces required by these regulations and shall have its
principal frontage upon a road or other approved access.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting roads,
as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT, FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line
ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line. In no case, shall any structure be closer
than three feet to any lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. Part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in
the office of the register of deeds, or a parcel of land the deed or agreement
to convey to which was recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior to
February 21, 1978.
   LOT, WIDTH. The width of a lot at the front yard line.
   MAIN BUILDING. See PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   MAJOR STREET. Streets or roads which have been designated as freeways or
arterial routes on the major street plan.
   MAP, OFFICIAL ZONING. The map or maps, which are legally adopted as a part
of the zoning regulations that delineate the boundaries of the zoning
districts.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY or DISPENSARY. An entity registered with the
South Dakota Department of Health pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G that acquires,
possesses, stores, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies, or
dispenses cannabis, cannabis products, paraphernalia, or related supplies and
educational materials to cardholders.
   MILLING. The processing or enhancing of a mineral.
   MINE DEWATERING DISCHARGE. Water that has been discharged from active or
abandoned mines in areas affected by mineral exploration, mining and milling.
   MINERAL. An inanimate constituent of the earth in a solid, liquid or gaseous
state which, when extracted from the earth, is useable in its natural form as a
metal, a metallic compound, a chemical, an energy source or a raw material for
manufacturing or construction material. For the purpose of these regulations,
this definition does not include surface or subsurface water, geothermal
resources or sand, gravel and quarry rock.
   MINERAL EXTRACTION. The removal of a mineral from its natural occurrence on
affected land. The term includes, but is not limited to, underground and
surface mining.
   MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME. Any single-family permanent living quarters,
more than eight feet wide and 32 feet in length, and designed and built to be
towed on its own chassis.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land designed and maintained for the
purpose of providing a location for mobile homes and site delivered dwellings
as living quarters and where private roads provide access to individual lots.
This definition shall specifically exclude sales lots for mobile homes, site
delivered dwellings, travel trailers and similar operations.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. Any building or structure in which a business,
service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing or repair of vehicles
is conducted or rendered. Including rebuilding of engines, spray paint
operations and hourly repair.
   MREM. One thousandth of a REM.
   NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY. Telephone, electric and cable television
lines, poles and equipment; water or gas pipes, mains and valves; sewer pipes
and valves; lift stations; telephone exchanges and repeaters; and all other
facilities and equipment (excluding buildings that exceed 120 square feet of
roof area) necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public
utility.
   NONCONFORMING USES. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of passage of these regulations or amendment thereto, which does not
conform after the passage of these regulations or amendment thereto with the
use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   NONSTANDARD USE. The category of nonconformance consisting of lots occupied
by buildings or structures or uses which existed immediately prior to the
effective date of this chapter which fail to comply with any of the following:
minimum lot requirements for the area, density, width, front yard, side yard,
rear yard, height, unobstructed open space or parking for the district in which
they are located, even though the use of the premises conforms to the permitted
uses within the district as set out in the provisions of this chapter.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
   PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store
one automobile, together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a
street and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
   PERMISSIVE USES. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
   PERMITTED SPECIAL USE. A use allowed in a zoning district subject to the
applicable restrictions of that zoning district and additionally subject to
certain restrictions for that specific use.
   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES (PCS). Licenses granted by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to build digital wireless phone networks which
compete with standard cellular service.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or their apparel; including, but not limited to:
laundry or dry cleaning, receiving station; garment services; coin operated
laundries; photographic and art studios; beauty shops; barber shops; shoe
repair; reducing salons and health clubs; clothing rental; private schools.
   PLANNING DIRECTOR. The individual for Minnehaha County designated to
administer the zoning regulations and who is responsible for the enforcement of
the regulations.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the primary or
predominant use of the lot on which it is located.
   PRODUCE STAND. A produce stand is defined as a temporary or permanent
structure used for the display and sale of agricultural products, not to
include retail nursery operations.
   PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES. See NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY. The definition
is the same as the neighborhood except that buildings that exceed 120 square
feet in roof area are allowable.
   QUARTER-QUARTER SECTION. A quarter of a quarter section as determined by the
United States Rectangular Land Survey System. A government lot as determined by
the rectangular land survey system shall be considered a quarter-quarter
section for purposes of these regulations. For purposes of these regulations,
rights-of-way for public or private transportation shall not impact the
completeness of a QUARTER-QUARTER SECTION.
   RECHARGE CAPACITY. The ability of the soils and underlying materials to
allow precipitation and runoff to infiltrate and reach the zone of saturation.
   RECREATION FACILITY. A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure-time activities, and other customary and usual recreational
activities, either active or passive. Related functions such as changing rooms
or restrooms, and maintenance may be housed in buildings or structures.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials or products that may be readily separated
from the solid waste stream and may be used or reused as a substitute for raw
materials or other items, including but not limited to aluminum, paper, glass
and plastic.
   RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY. An established facility where recyclable
materials are collected and/or processed for shipment off site, including
processing operations such as grinding or crushing of the materials. No on-site
sales of materials or salvage-type automobiles may be conducted or processed at
these types of facilities. Facilities which handle recyclable hazardous
materials or waste petroleum products as a primary or substantial portion of
their business are not included.
   REGULATED SUBSTANCE. A regulated substance shall include: pesticides and
fertilizers, hazardous and toxic substances designated by the EPA through any
of the following: Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. or Comprehensive
Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601
et seq.; petroleum and petroleum substances, kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge,
oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils, additives used in refining
oils and gasoline. This term does not include sewage and sewage sludge.
   REM (ROENTGEN EQUIVALENT MAN). A measurement of the biological effects
resulting from ionizing radiant energy where roentgen is the amount of
radiation leading to the absorption of 88 ergs of energy per gram of air.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AREA. An area of land that is located in a
residential zoning district; a residential subarea within a planned development
zoning district; or a subdivision of five or more lots.
   RETAIL SALES AND TRADE. Establishments engaged in selling products, goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption; and
establishments engaged in providing services or entertainment to the general
public including eating and drinking establishments, hotels, motels, repair
shops, indoor amusement, copying services, health, professional, educational
and social services, and other miscellaneous services.
   SALVAGE OPERATION, SCRAP PROCESSING OPERATION. A facility where salvageable
materials are collected and/or processed for shipment off site, including
processing operations such as grinding or crushing of the materials. Facilities
which handle recyclable hazardous materials, or waste petroleum products as a
primary or substantial portion of their business are not included.
   SALVAGE OR JUNK YARD. An open area where waste or scrap materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
tires, bottles and motor vehicles. This definition includes an automobile
wrecking or dismantling yard, but does not include uses established entirely
within enclosed buildings.
   SALVAGEABLE MATERIALS. Materials or products from dismantled, non-operating
or wrecked automobiles, trucks, trailers, equipment, machinery, mobile homes,
tractors or farm machinery, appliances or other vehicles or parts thereof; as
well as, scrap metals including iron, steel and any other metallic material
except recyclable material as defined herein.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A site for the disposal of garbage and other refuse
material.
   SETBACK/SETBACK LINE. The line that is the required minimum distance from
any lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure
must be erected or placed.
   SIGN. Any object, device or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or
visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
This definition does not include national or state flags or their emblem or
insignia, interior window displays, athletic scoreboards or the official
announcements or signs of government.
   SIGN (OFF-PREMISES). A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.
   SIGN (ON-PREMISES). A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is
located.
   SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A facility for the slaughtering and processing of animals
and the refining of their byproducts.
   SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SECS).  Any mechanism or device designed for
the purpose of converting solar energy into electrical or mechanical power.
   SOLID WASTE RECEIVING STATION. A facility where garbage and other refuse
material is brought to the site and deposited in a container, then compressed
and transported to a sanitary landfill.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         A.   Human genitals, pubic region;
         B.   Buttock; and
         C.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching or undraped human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
   STABLE. Any premises or part thereon where horses or any equine animal are
maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return for remuneration, or are kept
for the purpose of sale.
   STATIONARY TANK. An above-ground tank which is fixed permanently in place on
a foundation, rack, cradle, stilts or on the ground. The term does not include
tanks mounted on wheels, trolleys, skids, pallets or rollers.
   STEALTH. For freestanding telecommunications towers, it is the ability to
blend into the context of the surrounding environment at a given location. For
antenna support structures, STEALTH is the ability to camouflage or conceal the
presence of wireless communication facilities. Methods of camouflage or
concealment are required to be approved by the county planning director.
   STOCKYARDS. A facility for the temporary confinement and marketing of
animals.
   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
   STREET. A public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property. Also referred to a ROAD or HIGHWAY.
   STREET LINE. The line between the public right-of-way and private property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. For the
purpose of these regulations, retaining walls, concrete slabs and utility poles
are not considered structures.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building developments
(whether immediate or future). This term includes resubdivision and, when
appropriate to the context, is related to the process of subdividing or to the
land subdivided.
   SURFACE IMPOUNDMENT. A facility or part of a facility which is a natural
topographic depression, human-made excavation or dike area formed primarily of
earthen materials (although it may be lined with human-made materials), which
is designed to hold an accumulation of liquid wastes or wastes containing free
liquids, and which is not an injection well. Examples of SURFACE IMPOUNDMENTS
are holding, storage, settling and aeration pits, ponds and lagoons.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A self-supporting lattice, guyed-lattice or
monopole structure which supports wireless communications facilities. The term
includes new and existing towers that are used for services such as microwave,
common carrier, cellular telephone, personal communication services, two-way
radio paging and other similar services. The term TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER does
not include amateur radio operators’ equipment, as licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance above grade to the
highest point of the telecommunications tower, including the base pad and any
antenna.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITE. The lot of record for which the
telecommunications tower is located.
   TRAILER. Any of the following.
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
      (2)   MOTOR-HOME. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (3)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses. Permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer of the
trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not
exceeding eight feet, and a body length not exceeding 30 feet.
   TRUCK STOP. Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a
business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage or
repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the
dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into motor
vehicles, the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar
commercial vehicles. A TRUCK STOP also may include overnight accommodations and
restaurant facilities.
   UNSAFE SIGN. A sign on which the display area or structure has deteriorated
due to rust, rotting or physical damage to the point where any portion of the
sign has the potential to fall shall be considered unsafe.
   UNSIGHTLY SIGN. A sign which has deteriorated to the point where at least
one-fourth of the display area is no longer clearly recognizable at a distance
of 20 feet; or where the paint is peeling, chipping or flaking from the
structure shall be considered an unsightly sign.
   VACATION HOME RENTAL/SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A dwelling or portion thereof, or a
mobile or manufactured home or portion thereof, that is rented, leased, or
furnished to the public on a daily or weekly basis for more than 14 days in a
calendar year and is not occupied by an owner or manager during the time of
rental. This term does not include a bed and breakfast establishment as defined
in SDCL 34-18-9.1.
   VEHICLE. Shall include, but not be limited to, any motor vehicle which is
designed to be driven, and which is self-propelled, or is intended to be self-
propelled. This definition shall also include all VEHICLES, whether or not
self-propelled, that are intended to be attached, pulled or fixed to a VEHICLE.
   VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT, AGRICULTURAL. Any tool, implement, piece of equipment
or machinery that is presently used in an agricultural operation or which is
used in the regular or ongoing maintenance of the property; which includes, but
is not limited to, equipment used for planting, harvesting, spraying,
fertilizing, haying, livestock and manure handling, and other farming
functions, or for property maintenance.
   VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT, COMMERCIAL. A commercial vehicle and equipment is
defined as any of the following:
      (1)   Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property
in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-
for-hire or has commercial vehicle identification;
      (2)   Vehicles including but not limited to any solid waste collection
vehicle, semi-tractor, semi-trailer, dump truck, concrete mixer truck, box
truck, towing or recovery vehicle, and any construction equipment whether
located on the ground or on a truck, trailer or semi-trailer;
      (3)   Any vehicle having three or more axles, or exceeding 22 feet in
length;
      (4)   Any vehicle or equipment that has a gross vehicle weight of more
than 10,000 pounds; and
      (5)   Any equipment or trailer (open or closed) which is towed by another
commercial vehicle.
   VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL. Any vehicle designed for, used or capable of use for
sport or recreation, whether or not eligible to be licensed for use upon
streets and highways, including but not limited to campers, pickup campers,
tent trailers and motor homes, boats and boat trailers, snowmobiles, motor
bikes or all terrain vehicles, but excluding vehicles designed for commercial,
industrial or agricultural use.
   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. A triangular area on corner properties within which the
placement of certain structures, materials and the like are imposed under the
provisions of this chapter.
   WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
   WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, manure, sludge from a waste treatment plant,
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other
discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural
operations, and from community activities, but does not include solid or
dissolved materials in domestic sewage or dissolved materials in irrigation
return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to
permits under § 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1342, as amended to January 1, 1986, or source, special nuclear or by-product
materials as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2011
et seq., as amended to January 1.
   WATER SOURCE PROTECTION AREA. A geographical area overlying a geologic
formation, group of formations, or part of a formation capable of yielding,
storing or transmitting a usable amount of groundwater to wells or springs for
domestic or animal use. Any deposition of sand and gravel that is connected to
water bearing strata or is not isolated.
   WATER TABLE. The upper surface of a zone of saturation where the body of
groundwater is not confined by an overlying impermeable zone.
   WHOLESALE MERCHANDISING/TRADE. Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, the individuals or companies.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). Any mechanism or device designed for
the purpose of converting wind energy into electrical or mechanical power.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides,
antennas, antenna arrays and any other equipment associated with the
transmission or reception of telecommunications signals which a person seeks to
locate or have installed upon or near a telecommunications tower or antenna
support structure.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the
front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.
   YARD LINE. See BUILDING LINE.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full width of the lot between a principal
building and the rear lot line.
   YARD, REQUIRED. A required yard shall mean the required open space between a
property line and a building line. The open space shall be unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upwards except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. The required front yard shall extend across the front
of a lot between the property lines. There shall be a REQUIRED FRONT YARD on
each street side of a corner lot. The REQUIRED FRONT YARD with the smallest
required front yard may be referred to as the side-street-side front yard.
   YARD, REQUIRED REAR. The REQUIRED REAR YARD shall extend across the rear of
a lot between the property lines. On corner lots, the REQUIRED REAR YARD may be
to the rear of either street. On interior lots, the REQUIRED REAR YARD shall in
all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. The REQUIRED SIDE YARD shall extend between the
required front yard line and the required rear yard line. There shall only be
one REQUIRED SIDE YARD on a corner lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot,
and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A specifically delineated area in the joint zoning
jurisdiction within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the
use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
   ZONING PERMIT. A document signed by the planning director or an authorized
representative as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion or
installation of a building, which acknowledges that use, or building complies
with the provisions of the zoning regulations or an authorized variance
therefrom.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 24.02) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 100-03, passed
10-20-2003; Ord. 34-04, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 126-07, passed 7-16-2007; Ord.
76-09, passed 8-17-2009; Ord. 26-10, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 12-14, passed 1-28-
14; Ord. 37-14, passed 6-24-2014; Ord. 114- 21, passed 9-28-2021; Ord. 98-23,
passed 10-24- 2023; Ord. 24-24, passed 3-26-2024; Ord. 18-25, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 159.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished pursuant to SDCL 7-18A-2. Each and every day
that the violation continues may constitute a separate offense.
(1992 Code, App. C, § 23.05) (Ord. 20-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 126-07, passed
7-16-2007)
CHAPTER 160: ZONING
Section
Purpose and Title
   
160.001   Name and citation of title
   
160.002   Purpose
Definitions
   
160.005   Definitions
Districts and Boundaries
   
160.010   Districts designated
   
160.011   Incorporated by reference
   
160.012   Boundaries of districts; maps
   
160.013   Rules where uncertainty as to boundaries arises
   
160.014   Vacation of streets and alleys
   
160.015   Classification of annexed territory
   
160.016   Single-family residential—rural (RR)
   
160.017   Single-family residential—suburban (RS)
   
160.018   Single-family residential— traditional (RT-1)
   
160.019   Residential cluster development— PUD (RCD-PUD)
   
160.020   Single-family residential—historic preservation (RHP)
   
160.021   Manufactured residential housing (MH)
   
160.022   Twin home/duplex residential— suburban (RD-1)
   
160.023   Townhome residential—suburban (RD-2)
   
160.024   Townhome residential—traditional (RT-2)
   
160.025   Apartment residential—low density (RA-1)
   
160.026   Apartment residential—moderate density (RA-2)
   
160.027   Apartment residential—high density (RA-3)
   
160.028   Office (O)
   
160.029   General institutional (S-1)
   
160.030   Institutional campus PUD (S-2 PUD)
   
160.031   Live-work (LW)
   
160.032   Commercial—pedestrian-oriented (C-1)
   
160.033   Commercial—neighborhood and streetcar (C-2)
   
160.034   Commercial—community (C-3)
   
160.035   Commercial—regional (C-4)
   
160.036   Light industrial (I-1)
   
160.037   Heavy industrial (I-2)
   
160.038   Airport (AP)
   
160.039   Conservation (CN)
   
160.040   Recreation (REC)
   
160.041   Agriculture (AG)
   
160.042   Village PUD (V-PUD)
   
160.043   Downtown PUD (DT-PUD)
   
160.044   Pedestrian-oriented PUD (PO-PUD)
   
160.045   Midtown mixed-use—low density (MMU1)
   
160.046   Midtown mixed-use—moderate density (MMU2)
   
160.047   Midtown mixed-use—high density (MMU3)
Form Regulations
   
160.050   Forms designated
   
160.055   Form designation
Form DD1: Detached Dwelling—Rural
   
160.060   Scope of regulations
   
160.061   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.062   Principal uses
   
160.063   Accessory uses
   
160.064   Bulk regulations
   
160.065   Other applicable regulations
Form DD2: Detached Dwelling—Suburban
   
160.070   Scope of regulations
   
160.071   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.072   Principal uses
   
160.073   Accessory uses
   
160.074   Bulk regulations
   
160.075   Other applicable regulations
Form DD3: Detached Dwelling—Traditional
   
160.080   Scope of regulations
   
160.081   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.082   Principal uses
   
160.083   Accessory uses
   
160.084   Bulk regulations
   
160.085   Other applicable regulations
Form DD4: Detached Dwelling—Historic Preservation
   
160.090   Scope of regulations
   
160.091   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.092   Principal uses
   
160.093   Accessory uses
   
160.094   Bulk regulations
   
160.095   Other applicable regulations
Form DD5: Detached Dwelling—Older Manufactured Home
   
160.100   Scope of regulations
   
160.101   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.102   Principal uses
   
160.103   Accessory uses
   
160.104   Bulk regulations
   
160.105   Other applicable regulations
Form DD6: Detached Dwelling—Newer Manufactured Home
   
160.110   Scope of regulations
   
160.111   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.112   Principal uses
   
160.113   Accessory uses
   
160.114   Bulk regulations
   
160.115   Other applicable regulations
Form DD7: Detached Dwelling—High Density
   
160.120   Scope of regulations
   
160.121   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.122   Principal uses
   
160.123   Accessory uses
   
160.124   Bulk regulations
   
160.125   Other applicable regulations
Form AD1: Attached Dwelling—Suburban Twin Home/Duplex
   
160.130   Scope of regulations
   
160.131   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.132   Principal uses
   
160.133   Accessory uses
   
160.134   Bulk regulations
   
160.135   Other applicable regulations
Form AD2: Attached Dwelling—Suburban Four-unit Townhome
   
160.140   Scope of regulations
   
160.141   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.142   Principal uses
   
160.143   Accessory uses
   
160.144   Bulk regulations
   
160.145   Other applicable regulations
Form AD3: Attached Dwelling—Suburban Eight-unit Townhome
   
160.150   Scope of regulations
   
160.151   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.152   Principal uses
   
160.153   Accessory uses
   
160.154   Bulk regulations
   
160.155   Other applicable regulations
Form AD4: Attached Dwelling—Traditional Eight-unit Townhome
   
160.160   Scope of regulations
   
160.161   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.162   Principal uses
   
160.163   Accessory uses
   
160.164   Bulk regulations
   
160.165   Other applicable regulations
Form MD1: Multiple Dwelling—Small
   
160.170   Scope of regulations
   
160.171   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.172   Principal uses
   
160.173   Accessory uses
   
160.174   Bulk regulations
   
160.175   Other applicable regulations
Form MD2: Multiple Dwelling—Medium
   
160.180   Scope of regulations
   
160.181   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.182   Principal uses
   
160.183   Accessory uses
   
160.184   Bulk regulations
   
160.185   Other applicable regulations
Form MD3: Multiple Dwelling—Large
   
160.190   Scope of regulations
   
160.191   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.192   Principal uses
   
160.193   Accessory uses
   
160.194   Bulk regulations
   
160.195   Other applicable regulations
Form NF1: Neighborhood Facilities
   
160.200   Scope of regulations
   
160.201   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.202   Principal uses
   
160.203   Accessory uses
   
160.204   Bulk regulations
   
160.205   Other applicable regulations
Form NF2: Neighborhood Residential Facilities
   
160.210   Scope of regulations
   
160.211   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.212   Principal uses
   
160.213   Accessory uses
   
160.214   Bulk regulations
   
160.215   Other applicable regulations
Form BCF1: Business and Community Facilities—Small
   
160.220   Scope of regulations
   
160.221   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.222   Principal uses
   
160.223   Accessory uses
   
160.224   Bulk regulations
   
160.225   Other applicable regulations
Form BCF2: Business and Community Facilities—Community Service
   
160.230   Scope of regulations
   
160.231   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.232   Principal uses
   
160.233   Accessory uses
   
160.234   Bulk regulations
   
160.235   Other applicable regulations
Form BCF3: Business and Community Facilities—Large
   
160.240   Scope of regulations
   
160.241   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.242   Principal uses
   
160.243   Accessory uses
   
160.244   Bulk regulations
   
160.245   Other applicable regulations
Form BCF4: Business and Community Facilities—Open Space
   
160.250   Scope of regulations
   
160.251   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.252   Principal uses
   
160.253   Accessory uses
   
160.254   Bulk regulations
   
160.255   Other applicable regulations
Form RE1: Limited Retail Employment
   
160.260   Scope of regulations
   
160.261   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.262   Principal uses
   
160.263   Accessory uses
   
160.264   Bulk regulations
   
160.265   Other applicable regulations
Form RE2: Streetcar Retail Employment
   
160.270   Scope of regulations
   
160.271   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.272   Principal uses
   
160.273   Accessory uses
   
160.274   Bulk regulations
   
160.275   Other applicable regulations
Form RE3: Parking-Oriented Retail Employment
   
160.280   Scope of regulations
   
160.281   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.282   Principal uses
   
160.283   Accessory uses
   
160.284   Bulk regulations
   
160.285   Other applicable regulations
Form RE4: Community Retail Employment
   
160.290   Scope of regulations
   
160.291   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.292   Principal uses
   
160.293   Accessory uses
   
160.294   Bulk regulations
   
160.295   Other applicable regulations
Form RE5: Regional Retail Employment
   
160.300   Scope of regulations
   
160.301   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.302   Principal uses
   
160.303   Accessory uses
   
160.304   Bulk regulations
   
160.305   Other applicable regulations
Form RE6: Village Mixed-Use
   
160.310   Scope of regulations
   
160.311   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.312   Principal uses
   
160.313   Accessory uses
   
160.314   PUD regulations
   
160.315   Bulk regulations
   
160.316   Pedestrian access regulations
   
160.317   Other applicable regulations
Form MU1: Mixed-Use—Low Density
   
160.320   Scope of regulations
   
160.321   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.322   Principal uses
   
160.323   Accessory uses
   
160.324   Bulk regulations
   
160.325   Other applicable regulations
Form MU2: Mixed-Use—Medium Density
   
160.327   Scope of regulations
   
160.328   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.329   Principal uses
   
160.330   Accessory uses
   
160.331   Bulk regulations
   
160.332   Other applicable regulations
   
160.333   [Reserved]
   
160.334   [Reserved]
Form MU3: Mixed-Use—High Density
   
160.335   Scope of regulations
   
160.336   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.337   Principal uses
   
160.338   Accessory uses
   
160.339   Bulk regulations
   
160.340   Other applicable regulations
   
160.341   [Reserved]
Form WM1: Warehouse and Manufacturing—Light
   
160.342   Scope of regulations
   
160.343   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.344   Principal uses
   
160.345   Accessory uses
   
160.346   Bulk regulations
   
160.347   Other applicable regulations
Form WM2: Warehouse and Manufacturing—Heavy
   
160.350   Scope of regulations
   
160.351   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.352   Principal uses
   
160.353   Accessory uses
   
160.354   Bulk regulations
   
160.355   Other applicable regulations
Form WM3: Warehouse and Manufacturing—Mining and Waste
   
160.358   Scope of regulations
   
160.359   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.360   Principal uses
   
160.361   Accessory uses
   
160.362   Bulk regulations
   
160.363   Other applicable regulations
Form WM4: Warehouse and Manufacturing—Airport Facilities
   
160.364   Scope of regulations
   
160.365   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.366   Principal uses
   
160.367   Accessory uses
   
160.368   Bulk regulations
   
160.369   Other applicable regulations
   
160.370   [Reserved]
   
160.371   [Reserved]
Form OPEN1: Conservation Open Space
   
160.372   Scope of regulations
   
160.373   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.374   Principal uses
   
160.375   Accessory uses
   
160.376   Bulk regulations
   
160.377   Other applicable regulations
Form OPEN2: Recreation Open Space
   
160.380   Scope of regulations
   
160.381   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.382   Principal uses
   
160.383   Accessory uses
   
160.384   Bulk regulations
   
160.385   Other applicable regulations
Form OPEN3: Agriculture Open Space
   
160.388   Scope of regulations
   
160.389   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.390   Principal uses
   
160.391   Accessory uses
   
160.392   Bulk regulations
   
160.393   Other applicable regulations
   
160.394   [Reserved]
   
160.395   [Reserved]
Form UT1: Basic Utilities
   
160.396   Scope of regulations
   
160.397   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.398   Principal uses
   
160.399   Accessory uses
   
160.400   Bulk regulations
   
160.401   Other applicable regulations
   
160.402   [Reserved]
   
160.403   [Reserved]
Form UT2: Tower Utilities
   
160.404   Scope of regulations
   
160.405   Allowed zoning districts
   
160.406   Principal uses
   
160.407   Accessory uses
   
160.408   Bulk regulations
   
160.409   Other applicable regulations
Overlay Districts
   
160.410   Intent; scope of regulations
   
160.411   Boundaries of districts
   
160.412   Uses permitted
   
160.413   Accessory uses
   
160.414   Parking regulations
   
160.415   Sign regulations
   
160.416   Density, area, yard and height regulations
   
160.417   Design review overlay districts enumerated
   
160.418   Airport influence overlay district
   
160.419   Approach zone
   
160.420   Transition zones
   
160.421   Conical zone
   
160.422   Noise exposure zone
   
160.423   Avigation easement
   
160.424   Acknowledgment of airport influence overlay district
   
160.425   Billboard/off-premise sign opportunity overlay district
PUD Planned Unit Development Districts
   
160.440   Intent; scope of regulations
   
160.441   Compliance with comprehensive plan
   
160.442   Procedure
   
160.443   Initial development plan submittal process
   
160.444   Initial development plan submittal elements
   
160.445   Final development plan process and submittal elements
   
160.446   Conformance of final development plans
   
160.447   Rezoning of PUDs and amendment of initial development plans
   
160.448   Institutional campus (S-2) PUD district
   
160.449   Downtown (DT) PUD district
   
160.450   Village (V-PUD) district
   
160.451   Pedestrian-oriented mixed-use (PO-PUD) district
   
160.452   Residential cluster development (RCD) PUD district
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
   
160.460   Purpose and intent
   
160.461   Continuation of nonconforming uses
   
160.462   Use becoming nonconforming by change in law or boundaries
   
160.463   Change of nonconforming use
   
160.464   Extension or enlargement
   
160.465   Restoration after damage
   
160.466   Discontinuation of nonconforming uses
   
160.467   Effect on use which is illegal under prior law
   
160.468   Continuation of nonstandard uses
Fences
   
160.480   Fences
Landscape and Buffer Yard Standards
   
160.485   Landscape standards
   
160.486   [Reserved]
   
160.487   [Reserved]
   
160.488   Buffer yards
   
160.489   [Reserved]
   
160.490   [Reserved]
   
160.491   Standards for outdoor lighting
Additional Yard Regulations
   
160.505   Basics of measuring
   
160.506   Tracts with more than one main building with BCF, RE, WM, UT, and MD
forms
   
160.507   Location of accessory buildings
   
160.508   Front yard setback averaging
   
160.509   Adjustment to side yard requirements
   
160.510   Adjustment of yards when located on an alley
   
160.511   Projections from buildings
   
160.512   Chimney projection into yards
   
160.513   Porches and terraces in front yards
   
160.514   Projection of terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, decks and
ornamental features
   
160.515   Front yard; driveways
   
160.516   Future street rights-of-way
   
160.517   Intersection vision clearance area
   
160.518   Driveway vision clearance area
Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations
   
160.550   General conditions
   
160.551   Off-street parking requirements
   
160.552   Reductions
   
160.553   Residential parking
   
160.554   Off-street loading requirements
   
160.555   Stacking and queuing
   
160.556   Minimum improvement and maintenance standards
Original Art Murals
   
160.560   Purpose and intent
   
160.561   Original art mural minimum standards
   
160.562   Original art mural registration
On-Premises Sign Regulations
   
160.570   Purpose and intent
   
160.571   Sign standards
   
160.572   Allowed and unauthorized sign types in each district
   
160.573   Regulations and limitations of temporary signs
   
160.574   Regulations and limitations of changeable signs
   
160.575   Regulations and limitations for identification signs
   
160.576   Exemptions
   
160.577   Illumination
   
160.578   Prohibited signs
   
160.579   Nonconforming signage
   
160.580   Sign maintenance
   
160.581   Abandoned signs
   
160.582   Permitting process
   
160.583   Appeals
Off-Premises Signs
   
160.587   Purpose and intent
   
160.588   Establishment of billboard/off-premises sign opportunity overlay
districts
   
160.591   General regulations
   
160.592   Conditional uses
   
160.593   Nonconforming signs
Alternative Site Plans
   
160.594   Procedure
   
160.595   Application requirements
   
160.596   Alternative site plan — planning commission hearing
   
160.597   Amendments to alternative site plans
   
160.598   Common open space alternative plans—MD1, MD2, MD3, NF2, BCF3 forms
   
160.599   Landscaping and buffer yard alternative plans
   
160.600   Parking reduction alternative plans
   
160.601   [Reserved]
   
160.602   Signage alternative plans
   
160.603   Alternative site plans for streetcar (RE2) forms
Conditional Use Permits
   
160.605   Procedure
   
160.606   Application
   
160.607   Fees
   
160.608   Information on conditional use plans
   
160.609   Planning commission hearing
   
160.610   City council hearing
   
160.611   Approval and amendments to conditional use permits
   
160.612   Expiration
   
160.613   Permit revocation
   
160.614   Preexisting uses
   
160.615   Reapplication
   
160.616   Conditional use standards
Comprehensive Plan Amendment
   
160.630   Procedure
   
160.631   Application
   
160.632   Filing fee
   
160.633   Planning commission hearings
   
160.634   City council hearing
   
160.635   Reapplication
Change of Zone
   
160.650   Application to city or by city for zoning district change
   
160.651   Fees
   
160.652   Review criteria
   
160.653   Planning commission hearing
   
160.654   City council hearing
   
160.655   Reapplication
Administrative Modification of Required Yards and Buffer Yard Berms
   
160.660   Types and standards
Board of Adjustment
   
160.665   Board established
   
160.666   Membership
   
160.667   Rules
   
160.668   Meetings
   
160.669   Appeal procedure
   
160.670   Public notice
   
160.671   Stays
   
160.672   Jurisdiction
   
160.673   Decisions of board; scope and factors considered
   
160.674   Limitations
   
160.675   Court review
Administration and Enforcement
   
160.690   Powers and duties
   
160.691   Right of entry
   
160.692   Stop order
   
160.693   Occupancy violation
   
160.694   Cooperation of other officials and officers
Zoning Permits
   
160.705   Permits required
   
160.706   Application
   
160.707   Information on plot plan
   
160.708   Issuance
   
160.709   Retention of plans
   
160.710   Validity of permit
   
160.711   Expiration
   
160.712   Suspension or revocation
Certificate of Occupancy
   
160.725   Certificate of occupancy required
   
160.726   Certificate of occupancy; required for building permits
   
160.727   Certificate of occupancy; issuance
   
160.728   Temporary certificate
   
160.729   Certificate of occupancy; required for nonconforming uses
   
160.730   Record of certificates of occupancy to be kept
Fees
   
160.745   General regulations
   
160.746   Change of zone
   
160.747   [Reserved]
   
160.748   Initial development plan
   
160.749   Final development plan
   
160.750   Planned unit development amendments
   
160.751   Conditional use
   
160.752   [Reserved]
   
160.753   Design review and alternative site plan
   
160.754   Board of adjustment
   
160.755   Exemption for city filing on its own behalf
   
160.756   Zoning permit
   
160.757   Fees for zoning verification letters
   
160.758   Subdivision ordinance
   
160.759   Annexations
   
160.760   Future land use plan amendments
General Provisions
   
160.775   General regulations
   
160.776   Purpose of catch heads; introductory statements and illustrations
   
160.777   Amendments
   
160.778   Fractions
   
160.779   Violation and penalty
   
160.780   Interpretation, abrogation and severability
   
160.781   Term or title of director
   
160.782   Savings clause
   
160.783   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 111
   Amusements, see
ch. 113
   Building, see
ch. 150
   Extraterritorial zoning regulations, see
ch. 159
   Food and food handlers, see
ch. 112
   Historic preservation, see
ch. 151
   Manufactured homes, see
ch. 152
   Parks and recreation, see
ch. 95
   Pawnbrokers, and dealers in precious metals and gems, see
ch. 116
   Planning, see
ch. 154
   Sidewalks in planned unit developments, see § 96.056
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
   Storm drainage fee, see §
51.100
   Subdivisions, see
ch. 157
   Utilities, see title V
Statutory reference:
   Municipal planning and zoning, see SDCL ch. 11-4
   Power to adopt zoning ordinance, see SDCL 9-12-13
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 9-13 was adopted on 3-19-2013, and approved by the electorate on
4-8-2014. It became effective on 4-16-2014.
PURPOSE AND TITLE
§ 160.001 NAME AND CITATION OF TITLE.
   These regulations shall be referred to as the 2013 Shape Places Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Sioux Falls.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.002 PURPOSE.
   (a)   These regulations have been based upon the adopted Sioux Falls
Comprehensive Plan prepared for the city of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and are
in conformance with SDCL ch. 11-4. These regulations are designed to carry out
the goals and objective of the comprehensive plan, but especially to lessen
congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other
dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewer, school parks, and other public necessities.
      These regulations have been made with reasonable consideration of the
character and intensity of various forms and land uses and the need for public
facilities and services that would develop from those uses. These regulations
are necessary for the best physical development of the community.
   (b)   (1)   The regulations are intended to preserve and protect existing
property uses and values against adverse or unharmonious adjacent uses by
zoning all land within the city limits of the city.
   (c)   The land use regulations divide the area into a number of forms and
zoning districts:
      (1)   In order to provide a broad range of recreational facilities, a
number of areas will be set aside as recreational and conservation areas. Open
space areas can contribute to the aesthetic quality of the city as well as
provide a functional and attractive use for otherwise unusable land such as
floodplains and steep terrains. The provision of a district for recreational
and conservation areas will provide open space to lessen congestion and also
protect and preserve woodlands, wetlands, and wildlife habitats in and around
the city.
      (2)   The regulations include one agricultural district to provide for
the preservation of prime agricultural land while at the same time allowing for
compatible nonfarm uses on those lands which are not suitable for farming.
      (3)   A number of residential districts have been provided. The
regulations provide for single-family detached housing which is located on
suburban, cluster, and traditional-style lots, as well as for the construction
of duplexes, twin homes, town houses, multiple units, and manufactured homes.
The regulations establish districts where the single-family homes are provided
maximum protection from intrusions, including higher density residential uses,
while still providing safe, attractive areas for apartments, town houses, and
manufactured homes to locate.
      (4)   Office and institutional districts including general office,
general institutional land uses and campus institutional areas providing for
business and community service forms and uses.
      (5)   Commercial districts recognize the various types and levels of
retail activity that are needed throughout the community. The regulations
provide for neighborhood convenience shopping as well as community and regional
retail.
      (6)   The industrial districts provide for a light industrial district
for modern industrial- park-like uses. These would be attractive pollution-free
uses with large setbacks and no open storage. The heavy industrial district
will allow for industrial uses that require additional mitigation measures.
      (7)   Mixed-use planned unit developments are encouraged with design
standards as recommended in the Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan. As
an existing mixed-use area, downtown is one of the city’s largest employment
centers and a burgeoning residential area. The downtown mixed-use district is
differentiated from the other districts not only by the variety of uses it
allows, but also because of the highly dense physical attributes of the
downtown area.
      (8)   Other districts have been and will be provided as necessary.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
DEFINITIONS
§ 160.005 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   In the application of this chapter, the rules and definitions
contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
      (1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future.
      (2)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and the plural the singular.
      (3)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
      (4)   The word “may” is permissive.
      (5)   The word “used” or “occupied” shall include the words “intended,”
“designed” or “arranged to be used or occupied.”
      (6)   The word “lot” shall include the words “plot,” “parcel” or “tract.”
      (7)   The word “person” shall include a “firm,” “association,”
“organization,” “partnership,” “trust,” “company” or “corporation” as well as
an “individual.”
      (8)   The word “building” shall include the words “structure” and
“premises.”
      (9)   Any word not herein defined shall be as defined in any recognized
standard English dictionary.
   (b)   Definitions.
      ABANDONED OR ABANDONMENT. The relinquishment of property, or a cessation
of the use of the property, by the owner or lessee without any intention of
transferring rights to the property to another owner or of resuming the use of
the property.
      ABUTTING. (See CONTIGUOUS.)
      ACCESSORY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Alcohol that is either sold
on-site or provided as a complimentary service as an incidental and subordinate
portion of the existing business. This definition does not include full-service
restaurant establishments as defined elsewhere in this title.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. One that:
         A.   Is customary and clearly incidental and subordinate to the
principal building or principal use.
         B.   Serves exclusively the principal building or principal use.
         C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants
of the principal building or principal use served.
         D.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served, with the single exception of the accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot as the building or use served.
         E.   An accessory use, unless specifically listed otherwise, shall be
within the same building as the primary use. All accessory uses shall have
their operations internal to the primary use. However, uses such as day care
operations within places of worship, offices, or other uses may have outdoor
play areas that are to the same standards as if they were a principal use.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit either attached to a single-
family principal dwelling or located on the same lot and having a separate
address and entrance or an independent means of access.
      ACCESSORY PARKING, OFF-SITE. A parking area, open or enclosed, available
with or without compensation, to accommodate clients, customers, employees,
occupants, and the like of a principal building or principal use served, which
is located off-site from the principal building or principal use served.
      ACTIVITY. Any development or use encompassed within the jurisdiction of
this chapter.
      ADJACENT. Placed near or close; may be, but does not need to be,
touching. Property is adjacent when separated by a right-of-way.
      ADULT AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT. Any use that has as part of its
operations amusement or entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas or which features topless dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainment.
      ADULT BOOKSTORES, NEWSSTAND, VIDEO STORE, OR COMBINATION. An
establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock and
trade, books, magazines, publications, films, or other electronic media and
other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis of
sexually oriented material depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity
for less than 50 persons used for presenting material for observation by
patrons and that excludes minors by virtue of age.
      ADULT PHOTO STUDIO. An establishment that, on payment of a fee, provides
photographic equipment and/or models for the purpose of photographing specified
anatomical areas.
      ADULT SHOP. Any establishment offering for sale or rent, items from any
two of the following categories: sexually oriented books, magazines, and
videos; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use
for sexual activities; sexually oriented toys and novelties; video viewing
booths; or an establishment that advertises or holds itself out in any forum as
a sexually oriented business.
      ADULT THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
herein defined, for observation by patrons therein and that excludes minors by
virtue of age.
      ADULT USE. Includes adult bookstore, newsstand, video store, or
combination adult amusement or entertainment establishments, adult mini-motion
picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters, adult photo studios, adult
shop, and adult video viewing booths.
      ADULT VIDEO VIEWING BOOTHS. Often referred to as peep shows and
characterized by small private booths rented to individuals to view sexually
explicit films or tapes.
      AGRICULTURE. The production, storage, keeping, harvesting, grading,
packaging, processing, boarding, or maintenance for sale, lease, or personal
use of plants and animals useful to humans including but not limited to
forages, sod crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy products,
poultry and poultry products, livestock including beef cattle, sheep, swine,
horses, ponies, mules, goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including
the breeding and grazing of any or all of the animals, bees and apiary
products, fur animals, trees and forest products, fruits of all kinds including
grapes, nuts, and berries, vegetables, nursery, floral, ornamental, and
greenhouse products except where provided in a community garden; or lands
devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. This definition
shall not include intensive agricultural activities such as feedlot operations,
chicken farms, and agribusiness activities.
      AIR NATIONAL GUARD FACILITIES. Airport facilities exclusively for the use
and training of the Air National Guard.
      AIR PASSENGER TERMINAL. Including but not limited to air passenger-
associated ticket sales, restaurant/lounge and food services, retail sales and
services, car rental services, motor vehicle service and gas dispensing, car
wash, bus terminal, associated short-term and long-term parking lots, and other
airport-related services.
      AIRPORT. A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped
with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations
for passengers, including heliports. See HELIPORT.
      AIRPORT FACILITIES. Including but not limited to runways, aprons,
taxiways, weather monitoring facilities, control tower, navigational and
communications facilities, airfield lighting and signs, and associated
structures, aircraft servicing, warehousing, manufacturing, and retrofitting
facilities, aircraft hangars, servicing and repair facilities, air cargo
reserve/freight terminals, operations and activities, airport administration,
and maintenance facilities and offices, general aviation services and
facilities including aircraft tie-down and parking areas, support and
maintenance shops, concessions, aviation fuel storage, and dispensing
facilities, aircraft sales and leasing facilities and services, aerospace and
aviation-related training facilities.
      ALLEY. A public or private service right-of-way which affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
      ANNEXATION. The incorporation of land into the corporate boundaries of
the city of Sioux Falls.
      ANTENNA. Any device that radiates or captures electromagnetic wave
signals, including digital voice and data signals, analog voice and data
signals, video signals, or microwave signals, and is mounted on a structure
that allows freedom from obstruction for the radiation and capture of the
electromagnetic signals.
      ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any existing structure that supports wireless
communications facilities such as, but not restricted to, telecommunications
and broadcast towers, buildings, clock towers, steeples, and light poles.
      APPLICANT. The owner of land applying for a zoning permit or their
authorized agent who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of
the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. See
DEVELOPER.
      AQUIFER. A geologic formation, group of formations or part of a formation
capable of yielding, storing, or transmitting a usable amount of groundwater to
wells or springs for domestic or animal use.
      ARCADE. A building or structure, open to the public, that contains coin
operated games and similar entertainment and amusement devices as the primary
use or with five or more games as an accessory use.
      ARCHERY RANGE. An outdoor facility, which may include buildings or
structures, used for target practice with bows and arrows.
      ASSISTED-LIVING CENTER FACILITY. An intermediate term care facility
licensed by the state of South Dakota to provide personal care and services
beyond food, shelter, and laundry. The facilities include the supervision of
self-administration of medication and other services such as recreational,
financial, and transportation services.
      AUTOMOBILE. See MOTOR VEHICLE.
      AWNING. A roof-like cover that is temporary in nature and that projects
from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window
from the elements.
      BASE STATION, TELECOMMUNICA-TIONS TOWER. Base station shall mean and
refer to the structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications licensed or authorized by the FCC, between user equipment and a
communications network.
      BASEMENT. A space that may be occupied that is not more than six feet
above grade for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is less than 12 feet
above grade at any one point. See STORY.
      BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An owner-occupied single-family detached
dwelling registered or licensed by the state of South Dakota as a lodging
establishment in which a portion of the dwelling is operated to provide
accommodations for a charge to the public. An operator of a bed and breakfast
shall accommodate no more than five bedrooms with an average of not to exceed
ten guests per night in which family-style meals are provided.
      BERM. A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound which has
a maximum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical and shall be
planted with acceptable living ground cover.
      BIG SIOUX AQUIFER SYSTEM. A shallow, unconfined aquifer composed of
glacial outwash deposits in a valley cut into older underlying glacial till.
This aquifer is hydraulically connected to the Big Sioux River, which flows
south through the same valley, and to the Skunk Creek aquifer and to Skunk
Creek. It lies in South Dakota's eastern border counties.
      BILLBOARD. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than
the premises on which the sign is located.
      BLANK WALL. An exterior building wall with no openings and generally
constructed of a single material, uniform texture, and on a single plane.
      BLOCK. A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the
continuity of development.
      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. Public and quasi-judicial board consisting of five
citizens, appointed by the mayor, charged with hearing and determining zoning
appeals and, where appropriate, granting variances from the strict application
of the zoning ordinance.
      BREEZEWAY. An indoor narrow passageway from one building to another
building and does not constitute the joining of two buildings as required by
local building code.
      BROADCAST TOWER. A structure, not including offices or studio, for the
transmission of radio or television broadcast communications.
      BUFFER YARD. An open space and landscaped areas including fences, walls,
berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use
or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or
other items that are incompatible.
      BUILD-TO-ZONE, NON-PRIMARY. Area on the lot, measured parallel from the
front property line, where the non-primary building frontage must be located
within the minimum and maximum range of the setback provided.
      BUILD-TO-ZONE, PRIMARY. Area on a lot, measured parallel from the front
property line, where the primary building frontage must be located within the
minimum and maximum range of the setback provided.
      BUILDABLE AREA. The three-dimensional space within which a building is
permitted to be built on a lot and that is defined by maximum height
regulations and yard setback regulations.
      BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or movable property of any kind, and that is constructed or
erected on the ground or attached to the ground with a fixed location on the
ground.
      BUILDING FRONTAGE. The linear length of a building facing the right-of-
way, excluding canopies and overhangs.
      BUILDING FRONTAGE, NON-PRIMARY. Remainder of total building frontage not
included within the primary building frontage.
      BUILDING FRONTAGE, PRIMARY. The percentage of total building frontage to
be located within the primary build-to-zone.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance above grade to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
average height of the highest roof, or to the average height of the highest
gable of a pitched, hipped, or shed roof. The measurement shall be taken from
the average elevation of the finished grade within ten feet of the structure.
      BUILDING LINE. A line on the lot running parallel to and the required
horizontal distance from the nearest property line.
      BUILDING PERMIT. A document of permission issued by the proper municipal
authority for the construction, reconstruction, restoration, conversion, change
of use, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure.
      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A nonaccessory building in which the principal use
is conducted on the lot on which it is located.
      BULK REGULATIONS. Standards applying to individual lots that control the
placement of buildings, amount of open space on the lot, the height of
structures, setbacks from property lines and public rights-of-way, size and
density of buildings, yards including buffer yards, and number of units.
      BUS PASSENGER TERMINAL. Any premises for the storage or parking of motor-
driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
      BUS/TRUCK WASH. Any building or portions thereof used for washing buses
and/or trucks.
      BUSINESS LOCATION. A particular identifiable locality, building, or
portion thereof used for a commercial or industrial enterprise, task, mission,
or calling.
      CAMPGROUND. A plot of ground for public use upon which two or more
camping sites are located, established, maintained, advertised, or held out to
the public, to be a place where camping units can be located and occupied as
temporary living quarters for children or adults or both.
      CAMPING UNIT. Includes travel trailers, pickup coaches or campers, motor
homes, camping trailers, tents, and similar forms of portable shelter used for
recreational, education, or vacation purposes.
      CANOPY. A roof-like structure for the purpose of shielding people or
motor vehicles from the elements.
      CAR WASH. Any building or portions thereof used for washing motor
vehicles.
      CELLAR. The part of a building having more than one-half of its height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
      CEMETERY. Land used for interment of human or animal remains or cremated
remains, including a burial park, a mausoleum, a columbarium, necessary sale
and maintenance facilities or a combination thereof. Crematories and mortuaries
may also be included when operated within the cemetery boundary and complying
with the standards of this chapter.
      CEMETERY, PET. A cemetery for the interment of domestic animals that are
kept at a person's home.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A document issued by the city planning and
building services department allowing the occupancy or use of a building and
certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in
compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances.
      CHANGE OF USE. Substitution of one permitted use for another permitted
use.
      CITY. The City of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
      CITY COUNCIL. The legislative body of the city consisting of the duly-
elected city councilors for the city.
      CLUBHOUSE. A building or area used in association with a golf course
which includes social (e.g., dining, eating, and banquet facilities) and
wellness activities (e.g., tennis courts and swimming pools). Operators of
clubhouses may also render services customarily carried on as a business but
incidental to a golf course, including retailing, full service restaurants, and
on-sale and off-sale alcohol without drive-up windows.
      CLUSTER SUBDIVISION. A form of development that permits a reduction in
lot area and bulk requirements than is normally permitted under a conventional
subdivision. A cluster subdivision may also include common land area that is
devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas, or agriculture.
      COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY, or POST-HIGH SCHOOL. An educational institution that
awards associate or higher degrees or post high school vocational training.
      COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT/ FACILITY. An approved open or enclosed off-street
parking area or structure in compliance with §
160.556 (Minimum Improvement and Maintenance Standards) where licensed and
operable motor vehicles are temporarily stored for a fee. A commercial parking
lot shall not include off-site accessory parking lots.
      COMMUNITY GARDEN. Urban agriculture gardening that is a neighborhood-
based garden for the primary purpose of providing space for members of the
community to grow plants for beautification, education, recreation, community
distribution, or personal use. Sites are managed by an individual or groups of
individuals that are responsible for maintenance. As a supplemental policy to
clarify the provisions of this title, maintenance and management guidelines for
COMMUNITY GARDEN shall be provided by the director of planning.
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL HOME. A state of South Dakota licensed facility
with eight or more individuals who are “handicapped” as defined in the Fair
Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h) and which is confirmed by a record of
impairment through a South Dakota State licensed adjustment training center.
The facilities are typically long-term residences for people who have
developmental disabilities. Such assistance must include board and room,
habilitative services, and other incidental services customarily provided by
group homes. A group home shall not include temporary or emergency care housing
such as missions, shelters, halfway houses, recovery institutions, or detention
facilities.
      COMPATIBLE. A use of land and/or building(s) that, in terms of
development intensity, building coverage, design, bulk and occupancy, traffic
generation, parking requirements, access and circulation, site improvements,
and public facilities and service demands, is consistent with and similar to
neighboring uses and does not adversely affect the quality of life of persons
in surrounding or nearby buildings.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted long-range plan intended to guide the
growth and development of the community and region, including analysis,
recommendations, and proposals of the community's population, economy, housing,
transportation, community facilities, land use, and development standards.
      CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A conditional use is any use that, owing to
certain special characteristics attendant to its operation, may be permitted in
a zoning district subject to the evaluation and approval by the planning
commission. A conditional use is subject to requirements that are different
from the requirements imposed for any use permitted by right in the zoning
district.
      CONTIGUOUS. Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or
portion thereof, that is coterminous.
      CONTRACTOR'S SHOP AND STORAGE YARD. Use of land or building(s) for
storage and preparation of materials used by that same individual(s) in
conducting the business of construction and repair work, generally completed at
some other on-site location.
      CONVENT and MONASTERY. A place of residence for bona fide members of a
religious order who carry on religious, medical, educational or charitable work
in adjacent institutions.
      COURT. An open space more than one-half surrounded by buildings.
      CREMATORIUM. A furnace for the incineration of corpses.
      CREMATORY. The building or portion of a building that houses the
cremation chamber and the holding facility within or adjacent to the crematory
facility designated for the retention of human or animals/pet remains prior to
cremation.
      CULTURAL FACILITY. Establishments, public or private, that document the
social and religious structures and intellectual and artistic manifestations
that characterize a society and include museums, art galleries, and botanical
and zoological gardens or natural, historic, educational, or cultural interest.
      CURBLINE. The line coincident with the face of the street curb adjacent
to the roadway.
      DAY CARE. The providing of care and supervision of children/adults as a
supplement to regular parental/home care, without transfer of legal custody or
placement for adoption, with or without compensation, on a regular basis for a
part of a day.
      DAY CARE, CENTER. A facility of more than 12 children used for providing
adult or child day care, and is limited by the square footage of useable space
available. The ratio is 35 square feet per person indoors and 50 square feet
per person outdoors.
      DAY CARE, FAMILY. Care is provided in a dwelling. The number of persons
cared for is seven to 12 adults or children under the age of 14 years including
the provider's own children six years and under. The dwelling shall be used as
the principal use, and the day care use shall be accessory.
      DAY CARE, HOME. Care is provided in a dwelling and the number of persons
cared for is limited to a maximum of six adults or six children under the age
of 14 years. Included in the number of children are the provider's own children
six years and under. The dwelling shall be used as the principal use, and the
day care use shall be accessory.
      DECK. An unroofed platform, either freestanding or attached to a
building, that is supported by posts.
      DENSITY. The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing
structures per unit of land.
      DETENTION FACILITY. A public- or private-operated facility housing
persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty
of a criminal offense.
      DEVELOPER. The owner (or representative) of land applying for a zoning
permit or its authorized agent who shall have express written authority to act
on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises. See APPLICANT.
      DEVELOPMENT. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; or any use or extension of the use
of land.
      DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES/DIRECTOR. The person
appointed by the mayor to be the leader of the department empowered to carry
out/enforce all those codes adopted that regulate planning and zoning, housing,
building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical inspection.
      DISTILLATION OF PRODUCTS. A building or premises used for the
purification and concentration of a substance by volatilization or evaporation
and subsequent condensation.
      DISTRICT. A part, zone, or geographic area of the city or its joint
zoning jurisdiction within which certain zoning regulations apply. See ZONE.
      DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE WINDOW. An establishment that accommodates the
patron's motor vehicles, from which the occupants may obtain or receive a
service or obtain a product through a service window or automated device.
      DWELLING. A building or portion thereof used exclusively for human
habitation, including single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings,
but not including hotels, motels, or lodging houses.
      DWELLING FOR RELIGIOUS ORDER. Any single-housekeeping residential unit
including convents and monasteries that are small in scale and accessory to a
place of worship.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof which contains living
quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the
dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
      DWELLING(S), ABOVE THE FIRST STORY. One or more dwelling units only
allowed above the first story of the principal building. The first story of the
building would be occupied with another nonresidential permitted use.
      DWELLING, CONVERTED SINGLE- FAMILY. An originally designed single-family
structure that has been converted into two or more living units.
      DWELLING, DUPLEX. A building containing two dwelling units totally
separated from each other for occupancy of two separate dwelling units.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof containing three
or more dwelling units including units that are located one over the other.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling that is designed for and
occupied by not more than one family and is surrounded by yards and is not
attached to any other dwelling by any means.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY FARM. Single-family dwelling located on a farm
that is used or intended for use by the farm's owner or relative of the owner
or a person employed thereon.
      DWELLING, TOWNHOME. A one-family dwelling in a row and attached by a
shared common wall of at least two such units in which each unit has its own
front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and
each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-
resistant walls and property lines.
      DWELLING, TWIN HOME. A one-family dwelling attached to one other one-
family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling located on a
separate lot.
      ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION. A premises that may or may not contain buildings,
where the interconnection and usual transformation of electrical service takes
place between systems. An ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION shall be secondary,
supplementary, subordinate, and auxiliary to the main system.
      EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE. The use of any building or land area for the
display and sale of new and used farm implements, construction, or other heavy
equipment including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted
as an accessory use.
      EXPLORATION FOR MINERALS. The act of searching for or investigating a
mineral deposit, including, but not limited to, sinking shafts, tunneling,
drilling cave and bore holes, and digging pits or cuts and other work for the
purpose of extracting samples prior to commencement of development of
extraction operations, and the building of roads, accessways, and other
facilities related to the work.
      FAIRGROUNDS. Land area within the city limits of Sioux Falls entitled
"William H. Lyon Fairgrounds" which shall be maintained, managed, and
controlled by the county commissioners and their successors in office, for use
of the public as a county fairgrounds, wherein generally specified displays of
farm produce, livestock and crafts could be exhibited, and 4-H clubs and home
extension work could be demonstrated. Provision is also made for the
entertainment of the public with amusements of various kinds.
      FAMILY. A nonprofit household unit sharing common living, sleeping,
cooking, and sanitary facilities that includes a person living alone or any of
the following groups:
         A.   Any number of people related by blood, marriage, adoption,
guardianship, or foster care.
         B.   Not more than three unrelated adults.
         C.   A group of no more than seven people who are “handicapped” as
defined by the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h). Prior to occupancy of the
structure, planning and development services shall be provided with proof of a
record of impairment issued by a state licensed or accredited agency that
provides services to persons who are “handicapped.”
         D.   A FAMILY does not include temporary or emergency shelters or
halfway houses.
      FARM. A parcel of land used for agricultural purposes, with a minimum of
ten acres in size.
      FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen, or separate areas of land.
      FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
         A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
         B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
      FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See FLOODING.
      FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The square feet of floor space within the outside line
of walls and includes the total of all space on all floors of a building. It
does not include porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar when the
space is used for storage or incidental uses.
      FOOD PRODUCTION MANUFACTURING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate amount of space
within a retail establishment that is used as a warehouse.
      FOOT CANDLE. A measure of light falling on a given surface. One FOOT
CANDLE is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on a
square foot surface one foot away.
      FORM, PRIMARY. Form or forms most commonly used and best represents the
category of land uses on a parcel within a particular zoning district.
      FORMS. Forms are similar uses that are categorized together and generally
controlled equally through prototype site layouts, number of dwelling units,
building sizes, parking, signage, transition standards, and buffer yard
requirements for use in planning and design.
      FRONTAGE. The width of a lot or parcel abutting an existing or future
public right-of-way or private street measured at the front lot line.
      FROZEN FOOD LOCKER. A place where an animal is dressed and packaged,
where no rendering or refining is done.
      FRUIT/VEGETABLE CANNING AND PROCESSING. A commercial establishment in
which food is processed or otherwise prepared for human consumption but not
consumed on the premises.
      FULLY SHIELDED CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture constructed in a
manner that all light emitted by the fixture is projected below the horizontal
plane running through the lowest point of the fixture where light is emitted.
      FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment in which the dead are prepared
for burial or cremation and in which wakes and funerals may be held.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL. A residential accessory building designed or
used for the storage of motor vehicles, excluding all commercial vehicles,
owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
      GARDEN CENTER. A building or premises used primarily for the retail sale
of items useful in the culture, display or decoration of lawns, gardens or
indoor plants, including books, appliances and tools, but not including power
tools or tractors.
      GAS DISPENSING STATION. Any building or premises that provides for the
retail sale of gasoline or oil. No motor vehicle repair work or sale of auto
accessories or testing may be done. Gasoline pumps and islands shall be located
more than 16 feet from the nearest property line.
      GOLF COURSE. A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes or for a
driving range for playing the game of golf, improved with tees, greens,
fairways and hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters.
      GRADE (ADJACENT TO GROUND ELEVATION). The lowest point of elevation of
the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and
a point five feet distant from the wall, or the lowest point of elevation of
the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and
the property line if it is less than five feet distant from the wall. In case
walls are parallel to and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or
other right-of-way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or
right-of-way.
      GRAIN TERMINAL. A facility for the storage of agricultural grains.
      GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
      GREENWAYS (GW).  Any publicly held land that is adjacent to the Big Sioux
River or Skunk Creek.
      GROUNDWATER. Subsurface water that occurs in soils and geologic
formations that are fully saturated.
      GROUP HOME. See COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL HOME, HALFWAY HOUSE, and ASSISTED-
LIVING CENTER FACILITY.
      HALFWAY HOUSE. A temporary residential living arrangement intended for
persons previously living in an institutional setting and in need of a
supportive living arrangement in order to readjust to living outside the
institution. These institutions include detention facilities, drug and/or
alcohol rehabilitation facilities, and mental health facilities. These are
persons who are receiving case management which may include, but are not
limited to, therapy, treatment, rehabilitation, vocational training, and
counseling from support staff who maintain and manage the facility and provide
supervision and services on-site to residents. This definition does not include
peer-supported communal living arrangements that are maintained and managed by
residents without support staff and rental arrangements that do not include
case management services.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any containment and any hazardous chemical
constituting a physical or health hazard as defined and classified in the
building code and fire code.
      HEAVY MANUFACTURING. Those manufacturing processes that have the
potential to be a nuisance due to dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution,
smoke, heat, glare, or the operation of the processes outside the building.
      HELIPORT. (See AIRPORT.) An area, either at ground level or elevated on a
structure, licensed or approved for the loading and takeoff of helicopters, and
including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling, and
maintenance equipment.
      HIGHWAY (HW). Any interstate highway or South Dakota DOT-controlled
highway including I-29, I-90, I-229, SD 11, Veterans Parkway, and SD 100.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT. Properties with historic designation as referenced on
the register of historic places in §
151.048 of this Code.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried on by a member of the immediate
family residing on the premises, in accordance with the home occupation
standards within DD, AD, and MD forms §§
160.070-
160.125, DD;
160.130-
160.165, AD; and
160.170-
160.195, MD.
      HOSPITAL. An institution providing primary health services and medical or
surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness,
disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions,
and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such
as laboratories, outpatient facilities, medical offices, or training
facilities.
      HOTEL, MOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and which may include additional facilities and services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and recreational
facilities.
      HUMAN SERVICE FACILITY. Facilities and uses that provide an essential
human purpose or services including but not limited to food, clothing, and/or
medical care distribution.
      INDOOR RECREATIONAL USE/ FACILITY. See RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PRIVATE.
      INTEGRAL. A [sign] feature that is embedded, extruded, or carved into the
material of a building façade, made of bronze, brushed stainless steel or
aluminum, or similar material attached to the building façade.
      JOINT ZONING JURISDICTION. Responsibility given to a legislative body of
an incorporated municipality and a board of county commissioners who may then
jointly exercise the comprehensive planning and zoning powers in a joint
jurisdictional area beyond the municipal corporate limits.
      JUNKYARD. Any lot, land, parcel, or portion thereof used for the storage,
wrecking, dismantling, salvage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, or
exchange of abandoned or discarded vehicles, goods, waste, and scrap materials
including but not limited to two or more abandoned or inoperable motor
vehicles, glass, tires, appliances, machinery or automotive and mechanical
parts. A JUNKYARD does not include operations entirely enclosed within
buildings.
      KENNEL. Any premises, or portion, thereof, where dogs, cats, and other
household pets are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for in return for
remuneration or are kept for the purpose of sale.
      LANDSCAPED AREA/LIVING GROUND COVER.
         A.   Ground area that is modified from a natural state and permanently
devoted and maintained in turf grass, herbaceous perennials, shrubs, or
flowers.
         B.   Actively growing weeds as typically declared by the county to be
locally noxious and all other nonwoody plants growing to a greater height than
eight inches shall not be considered living ground cover.
      LEAKS AND SPILLS. Any intentional or unintentional discharge of
contaminants into the environment.
      LIGHT MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING, PROCESS AND ASSEMBLY, LIGHT.
      LIGHT TRESPASS. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the
boundaries of the property on which it is located.
      LIVE/WORK UNIT. The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or
accessory structure by occupants of the dwelling unit and employees, with the
business activities being subordinate to the residential use of the site. Live/
work is distinguished from home occupation primarily in that the use involves
more intensive activities and includes employees other than the residents of
the dwelling.
      LIVING UNIT, ACCESSORY. A residential unit that is customary, clearly
incidental, and subordinate to a principal business.
      LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot for
the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks.
      LOT. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used,
developed, or built upon.
      LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and
rear lot lines excluding any public or private street rights-of-way.
      LOT, BUILDABLE. A lot occupied or intended for occupancy by a use
permitted in this chapter, which may include one main building together with
its accessory buildings and the open spaces and parking spaces required by this
chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially
approved private street.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at
their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees.
      LOT DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot that fronts on two parallel streets or that
fronts on two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT LINE. A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-
way.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line
ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line. In no case, shall any structure be closer
than three feet to any lot line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
      LOT OF RECORD. A parcel established by the county or a lot that is
platted as part of a subdivision that has been recorded in the office of the
county register of deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded
in the office of the register of deeds prior to the effective date of the
subdivision ordinance. Any lot or parcel of land created through a violation of
any applicable laws or ordinances of the state, county, or the city shall not,
in this instance, be considered a LOT OF RECORD.
      LUMEN. A measure of light energy generated by a light source.
      LUMINAIRE. The complete lighting assembly less the support assembly. Two
or more units with lamps less than three feet apart shall be considered a
single luminaire.
      MAIN BUILDING. See PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
      MANUFACTURE OF ACID, ALCOHOL, AMMONIA, ASPHALT, BLEACH, CEMENT, CHLORINE,
DYESTUFFS, EXPLOSIVES, FERTILIZER, GLUE, GYPSUM, LIME, OILS, PLASTER OF PARIS,
SHELLAC, SIZING, TURPENTINE, OR YEAST AND THE LIKE. Establishments engaged in
the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products, including the assembling of component parts; the manufacturing of
products; and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics,
resins, or liquors.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more
sections at a location other than the home site by assembly line-type
production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site
manufacturing process. A MANUFACTURED HOME is designed to be towed on its own
chassis or be site delivered by alternative means. Every section shall bear a
data plate and label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. This definition does not
include prefabricated homes constructed under the International Residential
Code (IRC).
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, LICENSED. A contiguous parcel of land operated as
a unit, under the same ownership where two or more lots are rented for the
temporary placement of manufactured homes, with all necessary facilities and
services, and is licensed by the city.
      MANUFACTURING, PROCESS AND ASSEMBLY. Establishments engaged in the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products, including the assembling of components parts, the creation of
products, and the blending or materials, such as oils, plastics, resins, or
liquors.
      MANUFACTURING, PROCESS AND ASSEMBLY, HEAVY. Those manufacturing processes
which require additional performance standards to mitigate dust, odor, noise,
vibration, pollution, smoke, heat, or glare. Some aspects of these
manufacturing uses may have the process carried on outside. Uses include but
are not limited to: fruit and vegetable canning/processing, manufacture of acid
and alcohol, stockyard-slaughter of animals, rendering, distillation of
products, refining, paper manufacturing, smelting, boiler works, processing of
hides or furs, grain processing, asphalt concrete plant, ready-mix concrete
plant, regulated medical waste treatment facility, and manufacturing and
storage electrical transformers.
      MANUFACTURING, PROCESS AND ASSEMBLY, LIGHT. Those manufacturing processes
which are not obnoxious due to dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution, smoke,
heat, or glare. These manufacturing uses are characterized by generally having
all aspects of the process carried on within the building itself. Uses are
limited to those of the WM1 form.
      MAP, OFFICIAL ZONING. The map or maps, which are legally adopted as a
part of this zoning chapter, that delineate the boundaries of the zoning
districts and show the location and size of public rights-of-way, public
waterways, and the city limit lines.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY. An entity registered with the state of South
Dakota pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G and licensed by Chapter 121 of this Code of
Ordinances that acquires, possesses, stores, delivers, transfers, transports,
sells, supplies, or dispenses cannabis, cannabis products, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to cardholders. A MEDICAL CANNABIS
DISPENSARY may only be categorized as a principal use and not an accessory use.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY. An independent entity registered with
the state of South Dakota pursuant to SDCL ch. 34-20G and licensed by Chapter
121 of this Code of Ordinances that analyzes the safety and potency of
cannabis. A MEDICAL CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY may only be categorized as a
principal use and not an accessory use.
      MEDICAL OFFICE. An establishment where patients are admitted for
examination or treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists,
optometrists, social workers, or other members of the healing professions and
where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
      MICROCELL. A microcell tower is a wireless communication network served
by a low power cellular base station (tower), covering a limited area such as
an outdoor venue, mall, hotel complex, or a neighborhood. A microcell uses
power control to limit the radius of its coverage area. A microcell height
should not exceed 35'.
      MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT. The development of a neighborhood, tract of land,
building, or structures with a variety of complementary and integrated uses,
such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail,
public, and recreation, in a compact urban form and all within walking
distance.
      MORTUARY. A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial
or cremation.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is designed to travel along the ground or
in the water and shall include but not be limited to automobiles, vans, buses,
motorbikes, light duty trucks under 26,000 pounds and that do not require a
commercial driver's license, trailers, go-carts, golf carts, boats,
snowmobiles, and campers.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. Any vehicle that is adapted, designed,
equipped, and used to perform a specific commercial function and that does not
meet the definition of MOTOR VEHICLE, PERSONAL/PASSENGER, as defined herein.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, INOPERABLE. A motor vehicle that is not in operating
condition due to damage, removal, or inoperability of one or more tires and/or
wheels, engine or other essential parts, or that is not in operating condition
due to damage or removal of equipment as required by the state for its lawful
operation, or that does not have lawfully affixed thereto a valid state license
plate, or that constitutes an immediate health, safety, fire, or traffic
hazard.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, PERSONAL/ PASSENGER. Any car, pickup truck, motorcycle,
street legal ATV, or van that is designed for and facilitates personal/
passenger travel and has not been externally altered with features not
customary to personal usage.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL. Any vehicle that is adapted, designed, and
equipped to facilitate leisure time activities including, but not limited to,
the following: ATVs, boats, snowmobiles, and motor vehicles utilized for motor
vehicle racing events, along with trailers to haul the vehicles, RVs, and
travel trailers.
      MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR. Any building or premises involving the repair and/
or painting of motor vehicle bodies or parts thereof and the rebuilding and/or
overhauling of engines or transmissions.
      MOTOR VEHICLE SALES DISPLAY AND RENTAL. The use of any building, land
area, or premises for the display, sale, or rental of new or used motor
vehicles and including any warranty repair work and other repair service
conducted as an accessory use. The sale or display of inoperable motor vehicles
is not allowable as part of this use category. See JUNKYARD.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, SERVICE. Any vehicle built or assembled for personal
passenger use that incorporates attachments in order to support service
functions. A service vehicle is utilized as support for service and is not
utilized to perform a specific commercial function.
      MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises that provides for
the retail sale of gasoline, oil, tires, batteries, and accessories for motor
vehicles and/or for certain motor vehicle services, including washings, tire
changing, repair service, battery service, radiator service, lubrication, brake
service, wheel service and testing or adjusting of automotive parts. Motor
vehicle repair work may be done at a MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION provided
that no rebuilding of engines, spray paint operations or body or fender repair
is conducted. Gasoline pumps and gasoline pump islands shall be located more
than 16 feet from the nearest property line.
      MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE YARD. The temporary storage of vehicles that are
impounded, licensed and operable in an unroofed area.
      MURAL, ORIGINAL ART. A one- of-a-kind, hand-painted, hand-tiled, or
digitally printed work of visual art that is either affixed to or painted
directly on the exterior wall of a structure with the permission of the
property owner. A MURAL does not include displays with electrical or mechanical
components or a changing image art display.
      MURAL, VINTAGE ORIGINAL ART. An original art mural that existed prior to
April 6, 2021.
      NATURAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES. A natural watercourse, swale, or similar
depression into which surface water flows.
      NATURE PRESERVE. An area in which human activities are very limited and
where the natural environment is protected from human changes.
      NATIVE LANDSCAPING. Grasses, forbs, woody plants, and other plantings
that are species native to the region that when maintained in an appropriate
manner do not require irrigation, fertilizer, and/or pesticides.
      NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY. Telephone, electric, and cable television
lines, poles, and equipment; water or gas pipes, mains, and valves; sewer pipes
and valves; lift stations; telephone exchanges and repeaters; and all other
facilities necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public or
private utility.
      NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION (NLR). Outdoor to indoor reduction to be achieved
through incorporation of noise attenuation into the design and construction of
the structure(s).
      NONCONFORMING USE. A use of land, buildings, structures, or premises that
lawfully existed prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this chapter
but which fails, by reason of the adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform
to the present use restrictions of the zoning district in which it is located.
      NONSTANDARD USE. The category of nonconformance consisting of lots
occupied by buildings or structures or uses that existed immediately prior to
the effective date of this chapter that fail to comply with any of the
following: minimum lot requirements for the area, density, width, front yard,
side yard, rear yard, height, unobstructed open space or parking for the
district in which they are located, even though the use of the premises
conforms to the permitted uses within the district as set out in the provisions
of this chapter.
      NURSERY, WHOLESALE/TREE FARM. The growing, cultivation, storage, and sale
of garden plants, flowers, trees, and shrubs to landscapers, developers,
builders, and retail nurseries/garden centers.
      NURSING HOME. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or
approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who,
by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care
for themselves.
      OFFICE. A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, industry, or government and generally furnished
with desks, tables, files, and communication equipment including but not
limited to medical clinics, veterinary hospital, and banks.
      OFF-SALE ALCOHOL BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment that sells any
alcoholic beverage for consumption off the premises of where it was sold and
that has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the
premises where sold as required by SDCL chapter 35-1 and Sioux Falls City
Ordinances
ch. 111: Alcoholic Beverages.
      ON-SALE ALCOHOL BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that includes,
but is not limited to, taverns, lounges, bars, and pubs in which alcoholic
beverages are served, primarily by the drink, and in which food or packaged
liquor may also be served or sold and which has obtained or is eligible to
obtain an on-sale alcoholic beverage license as defined in SDCL 35-1-1 and is
or will be licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the
premises where sold or provided. This use does not include accessory alcoholic
beverage licenses or a full-service restaurant as provided elsewhere in this
chapter.
      OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water, essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants, and their guests.
      OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended
for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and their
guests and that may include such accessory structures and improvements as are
necessary and appropriate.
      OUTDOOR LIGHTING FIXTURE. An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor
lighting, or reflective surface, lamp, or similar device, permanently installed
or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. The devices shall include,
but are not limited to:
         A.   Parking lot lighting.
         B.   Building and structural lighting.
         C.   Landscape lighting.
         D.   Recreational lighting.
         E.   Billboards and other signs (advertising or otherwise).
         F.   Product display area lighting.
         G.   Building overhangs and open canopies.
         H.   Security lighting.
         I.   Searchlight, spotlight, and flood lights.
      OUTDOOR RETAIL SALES. The display and sale of products and services,
primarily outside of a building or structure, including vehicles; garden
supplies, flowers, shrubs, and other plant materials, gas, food and beverages,
boats, motor homes, and burial monuments. This definition does not include
lumberyards.
      OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods, material,
merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours that are not
considered under the definition of outdoor retail sales. Goods, material,
merchandise, or vehicles shall not include items listed, nor be of a nature as
indicated, in the definition of junkyard as defined herein.
      OWNER. The record owners of real property in fee simple including any
person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any
other legal entity having fee simple legal title to the land.
      PARAPET or PARAPET WALL. The portion of a building wall that rises above
the roof level.
      PARCEL. A contiguous quantity of land in possession of, owned by, or
recorded as property of the same claimant person or company.
      PARK, COMMUNITY/REGIONAL. An open space and tract of land owned by a
government entity and available to the general public for recreational purposes
that is used for a wide range of activities such as swimming pools, community
centers, and athletic complexes.
      PARK, NEIGHBORHOOD. A tract of land, generally five to ten acres in size,
owned by a branch of government and available to the general public for
recreational purposes. These parks typically include playground equipment,
playfields, parking lots, and multi-use paved areas for court games. A shared
school/park site would also be allowed as a neighborhood park including a
community center.
      PARKING LOT. An off-street, ground level open area that provides for
parking of motor vehicles.
      PARKING, MOTOR VEHICLE SALES, DISPLAY, AND RENTAL. Area on a sales and
display lot that is commonly used for display of any motor vehicle for the
sale, display, rental, or use of the business.
      PARKING, OFF-SITE. Parking provided for a specific use but located on a
site other than the one on which the specific use is located.
      PARKING, OFF-STREET. Parking and storage area for a motor vehicle that is
directly accessible to an access isle and that is not located on a dedicated
street right-of-way.
      PARKING, ON-SITE. Temporary parking and storage provided for a specific
use and located on the same parcel on which the specific use is located.
      PARKING, ON-STREET. A temporary parking and storage area for a motor
vehicle that is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
      PARKING RAMP. A building or structure consisting of more than one level
and used to store motor vehicles.
      PARKING, SHARED. Joint utilization of a parking area for more than one
use.
      PARKING SPACE. A hard-surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient
in size to park one motor vehicle for either residents, customers, or
employees. A PARKING SPACE must be striped and provided an unobstructed means
of access, except as otherwise required for BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT.
      PARKING SPACE, INTERIOR. Commonly one of a row of like spaces in a
parking lot, an INTERIOR PARKING SPACE is one that does not abut a parking
lot's perimeter.
      PARKING, STALLS. Total number of parking spaces on a site that includes
off-street parking spaces for customers and other parking stalls commonly used
on the site for parking, stacking, and  queuing spaces, and outdoor storage of
any motor vehicle for the sale, repair, or use of the business.
      PARTY WALL. A common wall shared by two attached structures, buildings,
or dwelling units as determined by building code.
      PASSENGER TERMINAL. Including but not limited to air-passenger-associated
ticket sales, restaurant/lounge and food services, retail sales and services,
car rental services, motor vehicle service and gas dispensing, car wash, bus
terminal, associated short-term and long-term parking lots, and other airport-
related services.
      PERMITTED SPECIAL USE. See USE, PERMITTED SPECIAL.
      PERMITTED USE. See USE, PERMITTED.
      PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES (PCS). Licenses granted by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to build digital wireless phone networks that
compete with standard cellular service.
      PHOTOMETRIC PLAN. A plan used for an approval process or construction
indicating the number, location, type of luminaire, and manufacturer's
specification data on proposed site lighting, both pole and building mounted.
      PLACES OF WORSHIP. A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other facility
that is used for prayer by persons of similar beliefs. A place of worship may
also include special-purpose buildings that are architecturally designed and
particularly adapted for the primary use to assist with the operations of the
place of worship.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The duly designated planning board of the
municipality responsible for reviewing and approving applications for
development and preparation of master plans and ordinances.
      PREMISES. A lot, parcel, tract, or plot of land together with all
buildings and structures thereon.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the primary or
predominant use of the lot on which it is located.
      PROCESSING. A series of manufacturing operations, usually in a continuous
and regular action or succession of actions, taking place or carried on in a
definite manner.
      PROPERTY LINE. See LOT LINE.
      PUBLIC ASSEMBLY FACILITY. Any facility where large numbers of individuals
collect to participate or to observe programs of participation including, but
not limited to, auditoriums, stadiums, and event centers.
      PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY. Government facilities and uses that provide an
essential public purpose or service including, but not limited to, a police
station, judicial court, fire station, ambulance service, transit or
transportation transfer station, library, community center, public recreation
facility or office, but not including public utility or maintenance facilities.
      PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES. See NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY.
      QUARRY, MINING, AND MINERAL EXPLORATION. The development or extraction of
a mineral from its natural occurrence or affected land. The term includes but
is not limited to quarries, surface mining and surface operation, in-situ
mining, the reprocessing of tailing piles, the disposal of refuse from
underground mining, and milling and processing located on land described in the
application for a mining permit.
      RECREATION FACILITY. An indoor or outdoor facility designed and equipped
for the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities, wellness activities, dance
studio, and other customary and usual recreational activities, either active or
passive, and open to the public with or without fees.
      RECREATION FACILITY, PRIVATE. A recreation facility operated as a
business. This definition does not include amusement parks, theme parks,
miniature golf facilities, and other commercial entertainment facilities that
are considered general retail and services.
      RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC. A public recreation facility operated by a
governmental agency.
      RECREATION FACILITY, SUBDIVISION. A recreation facility operated by a
residential subdivision and open to the subdivision residents with or without
fees.
      RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials or products that may be readily separated
from the solid waste stream and may be used or reused as a substitute for raw
materials or other items including, but not limited to, aluminum, paper, glass,
and plastic.
      RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY. An established facility where recyclable
materials are collected for shipment off site, with no processing such as
grinding or crushing of the materials. Fully enclosed automated self-service
aluminum collection machines not more than 750 square feet are considered
RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITIES regardless of whether they contain a crusher or
grinder. Facilities that handle recyclable hazardous materials or waste
petroleum products as a primary or substantial portion of their business are
not included.
      RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY. An established facility where recyclable
materials are collected and/or processed for shipment off site, including
processing operations such as grinding or crushing of the materials. No on-site
sales of materials or salvage-type motor vehicles may be processed at these
types of facilities. Facilities that handle recyclable hazardous materials or
waste petroleum products as a primary or substantial portion of their business
are not included.
      REDEVELOPMENT. The removal and replacement, rehabilitation, or adaptive
reuse of an existing structure or structures, or other uses as well as
provisions for streets, parks, and other public facilities.
      REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE. Any solid waste that is generated in the
diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of humans or animals in research
pertaining to diseases of humans or animals, or in a production or testing of
biologicals. REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE shall not include medical waste generated
in an individual household.
      REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE TRANSFER OR TREATMENT FACILITY. A site, including
the land and any structures thereon, where regulated medical waste is accepted,
transferred, stored, handled, treated, decontaminated, processed or disposed of
by any method, technique or process designed to change the biological character
or composition of a regulated medical waste to reduce or eliminate its
potential for causing disease. REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE TRANSFER OR TREATMENT
FACILITY does not include incineration facilities. This chapter is not intended
to regulate the treatment of and does not permit the acceptance of chemotherapy
waste, pathological waste, radioactive waste, chemical waste or hazardous
material as defined in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.1 to 261.38, inclusive.
      RESEARCH FACILITY. A facility for investigation into the natural,
physical, or social sciences, which may include engineering and product
development.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment where food and drink, excluding alcohol, is
prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building.
      RESTAURANT, FULL-SERVICE. A restaurant that is regularly used and kept
open for the primary purpose of serving meals to guests for compensation and
that has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, which contains
customary commercial equipment for cooking an assortment of foods which may be
required for the meals. The establishments have a separate dining area and may
include a bar, cocktail lounge or other area designed primarily for the service
of alcoholic beverages that operates as an accessory part of the restaurant and
are licensed or is eligible to be licensed by the state of South Dakota for
alcohol.
      RETAIL AND SERVICES. Establishments engaged in selling products, goods,
or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and
establishments engaged in providing services or entertainment to the general
public including restaurants, hotels, motels, repair shops, indoor amusement,
copying services, health, professional, educational, and social services and
other miscellaneous services, but does not include on-sale or off-sale
alcoholic beverage establishments or restaurant with accessory alcohol license.
      RETAIL AND SERVICE, LIMITED. Neighborhood-friendly and pedestrian-
oriented retail and services that are small in scale and include general retail
and service uses that limit the impacts to the neighborhood area. Uses do not
include automobile retail and services. Limited retail services include all
general retail and services except day labor agency, exterminating shop,
firearms dealer, memorial monuments, pawnshop, small engine repair, tattoo and
body piercing parlor, adult use, tobacco shop, primary on-sale and off-sale
liquor, nightclub, hotel, bus passenger terminals, or reception hall.
      RETAIL AND SERVICES, GENERAL. All retail and services except motor
vehicle retail and services as defined within this chapter.
      RETAIL AND SERVICES, MOTOR VEHICLE. Motor vehicle-dominated retail and
service uses including but not limited to fast food restaurants, motor vehicle
service stations, convenience store, car washes, vehicle service, drive-in
theater, bus passenger terminal, repair, personal passenger vehicle repair, and
service.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street,
sidewalk, alley, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas
pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES. The lines that form the boundaries of a right-of-way.
      ROOF. The uppermost covering of a building.
      ROOF, PITCHED. A roof with a slope.
      SALVAGE OPERATION, SCRAP PROCESSING OPERATION, AND SALVAGE MATERIAL. A
facility where salvageable materials are collected and/or processed for
shipment off site, including processing operations such as grinding or crushing
of the materials. Facilities that handle recyclable hazardous materials or
waste petroleum products as a primary or substantial portion of their business
are not included. A SALVAGE OPERATION does not include operations entirely
enclosed within buildings.
      SALVAGEABLE MATERIALS. Materials or products from dismantled,
nonoperating or wrecked motor vehicles, trucks, trailers, equipment, machinery,
mobile homes, tractors, farm machinery, appliances or other vehicles or parts
thereof, as well as scrap metals including iron, steel and any other metallic
material except recyclable material as defined herein.
      SANITARY LANDFILL. A planned method of solid waste disposal in which the
solid waste is spread in thin layers, compacted to reduce its volume, and
covered with earth. A rubble site shall also be defined as a sanitary landfill.
      SANITARY SEWER AND WATER, PUBLIC. Any system other than an individual
septic tank, tile field, or individual well, that is operated by a
municipality, government agency, or a public utility for the collection,
treatment, and disposal of wastes and the furnishing of potable water.
      SCHOOL. Any building or part thereof that is designated, constructed, or
used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
      SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY. Any school that is licensed by the state and meets
the state requirements for elementary education.
      SCHOOL, MIDDLE OR HIGH SCHOOL. Any building or part thereof, whether
public or private, which is designed, constructed, and licensed by the state
for middle or junior high school grades and/or secondary (high school)
education.
      SEASONAL ROADSIDE STANDS. A temporary structure that is not permanently
affixed to the ground and is readily removable in its entirety that is used
solely for the display or sale of farm products produced on the premises upon
which the roadside stand is located. No ROADSIDE STAND shall be more than 300
square feet in ground area and there shall be not more than one roadside stand
on any one premises.
      SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. A building or group of buildings containing
separate individual and private storage spaces of varying sizes available for
lease or rent for varying periods of time. This definition does not include a
contractor's shop.
      SELF-STORAGE FACILITY, RESIDENTIAL-COMPATIBLE. A self-storage facility
that is designed and constructed in a manner that is compatible with the
residential buildings in the area based upon the standards of this zoning
chapter.
      SENSITIVE LAND USES. Uses that need to be separated by a reasonable
distance from certain incompatible uses. SENSITIVE LAND USES include all DD and
AD forms and the following uses: places of worship, elementary, middle, or high
schools, day care centers, parks, libraries, community centers, and public
recreation facilities. This definition only includes place of worship uses
built as an NF1 form.
      SETBACK/SETBACK LINE. The line that is the required minimum distance from
any lot line to the building line that establishes the area within which the
principal structure must be erected or placed. See BUILDING LINE.
      SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or visible from outdoors, that is used to advertise, identify,
display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images. This definition does not include national or
state flags or their emblems or insignia, interior window displays, athletic
scoreboards or the official announcements or signs of government.
      SIGN, ABANDONED. A freestanding or wall sign that is located on property
that has been vacant for a period of six months or more.
      SIGN, ADHESIVE WALL. A sign composed of vinyl, polypropylene, or other
durable material mounted to a building.
      SIGN, ANIMATED. Employing action, motion or the illusion of motion.
      SIGN AREA. The area of the largest single face of the sign within a
perimeter that forms the outside shape, including any frame that forms an
integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights
on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one section
or module, all areas will be totaled.
      SIGN, AUTOMOTIVE FLUID DISPENSER. Any advertising sign that is attached
to an automotive fluid dispenser.
      SIGN, BANNER. A sign composed of cloth, canvas, fabric, or other
lightweight material secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the sign
caused by movement of the atmosphere.
      SIGN, BLINKING OR FLASHING. Sign where the light illumination alternates
suddenly between fully illuminated and fully nonilluminated in a time frame
less than four seconds.
      SIGN, BUILDING. A sign which is attached to the exterior of a structure
or building.
      SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign which identifies the contractors and
subcontractors within the construction site.
      SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE. Signs containing a computer or digital software
generated message or other automated or remote method of changing copy.
      SIGN FACE (DISPLAY SURFACE). The entire area of sign on which copy could
be placed. See SIGN AREA.
      SIGN, FADE OR DISSOLVE. A sign where the transition between static
message displays are achieved with varying light intensity, where the first
message or image gradually reduces light intensity to the point of not being
legible, and the subsequent message or image gradually increases intensity to
the point of legibility.
      SIGN, FREESTANDING SIGN (GROUND SIGN). A sign supported by one or more
uprights, poles, or braces in the ground, thereby freestanding, and not
attached to any building.
      SIGN, GAS PUMP TOPPER. A sign enclosed within a rigid frame which is
attached to the top of or adjacent to the gas pump.
      SIGN, GROUND. See SIGN, FREESTANDING.
      SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION. A nonilluminated sign not over one square foot in
area attached flat against the dwelling and displaying only the occupant's name
and/or address and/or occupation.
      SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface or reflecting off its surface.
      SIGN, INFLATABLE. A portable sign which through the use of a gas allows
it to remain inflated.
      SIGN, INTEGRAL. Permanent signs which are an integral part of the
building's structure, such as the names of buildings, dates of erection,
monumental citations, commemorative tablets, and the like.
      SIGN, JOINT TENANT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Freestanding sign, on common area
within an employment center, which identifies the tenants within the center.
      SIGN, MONUMENT. A ground-mounted, freestanding sign which is attached to
the ground or to its base on grade by a solid structure and which structure
extends from the ground or base to the sign face at the same or greater width
as the sign face.
      SIGN, MURAL. A sign painted directly onto the surface of a building wall
with no words or graphics advertising a business, product, or service.
      SIGN, NONCONFORMING. Any type of sign that lawfully existed prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment to this title but which fails, by reason of
such adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform to the present use
restrictions of the zoning district in which it is located.
      SIGN, NONINFLATABLE. A portable sign that is displayed by protruding from
the ground, such as spinners, wind feathers, or other light weight material,
that allows movement.
      SIGN, NONRESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION. In any nonresidential form, a
masonry wall, landscaping, and other similar material or feature may be
combined to form a permanent display for campus or tract identification.
      SIGN (OFF-PREMISES). A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.
      SIGN (ON-PREMISES). A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is
located.
      SIGN, PAINTED WALL. A sign painted directly on the surface of a building
wall.
      SIGN, PARASITIC. A sign affixed to a sign structure that is in addition
to signs specifically designed for the sign structure.
      SIGN, PENNANTS. Any geometric-shaped cloth, fabric, or other lightweight
material normally fastened to a stringer and limited to a maximum sign area of
one square foot per pennant that is secured or tethered so as to allow movement
of the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere.
      SIGN, PERMANENT. Signs that exist perpetually; everlasting, especially
without significant change.
      SIGN, POLE. A freestanding sign attached or suspended from a pole, post,
pylon, or pier, which is embedded in the ground. Typically, the poles are left
exposed; however, this definition applies even when the poles are skirted or
cladded.
      SIGN, POLITICAL CAMPAIGN. A temporary sign relating to a public election.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
building.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign that is attached to and projects from a
structure or building face.
      SIGN, REAL PROPERTY FOR SALE, RENTAL, OR LEASE. A temporary sign which is
used exclusively to announce property for sale, rental, open house, or lease of
the structure or property on which it is installed.
      SIGN, RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICA- TION. In any residential form, a masonry
wall, landscaping, and other similar material or feature may be combined to
form a permanent display for neighborhood or tract identification.
      SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or
on top of the parapet of a building.
      SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A sandwich board sign, which consists of a portable
two-sided A-frame-type sign hinged at the apex to be folded into a sandwich
position when transported or stored.
      SIGN, SCROLLING OR TRAVELING. A mode of message transition on an
electronic message sign where the message appears to move vertically or
horizontally across the display surface.
      SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports, has supported, or is
capable of supporting a sign.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY. A device, display, structure, or pennant that acts as a
sign and is intended to be displayed for a limited time period.
      SIGN, TRAFFIC DIRECTION. Signs directing traffic movement onto and out of
commercial, industrial, institutional, office, apartment, and manufactured home
park uses.
      SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to or erected against a wall of a building
and projecting no more than 12 inches with the face in a parallel plane to the
plane of the building wall.
      SIGN, WINDOW. A sign attached or adhered within a window frame which is
used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention.
      SIZE, MAXIMUM. The greatest number of either units or largest amount of
gross floor area (gfa) allowed for certain form regulations.
      SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A facility for the slaughtering and processing of animals
and the refining of their byproducts.
      SOLAR FARM. An installation or area of land in which a large number of
solar collection devices are set up in order to generate electricity.
      SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY. A fixed facility where solid waste from
collection vehicles is consolidated and temporarily stored for subsequent
transport to a permanent disposal site. This does not include an infectious
waste incineration facility.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
            1.   Human genitals, pubic region.
            2.   Buttock.
            3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
         B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
         A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
         B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
         C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of undraped human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, or female breast.
      STABLE. Any premises or part thereon where horses or any equine animals
are maintained, boarded, bred, trained or cared for in return for remuneration,
or are kept for the purpose of sale.
      STEALTH. For freestanding telecommunications towers, it is the ability to
blend into the context of the surrounding environment at a given location. For
antenna support structures, STEALTH is the ability to camouflage or conceal the
presence of wireless communication facilities.
      STOCKYARDS. A facility for the temporary confinement and marketing of
animals.
      STORAGE, MOTOR VEHICLE. Hard area on a lot that is commonly used for
storage of any motor vehicle for the storage or use of the business.
      STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under-floor space is
more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total
perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point,
the basement cellar or unused under-floor space shall be considered a STORY.
      STREET. Any vehicular way whether improved or unimproved that currently
or will in the future afford the principal means of access to abutting property
that includes the following: (1) an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway; (2) a vehicular way shown on a plat approved pursuant to law; (3) a
vehicular way approved by other official action; and (4) a vehicular way shown
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of register of deeds.
      STREET, ARTERIAL. A principal traffic artery, more or less continuous
across the city, that acts as a principal connecting street with state and
federal highways and includes each street designated as an arterial street on
the major street plan.
      STREET COLLECTOR. A street that carries traffic from local streets to
arterial streets or highways, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation in the development.
      STREET, LOCAL. A street intended to provide access to other streets from
individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for various
utilities, but not intended to be used for through traffic.
      STREET, PRIVATE. A street in private ownership not dedicated or
maintained as a public street by a municipality or other government entity.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting
members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders
or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or the exterior walls.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having
a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, STRUCTURES include
buildings, walls, fences, signs, docks, dams, manufactured homes, and sheds.
      TANK FARM. An open air facility containing a number of aboveground, large
containers for the bulk storage in liquid, gaseous, powder, or pellet forms.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Science and practice of transmitting information by
electromagnetic means. A wide variety of information can be transferred through
a telecommunications system, including voice and music, still-frame and full-
motion pictures, computer files and applications and telegraphic data.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA STORAGE FACILITY. A self-supporting facility used
to store data sent and received by telecommunications not requiring on-site
staff to operate or maintain the storage of the data.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A self-supporting lattice, guyed-lattice, or
monopole structure that supports wireless communications facilities. The term
includes new and existing towers that are used for services such as microwave,
common carrier, cellular telephone, personal communication services, two-way
radio paging and other similar services. The term TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER does
not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance above grade to the
highest point of the telecommunications tower, including the base pad and any
antenna.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITE. The lot of record for which the
telecommunications tower is located.
      TEMPORARY OR EMERGENCY SHELTER.
         A.   A facility providing refuge to persons who require physical,
social, or psychological therapy and counseling to assist them in overcoming
physical or emotional problems which includes, but is not limited to, missions,
shelters, or detoxification centers.
         B.   Exception: All temporary or emergency shelter facilities
associated with a declared state of emergency by local, state, or federal
government are exempt.
      TOPPING. The indiscriminate cutting back of tree branches to stubs or
lateral branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role.
      TOWER. Shall mean and refer to any structure built for the sole or
primary purpose of supporting any antennas and their associated facilities,
licensed or authorized by the FCC, including structures that are constructed
for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated
site.
      TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance above grade to the highest point at
the tower, including the base pad and any antenna.
      TREE, REQUIRED. A tree that is required by this chapter and meets or
exceeds the following minimum specifications according to tree type.
      TRUCK, HEAVY DUTY OR SEMI. Any truck with over a 26,000-pound gross
vehicle weight rating and that requires a commercial driver's license.
      TRUCK TERMINAL. An area and building where trucks load and unload cargo,
store cargo and freight, break down cargo and freight into smaller or larger
loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation, and where
minor maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.
      USE. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended.
      USE, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
      USE, CONDITIONAL. A use that because of its unique or varying
characteristics cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district. After due consideration, as provided for in this chapter,
of the impact of the use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at a particular location, the CONDITIONAL USE may or may not be
granted.
      USE, PERMITTED. A use that may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements and
regulations of the form in which the use is located.
      USE, PERMITTED SPECIAL. A permitted use that must comply with additional
special requirements including restriction and specific siting and transition
mitigation standards.
      USE, PRINCIPAL.  The primary or predominant use of any lot.
      VARIANCE. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance.
      VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A place where animals are given medical care and the
boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital
use and all kenneling is indoors.
      WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
      WAREHOUSE, ACCESSORY RETAIL. A subordinate amount of space within a
retail establishment that is used as a warehouse.
      WAREHOUSE AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT, HEAVY. Those warehousing and freight
movement operations which require additional performance standards to mitigate
dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat, or glare. Some aspects of
these manufacturing uses may have the process carried on outside. Uses include
but are not limited to: unscreened outdoor storage, salvage operation, solid
waste transfer facility, grain terminal, junkyard, tank farm, petroleum
terminal, truck terminal, or regulated medical waste transfer facility.
      WAREHOUSE AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT, LIGHT. Those warehousing and freight
movement operations which typically have all storage contained within a
building and/or are not obnoxious due to dust, odor, noise, vibration,
pollution, smoke, heat, or glare. Uses include but are not limited to:
recycling collection facility, contractor's shop/storage yard, wholesale trade,
frozen food locker, warehouse, telecommunications data storage facility, self-
storage, camper sales and service, manufactured housing sales, motor vehicle
storage yard, farm implement sales and service, semi-truck and heavy duty truck
sales and service, and heavy duty truck and bus washes, and outdoor storage
when screened or mitigated as required in WM1 form standards.
      WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water
supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and other discarded
materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining or agricultural operations, or
from community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved materials in
domestic sewage or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges that are point sources subject to permits under § 402 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342, as amended to January 1,
1986, or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 et seq., as amended to
January 1, 1986.
      WATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. A facility for the treatment of a
public water or wastewater. See SANITARY WASTEWATER AND WATER, PUBLIC.
      WATER TOWER. A water storage facility, usually, above ground and often
spherical or cylindrical in shape.
      WHOLESALE MERCHANDISING; WHOLESALE TRADE. Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, the individuals or companies.
      WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). Any mechanism or device designed
for the purpose of converting wind energy into electrical or mechanical power.
      WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, antennas, antenna arrays and any other equipment associated with the
transmission or reception of telecommunications signals that a person seeks to
locate or have installed upon or near a telecommunications tower or antenna
support structure.
      YARD. Open space that lies between the principal building or buildings
and the nearest lot line.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the
front line of the principal building to the front line of the lot.
      YARD LINE. See BUILDING LINE.
      YARD, REAR. A yard across the full width of the lot between a principal
building and the rear lot line.
      YARD, REQUIRED. The required open space between a property line and a
building line. The open space shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upwards except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      YARD REQUIRED FRONT. The REQUIRED FRONT YARD shall extend across the
front of a lot between the property lines. There shall be a REQUIRED FRONT YARD
on each street side of a corner lot. The REQUIRED FRONT YARD with the smallest
required front yard may be referred to as the side-street-side front yard.
      YARD, REQUIRED REAR. The REQUIRED REAR YARD shall extend across the rear
of a lot between the property lines. On corner lots, the REQUIRED REAR YARD may
be to the rear of either street. On interior lots, the REQUIRED REAR YARD
shall, in all cases, be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
      YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. The REQUIRED SIDE YARD shall extend between the
required front yard line and the required rear yard line. There shall only be
one REQUIRED SIDE YARD on a corner lot.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
      ZONE. See ZONING DISTRICT.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A specifically delineated area or district of the city
or its joint zoning jurisdiction within which regulations and requirements
uniformly govern the use, placements spacing and size of land and buildings.
      ZONING MAP. The map or maps that are a part of the zoning ordinance and
delineate the boundaries of zone districts.
      ZONING PERMIT. A document signed by a zoning officer, as required in the
zoning ordinance, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use,
substantial change of use, or erection, construction, reconstruction,
restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or
building, which acknowledges that such use, structure, or building complies
with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or authorized variance
therefrom. Where a building permit is required a zoning permit shall be
included as a part of the building permit.
(1992 Code, App. B,§§ 15.03.010, 15.03.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord.
69-84, passed 4-23-1984; Ord. 29-87, passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 5-88, passed 1-18-
1988; Ord. 72-88, passed 8-1-1988; Ord. 121-88, passed 12-19-1988; Ord. 41-89,
passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 71-89, passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 30-90, passed 4-20-1990;
Ord. 46-90, passed 5-21-1990; Ord. 55-90, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 5-91, passed 1-
7-1991; Ord. 55-91, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 79-91, passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 74-92,
passed 8-3-1992; Ord. 58-93, passed 7-19-1993; Ord. 20-94, passed 3-7-1994;
Ord. 51-94, passed 6-6-1994; Ord. 81-94, passed 9-6-1994; Ord. 103-94, passed
11-21-1994; Ord. 94-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 27-96, passed 3-4-1996; Ord. 39-
96, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 5-97, passed 1-21-1997; Ord. 9-97, passed 2-3-1997;
Ord. 41-97, passed 6-2-1997; Ord. 17-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 3-99, passed 1-
4-1999; Ord. 4-99, passed 1-4-1999; Ord. 16-99, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 24-99,
passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 35-99, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 70-99, passed 7-6-1999;
Ord. 115-99, passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 1-00, passed 1-3-2000; Ord. 15-00, passed
3-6-2000; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 87-01, passed 10-1-2001; Ord. 97-
01, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 20-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 32-04, passed 3-8-2004;
Ord. 85-04, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 108-04, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 21-05, passed
3-7-2005; Ord. 121-05, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 128-05, passed 12-19-2005; Ord.
40-06, passed 4-3-2006; Ord. 106-06, passed 9-5-2006; Ord. 02-07, passed 1-2-
2007; Ord. 13-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 76-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 107-07,
passed 7-2-2007; Ord. 129-07, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 130-07, passed 8-6-2007;
Ord. 01-08, passed 1-7-2008; Ord. 60-08, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 93-08, passed
7-21-2008; Ord. 109-09, passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 112-09, passed 12-21-2009; Ord.
37-10, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 9-11, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 3-12, passed 1-3-2012;
Ord. 35-12, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 91-12, passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-
19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 89-15, passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 23-
16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 33-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018;
Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 38-21, passed 4-
6-2021; Ord. 104-21, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 146-21, passed 11-16-2021; Ord. 114-
22, passed 10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023; Ord. 106-23, passed 11-7-
2023)
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
§ 160.010 DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
   (a)   In order to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings,
structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes, the
city is hereby divided into the following districts that provide for a number
of forms and uses that are generally compatible with each other. The districts
should transition from higher to lower compatibility districts in a way that
maintains a neighborhood's context.
   RR single-family residential—rural
   RS single-family residential—suburban
   RT-1 single-family residential—traditional
   RCD residential cluster development PUD
   RHP single-family residential—historic preservation
   MH manufactured residential housing
   RD-1 twin home/duplex residential—suburban
   RD-2 townhome residential—suburban
   RT-2 townhome residential—traditional
   RA-1 apartment residential—low density
   RA-2 apartment residential—moderate density
   RA-3 apartment residential—high density
   O office
   S-1 general institutional
   S-2 institutional campus PUD
   LW live-work
   C-1 commercial—pedestrian-oriented
   C-2 commercial—neighborhood and streetcar
   C-3 commercial—community
   C-4 commercial—regional
   I-1 light industrial
   I-2 heavy industrial
   AP airport
   CN conservation
   REC recreation
   AG agriculture
   PUD planned unit development
   Institutional campus PUD (S-2)—see PUD section.
   Village PUD—see PUD section.
   Downtown PUD—see PUD section.
   Pedestrian-oriented PUD—see PUD section.
   Residential cluster development (RCD)— see PUD section.
   (b)   The following districts shall be designated as zoning overlay
districts, imposing special regulations on the properties that fall within
these overlay districts without abrogating the requirements imposed by the
underlying land use district regulations: Airport Influence Overlay.
   (c)   All zoning districts include a number of forms that provide for common
category of uses and standards of development. Form regulations are provided
within §§
160.050 to
160.405.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.05.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 5-88,
passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 94-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.011 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The following are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference:
   (a)   The official zoning map of the city of Sioux Falls, together with all
the explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by
reference and is declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (b)   The approved plans submitted in conjunction with any Planned Unit
Development are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
   (c)   Those maps prepared in conjunction with any overlay district,
indicating those parcels included in the design review district, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.05.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 5-88,
passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.012 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS; MAPS.
   The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the maps that have been made
a part hereof by reference. That part of the maps designating the different
districts and their boundaries and that part of the legend designating the
symbol title shall have the same force and effect as if they were all fully set
forth herein. Other notations in references thereon are for information only.
Any change in zoning classification must follow the regulation within §§
160.650—
160.655 (Change of Zone).
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.05.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.013 RULES WHERE UNCERTAINTY AS TO BOUNDARIES ARISES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts shown on the district map accompanying and made a part of this title
by reference, the following rules apply:
   (a)   The district boundaries are either dedicated public or private streets
or alleys unless otherwise shown; and where the districts designated on the
map, made a part of this chapter by reference, are bounded approximately by
public or private street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed
to be the boundary of the district.
   (b)   Where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks
and platted lots, the district boundary shall be construed to coincide with the
nearest platted lot lines; and where the districts designated on the district
map, made a part of this chapter by reference, are bounded approximately by
platted lot lines, the platted lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary
of the district, unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the maps.
   (c)   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map, made
a part of this chapter by reference, shall be determined by use of the scale
appearing on the map as determined by the Sioux Falls Geographic Information
System (GIS).
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.05.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 5-88,
passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.014 VACATION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever any street, alley, or other public right- of-way is vacated, the
zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or other public
right-of-way is extended to the center of such vacation and all area included
in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to the appropriate
regulations of the extended districts.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.05.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.015 CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   In all territories that may hereafter be annexed to the city, the zoning
districts as they exist in the Minnehaha County or Lincoln County joint
jurisdictional zoning area shall be continued until otherwise changed by
ordinance. If the same zoning district does not exist, a comparable rezoning
shall be determined with the annexation resolution.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.05.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.016 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL—RURAL (RR).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to protect existing rural
residential homes that have been surrounded by the new urban development. The
RR district, where permitted, shall generally be located where homeowners
desire to maintain their rural character through larger lot sizes and more
rural character infrastructure.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: detached dwelling—rural (DD1).
      (2)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.017 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL— SUBURBAN (RS).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for areas of residential
use with a lower density. The district permits single-family dwellings and such
supportive community facilities as schools, neighborhood parks, and places of
worship. It is intended that this district provide protection for those areas
existing as, or planned for, single-family neighborhoods.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: detached dwelling—suburban (DD2).
      (2)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.018 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL— TRADITIONAL (RT-1).
   (a)   Intent. The RT-1 district shall allow core area neighborhoods or newly
developed areas that desire higher density neighborhoods to construct or
reconstruct homes on lots that were difficult to develop with conventional
suburban-style standards such as within RS zones. Lot density is higher with
this zone and the traditional style is allowed to better fit into the higher
density and more traditional-style homes that were typical of core area
neighborhoods.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: detached dwelling—traditional (DD3).
      (2)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.019 RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT—PUD (RCD-PUD).
   (a)   Intent. The RCD PUD is established to provide for very high density
detached dwelling housing in new or redeveloping areas of the city. Applicant
should show an initial development plan that incorporates flexible yard
requirements that use examples from the DD7 detached dwelling—high density
form. Also, cottage developments and other similar cluster subdivision
developments that create very high density single-family neighborhoods and
offer affordable and sustainable areas for people to live are very much
encouraged. Initial development plans shall incorporate transitions from the
edge of these developments and comply with building and fire code requirements.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: detached dwelling—high density (DD7).
      (2)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
   (c)   See PUD §§
160.443 (Submittal Process),
160.444 (Elements),
160.452 (RCD PUD Standards) for other required initial development plan
requirements.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.020 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL— HISTORIC PRESERVATION (RHP).
   (a)   Intent. The RHP district shall preserve the vital historic character
of a neighborhood by ensuring that all primary and accessory buildings maintain
the same design in order to retain the building’s original design features and
ensure compatibility between the new and the old. An area may be zoned to RHP
when it is approved as a historic district on the National Register of Historic
Places or the property owners of a neighborhood eligible for designation within
the neighborhood would desire to maintain property values and a sense of
neighborhood identity.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: detached dwelling—historic preservation (DD4).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.021 MANUFACTURED RESIDENTIAL HOUSING (MH).
   (a)   Intent: The MH district is intended to provide for areas of
manufactured homes with a minimum subdivision size of five acres. The district
permits the permanent placement of single-family detached manufactured homes
lot, licensed manufactured home parks, plus support facilities such as schools,
public utilities, and places of worship.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: detached dwelling—newer manufactured home (DD6).
      (2)   Form: detached dwelling—older manufactured home (DD5).
      (3)   Form: detached dwelling—suburban (DD2).
      (4)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (5)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 16-21, passed
2-2-2021)
§ 160.022 TWIN HOME/DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL—SUBURBAN (RD-1).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for both developing and
redeveloping areas of moderate density residential. This district provides for
single- family and two-family residential uses, plus support facilities such as
schools, parks, community buildings, and places of worship.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex (AD1).
      (2)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (3)   Form: detached dwelling—suburban (DD2).
      (4)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (5)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.023 TOWNHOME RESIDENTIAL— SUBURBAN (RD-2).
   (a)   Intent. The RD-2 district is intended to provide for both developing
and redeveloping areas of moderate density residential. This district provides
for single-family, two-family, and townhome residential uses. The district also
includes support facilities such as schools, parks, community buildings, and
places of worship.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome (AD3).
      (2)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (3)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex (AD1).
      (4)   Form: detached dwelling—suburban (DD2).
      (5)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (6)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (7)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.024 TOWNHOME RESIDENTIAL— TRADITIONAL (RT-2).
   (a)   Intent. The RT-2 district shall allow core area neighborhoods and
neighborhoods that desire higher densities to construct or reconstruct
townhomes on lots that are difficult to develop with conventional suburban-
style standards such as within RD and RA-1 zones. Lot density is higher with
this zone and the traditional style is allowed to better fit into the higher
density and more traditional-style homes and row houses that were typical of
core areas.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: attached dwelling—traditional eight-unit townhome
(AD4).
      (2)   Form: detached dwelling—traditional (DD3).
      (3)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (4)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (5)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.025 APARTMENT RESIDENTIAL— LOW DENSITY (RA-1).
   (a)   Intent. The RA-1 district is intended to provide for areas of lower
density multiple-family townhomes and apartments. This district provides for
neighborhood facilities such as schools, places of worship, nursing homes,
assisted living center facilities, and community residential homes. Because RA-
1 districts are one important method to transition to residential areas, an
emphasis will be put on the quality of the development with regard to its
landscaping, setbacks, and site arrangement.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: multiple dwelling—small (MD1).
      (2)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex (AD1).
      (3)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (4)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome (AD3).
      (5)   Form: attached dwelling-traditional eight-unit townhome (AD4).
      (6)   Form: detached dwelling—suburban (DD2).
      (7)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (8)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (9)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (10)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 106-23, passed
11-7-2023)
§ 160.026 APARTMENT RESIDENTIAL— MODERATE DENSITY (RA-2).
   (a)   Intent. The RA-2 district is intended to provide for areas of moderate
multi-family residential density up to 48-unit apartments three stories high.
This district also provides for two-family, town home, and support facilities
such as schools, nursing homes, places of worship, and community residential
homes.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: multiple dwelling—medium (MD2).
      (2)   Form: multiple dwelling—small (MD1).
      (3)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex (AD1).
      (4)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (5)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome (AD3).
      (6)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (7)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (8)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (9)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.027 APARTMENT RESIDENTIAL— HIGH DENSITY (RA-3).
   (a)   Intent: The RA-3 district is intended to provide for areas of the
highest density of multi-family residential apartments. This district also
provides for support facilities such as schools, nursing homes, places of
worship, and community residential homes.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: multiple dwelling—large (MD3).
      (2)   Form: multiple dwelling—medium (MD2).
      (3)   Form: multiple dwelling—small (MD1).
      (4)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (5)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (6)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (7)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.028 OFFICE (O).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for developing and
redeveloping areas primarily consisting of a mixture of office, institutional,
and limited commercial uses. This district is intended to be located on
arterial streets in close proximity to commercial forms and uses or used as a
transition zone between commercial and residential uses. Because office
districts are one important method to transition to residential areas, an
emphasis will be put on the quality of the development with regard to its
landscaping, setbacks, and site arrangement.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: business and community facilities —small (BCF1).
      (2)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (3)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (4)   Form: limited retail employment (RE1).
      (5)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (6)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.029 GENERAL INSTITUTIONAL (S-1).
   (a)   Intent. The S-1 district is intended to provide a well-planned area
for larger institutional buildings that can act as a good transition to
commercial or industrial areas. The institutional forms and uses may include
schools and places of worship. Hospitals, human service facilities, halfway
houses, drug or alcohol rehabilitation clinics, detention facilities and
temporary emergency shelters are also allowed within the S-1 district, but
additional transitions and conditions may be required to allow for appropriate
transitions to residential areas.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: business and community facilities — community service
(BCF2).
      (2)   Primary Form: business and community facilities — large (BCF3).
      (3)   Form: business and community facilities — small (BCF1).
      (4)   Form: limited retail employment (RE1).
      (5)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (6)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (7)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (8)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 106-23, passed
11-7-2023)
§ 160.030 INSTITUTIONAL CAMPUS PUD— (S-2 PUD).
   (a)   Intent. The S-2 district is established to provide for coordinated
growth of the major institutions such as hospitals and college campuses. These
institutions provide needed health, educational, and other services to the
citizens of Sioux Falls and the region. The institutions also contribute to
employment opportunities and to the overall diversification of the city's
economy. If not properly planned, major institutions can have negative impacts
such as traffic, loss of housing, and incompatible development. The S-2 planned
unit development requires an initial development plan with significant
community involvement in the development, monitoring, implementation, and
amendment including neighborhood meetings before initial development plans are
approved or amended.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: business and community facilities —large (BCF3).
      (2)   Form: business and community facilities —community service (BCF2).
      (3)   Form: business and community facilities —small (BCF1).
      (4)   Form: multiple dwelling—medium (MD2).
      (5)   Form: multiple dwelling—small (MD1).
      (6)   Form: limited retail employment (RE1).
      (7)   Form: streetcar retail employment (RE2).
      (8)   Form: parking-oriented retail employment (RE3).
      (9)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex (AD1).
      (10)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (11)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome (AD3).
      (12)   Form: attached dwelling—traditional eight-unit townhome (AD4).
      (13)   Form: neighborhood facilities—(NF1).
      (14)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities—(NF2).
      (15)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (16)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
   (c)   See PUD §§
160.443 (Submittal Process),
160.444 (Elements),
160.448 (S-2 PUD Standards) for other required initial development plan
requirements.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.031 LIVE-WORK (LW).
   (a)   Intent. The live-work district is ideally designed to allow
multifamily residential and office forms and uses within the same district and
it will also allow limited commercial within the district. Residents and
employees within this district will have the option of living in close
proximity to their work area and allow for a more sustainable neighborhood.
This district allows developers more flexibility to determine the best
available market between two very compatible land uses. LW will also allow a
mixed-use building where office buildings are allowed on the first floor and
residential on the second floor.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: business and community facilities—small (BCF1).
      (2)   Form: multiple dwelling-medium (MD2).
      (3)   Form: business and community facilities-large (BCF3).
      (4)   Form: multiple dwelling—small (MD1).
      (5)    Form: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex (AD1).
      (6)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (7)   Form: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome (AD3).
      (8)   Form: limited retail employment (RE1).
      (9)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (10)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (11)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (12)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 37-19, passed
4-2-2019)
§ 160.032 COMMERCIAL—PEDESTRIAN- ORIENTED (C-1).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for existing traditional
and core area commercial and service areas located adjacent to collector or
arterial streets that serve the area. Redeveloped core neighborhood commercial
areas would be allowed only with a future land use amendment. It is the intent
of this section to provide for a pedestrian-oriented commercial district,
providing convenience goods and personal services to primarily serve residents
within one mile of the development. Because of the very nature of commercial
forms and uses, site and architectural design shall be compatible with and
sensitive to adjacent residential development, striving to preserve and protect
residential property values. Outdoor storage will not be allowed.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: limited retail employment (RE1).
      (2)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.033 COMMERCIAL—NEIGHBORHOOD AND STREETCAR (C-2).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for a redevelopment of
streetcar commercial along strip corridors and newer neighborhood commercial
development at the intersection of two arterial roads as indicated on the
future land use map. The development would include retail store forms with
sizes not greater than 25,000 square feet in size. Parking is encouraged to be
in the back or the side of the commercial buildings, but conventional front
parking is also allowed with RE3 form standards.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: streetcar retail employment (RE2).
      (2)   Primary Form: parking-oriented retail employment (RE3).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (4)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.034 COMMERCIAL—COMMUNITY (C-3).
   (a)   Intent. C-3 areas are designed to serve the entire community with
retail and employment services as indicated on the future land use map. C-
3 buildings are allowed to be sized up to 75,000 square feet. C-3 areas include
such forms and uses as grocery stores, drug stores, sit-down restaurants, and
other similar uses.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: community retail employment (RE4).
      (2)   Form: parking-oriented retail employment (RE3).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (4)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.035 COMMERCIAL—REGIONAL (C-4).
   (a)   Intent. C-4 areas are designed to serve the entire region with retail
and employment services as indicated on the future land use map. The C-4 areas
are the most intense business and retail area in the city. Businesses include
malls, big box stores, super grocery stores, warehouse clubs, department
stores, and furniture stores. C-4 centers attract shoppers from all over the
city and surrounding region.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: regional retail employment (RE5).
      (2)   Form: community retail employment (RE4).
      (3)   Form: parking-oriented retail employment (RE3).
      (4)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (5)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.036 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-1).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for a number of light
manufacturing, offices, wholesale, warehousing, service forms and uses, and
supporting retail uses in an attractive industrial or office park setting. It
is the intention of this district to provide high-amenity industrial or office
development along the major streets and adjacent to higher density residential
areas, while allowing for more traditional industrial development in the
interior of the industrial areas.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: warehousing and manufacturing-light (WM1).
      (2)   Form: business and community facilities —small (BCF1).
      (3)   Form: business and community facilities —community service (BCF2).
      (4)   Form: business and community facilities-large (BCF3).
      (5)   Form: parking-oriented retail employment (RE3).
      (6)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (7)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.037 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (I-2).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses
that may create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with, nor
compatible with, residential, office, institutional, or planned or neighborhood
commercial establishments. Additional standards are included within this
district to help mitigate some of the operations of these forms and uses.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: warehousing and manufacturing-heavy (WM2).
      (2)   Primary Form: warehousing and manufacturing-mining and waste (WM3).
      (3)   Form: warehousing and manufacturing —light (WM1).
      (4)   Form: business and community facilities —large (BCF3).
      (5)   Form: business and community facilities —community service (BCF2).
      (6)   Form: business and community facilities —small (BCF1).
      (7)   Form: limited retail employment (RE1).
      (8)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (9)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.038 AIRPORT (AP).
   (a)   Intent. It shall be the intent of this district to encourage and
support the continued operation and vitality of the Sioux Falls Regional
Airport by allowing certain airport-related commercial/industrial and
recreational uses in accordance with this chapter, state law, and Federal
Aviation Administration regulations. All regulations within this zoning chapter
shall be administered by the Sioux Falls Regional Airport Authority.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: warehousing and manufacturing —airport facilities
(WM4).
      (2)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.039 CONSERVATION (CN).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide the city with open space
and natural areas to provide protection from floods and erosion, to protect
views, to preserve natural settings for wildlife habitats, to add to the
aesthetic quality of the community, and to lessen the urban density. Other
allowable uses include golf courses, cemeteries, and other similar uses that
are typically compatible with a conservation area.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: conservation open space (Open1).
      (2)   Form: business and community facilities —open space (BCF4).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (4)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.040 RECREATION (REC).
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide the city with
recreational opportunities and open space and to provide areas where athletic
events and community events can be accommodated. Uses typical of a recreational
district include public parks and public recreation areas.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: recreation open space (Open2).
      (2)   Form: business and community facilities —open space (BCF4).
      (3)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (4)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.041 AGRICULTURE (AG).
   (a)   Intent. It shall be the intent of this district to provide for a
limited agricultural industry within the city limits. Agricultural districts
within city limits are typically agricultural lands transitioning to future
urban uses. This transition should therefore maintain current agricultural
operations until such time as it can be rezoned to a more appropriate urban
zoning district. Land that is important to preserve in its natural state should
remain within an agriculture district or be rezoned to a CN Conservation
district to help protect environmental assets such as rivers and floodplains,
critical open space, urban forests, soils, wetlands, and steep slope areas.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: agriculture open space (Open3).
      (2)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
      (4)   Form: warehousing and manufacturing —mining and waste (WM3).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.042 VILLAGE PUD (V-PUD).
   (a)   Intent. In urban villages, densities are high and projects frequently
have the scale and character of a downtown or town center district. This street
orientation creates a much tighter streetscape setting, reducing traffic speeds
and increasing walkability. In vertical mixed-use or urban villages, the
building rather than parking lots define the street and structures typically
have two or more stories. Urban villages also create populated places rather
than just providing lots for development; consequently, appearance, design, and
function of the development is emphasized along with land use.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: village mixed-use (RE6).
      (2)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
   (c)   See PUD §§
160.443 (Submittal Process),
160.444 (Elements),
160.450 (Village PUD Standards) for other required initial development plan
requirements.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.043 DOWNTOWN PUD (DT-PUD).
   (a)   Intent. It shall be the purpose of this planned unit development
district to make the central business district the focal point of the city,
encouraging private and public investment which will preserve the central
business district as the primary office, hotel, institutional, cultural, and
entertainment center of the city. It is further the purpose of this district to
encourage a strong supportive retail center in the central business district
that will complement other downtown uses and the surrounding neighborhoods. It
is the intent of this district to place a high priority on the quality of
design, integrating new forms and uses with existing structures in a cohesive
and attractive manner. Forms and uses along the riverfront should be oriented
towards the greenway and riverwalk system. Development should facilitate the
transportation needs of individuals and businesses and a well-balanced
transportation system that would recognize the importance of all modes, either
pedestrian, bicycling, transit, automobile, or truck in nature.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: village mixed-use (RE6).
      (2)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
   (c)   See PUD §§
160.443 (Submittal Process),
160.444 (Elements),
160.449 (Downtown PUD Standards) for other required initial development plan
requirements.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.044 PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED PUD (PO-PUD).
   (a)   Intent. The intent of pedestrian-oriented development is to fully
integrate more than one use in a unified and fully pedestrian-connected planned
project, thereby reducing vehicular trips using land efficiently and tending to
create more active and lively urban environments. A PO PUD should encourage
mixed-use development by removing regulatory obstacles and providing
flexibility in its ordinances. In return, projects should authentically
integrate more than one use to demonstrate the advantages of mixed-use
development.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Form: streetcar retail employment (RE2).
      (2)   Form: parking-oriented retail employment (RE3).
      (3)   Form: community retail employment (RE4).
      (4)    Form: regional retail employment (RE5).
      (5)   Form: multiple dwelling-small (MD1).
      (6)   Form: multiple dwelling-medium (MD2).
      (7)    Form: multiple dwelling-large (MD3).
      (8)   Form: attached dwelling-suburban four-unit townhome (AD2).
      (9)   Form: attached dwelling-suburban eight-unit townhome (AD3).
      (10)   Form: attached dwelling-traditional eight-unit townhome (AD4).
      (11)   Form: neighborhood facilities (NF1).
      (12)   Form: neighborhood residential facilities (NF2).
      (13)   Form: business and community facilities-small (BCF1).
      (14)   Form: basic utilities (UT1).
      (15)   Form: tower utilities (UT2).
   (c)   See PUD §§
160.443 (Submittal Process),
160.444 (Elements),
160.451 (PO-PUD Standards) for other required initial development plan
requirements.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 37-19, passed
4-2-2019)
§ 160.045 MIDTOWN MIXED-USE—LOW DENSITY (MMU1).
   (a)   Intent. The intent of the midtown mixed-use—low density district is to
allow residential centered mixed-use within the urban core areas of Sioux Falls
as defined in Chapter 4 of the Shape Sioux Falls Comprehensive Plan. The MMU1
should encourage mixed-use development by reducing regulatory obstacles;
provide shared parking utilization; and locate buildings along the front of the
street with parking at the side or rear of the lot. MMU1 buildings will be a
minimum of three stories and include uses such as grocery stores, drug stores,
sit-down restaurants, offices, multiple dwellings, and similar uses.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: Mixed-Use—Small (MU1).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.046 MIDTOWN MIXED-USE— MODERATE DENSITY (MMU2).
   (a)   Intent. The intent of the midtown mixed-use—moderate density district
is to allow residential centered mixed-use within the Urban Streetcar or
Suburban Strip corridors and within Urban Core areas of Sioux Falls as defined
in Chapter 4 of the Shape Sioux Falls Comprehensive Plan. The MMU2 should
encourage mixed-use development by reducing regulatory obstacles; provide
shared parking utilization; and locate buildings along the front of the street
with parking at the side or rear of the lot. MMU2 district buildings will be a
minimum of three stories and maximum of six stories and include such uses such
as grocery stores, drug stores, sit-down restaurants, offices, multiple
dwellings, and similar uses. Multiple dwellings are encouraged to be above the
first story.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: Mixed-Use—Medium (MU2).
      (2)   Form: Mixed-Use—Small (MU1).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.047 MIDTOWN MIXED-USE—HIGH DENSITY (MMU3).
   (a)   Intent. The intent of the midtown mixed-use—high density district is
to allow commercial-centered mixed-use surrounding downtown as defined in
Chapter 4 of the Shape Sioux Falls Comprehensive Plan. The MMU3 district should
encourage mixed-use development by reducing regulatory obstacles; provide
shared parking utilization and locate buildings along the front of the street
with parking at the side or rear of the lot. MMU3 buildings will be a minimum
of three stories to a maximum of ten stories and include such uses as grocery
stores, drug stores, sit-down restaurants, offices, multiple dwellings, and
similar uses. Multiple dwellings are encouraged above the first story.
   (b)   Forms allowed in this district are as follows:
      (1)   Primary Form: Mixed-Use—Large (MU3).
      (2)   Form: Mixed-Use—Medium (MU2).
      (3)   Form: Mixed-Use—Small (MU1).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM REGULATIONS
§ 160.050 FORMS DESIGNATED.
   (a)   The Sioux Falls zoning ordinance is organized into forms that
categorize similar uses and control them equally with basic site layout,
density, parking, signage, yard, and buffer yard requirements.
   (b)   Forms are categories of uses including a level of density. Each form
is generally controlled in the same manner. Each form has all allowed uses
listed and includes specific standards for those uses when appropriate. Uses
are controlled as permitted, special permitted, or conditional uses. Forms are
included in zoning districts based upon each different form’s compatibility and
within the appropriate character and context of the zoning district (see §§
160.016-
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries).
   (c)   In order to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and
size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of a lot that may be
occupied, the size of the yards, courts, and other open spaces, and the density
of population, the following forms are hereby provided:
DD1: detached dwelling—rural
DD2: detached dwelling—suburban
DD3: detached dwelling—traditional
DD4: detached dwelling—historic preservation
DD5: detached dwelling—older manufactured home
DD6: detached dwelling—newer manufactured home
DD7: detached dwelling—high density
AD1: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/ duplex
AD2: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome
AD3: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome
AD4: attached dwelling—traditional eight-unit townhome
MD1: multiple dwelling—small
MD2: multiple dwelling—medium
MD3: multiple dwelling—large
NF1: neighborhood facilities
NF2: neighborhood residential facilities
BCF1: business and community facilities—small
BCF2: business and community facilities— community service
BCF3: business and community facilities—large
BCF4: business and community facilities—open space
RE1: limited retail employment
RE2: streetcar retail employment
RE3: parking-oriented retail employment
RE4: community retail employment
RE5: regional retail employment
RE6: village mixed-use
MU1: mixed-use—small
MU2: mixed-use—medium
MU3: mixed-use—large
WM1: warehousing and manufacturing—light
WM2: warehousing and manufacturing—heavy
WM3: warehousing and manufacturing—mining and waste
WM4: warehousing and manufacturing—airport facilities
OPEN1: conservation open space
OPEN2: recreational open space
OPEN3: agriculture open space
UT1: basic utilities
UT2: tower utilities
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.055 FORM DESIGNATION.
   Forms shall be administratively assigned by the planning director or their
designee. For each Lot of Record there shall be only one Form allowed which is
associated to the effective zoning classification.
   A Change of Form will be administered through the zoning office of planning
and building services.
(Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016)
FORM DD1: DETACHED DWELLING—RURAL
§ 160.060 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this chapter are the form regulations of the DD1:
Detached Dwelling—Rural.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.061 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RR.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.062 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as a DD1 form:
dwelling, single-family.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.063 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD1 form.
   (a)   Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
      (1)   Family day care.
         A.   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
         B.   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier
such as a fence, wall, or berm.
         C.   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
      (2)   Stable.
         A.   Stables must be for the use of members of the immediate family
residing on the premises.
         B.   A minimum of two acres in the lot, but in all cases at least one
acre per horse should be provided.
         C.   A pasture of at least 10,000 square feet provided, but not
allowed within the required front yard setback.
         D.   The fence surrounding the pasture shall not be barbed wire or
electric.
      (3)   Accessory dwelling units—detached.
         A.   Only one additional single-family dwelling unit is allowed and
one of the units must be owner-occupied.
         B.   Additional off-street parking is required per §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) as an additional
single-family dwelling.
         C.   Detached accessory dwelling units have the following standards.
            1.   The unit must not be any more than 40% of the square feet of
main structure.
            2.   The unit is only allowed in the rear yard.
            3.   The unit must be at least ten feet from main dwelling.
            4.   The unit must maintain the same required yards as the main or
principal building.
            5.   The unit must be 60 feet from the front property line or
recessed six feet behind the front of the principal dwelling.
      (4)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
         B.   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
personal/passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
         C.   Vegetable or flower garden.
         D.   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
         E.   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
         F.   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
      (5)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses
allowed on a premises in conformance with the following:
         A.   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
         B.   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
         C.   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
         D.   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not
have its own separate outside entrance.
         E.   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
F. below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
         F.   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than
a nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
         G.   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a
dwelling.
         H.   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
         I.   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
         J.   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal
or vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
         K.   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (b)   Conditional use. The following accessory uses within the DD1 form if a
conditional use permit for such use has been obtained in conformance with the
requirements of §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use).
      (1)   Bed and breakfast establishments.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.064 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the DD1 form
shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   30 feet.*
Required Side Yard:    7 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    30 feet—15 feet on corner lots.
Required Lot Frontage: 125 feet.
Required Lot Density:  1 acre minimum.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to highways.
*One required front yard on corner lots may be 25 feet.
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots. The yard with access to parking situated on a
lot as provided by this title shall always be considered a front yard.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.065 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM DD2: DETACHED DWELLING—SUBURBAN
§ 160.070 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
DD2: detached dwelling—suburban.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.071 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RS, RD-1, RD-2, RA-1, and MH.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.072 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot. Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as a DD2 form:
Dwelling, single-family detached.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.073 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD2 form.
   (a)    Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific  use listed below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
      (1)    Family day care.
         A.   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
         B.   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier
such as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
         C.   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
      (2)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
         B.   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
personal/passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
         C.   Vegetable or flower garden.
         D.   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
         E.   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
         F.   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
      (3)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses
allowed on a premises in conjunction with the following:
         A.   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
         B.   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
         C.   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
         D.   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not
have its own separate outside entrance.
         E.   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
F. below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
         F.   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than
a nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
         G.   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a
dwelling.
         H.   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
         I.   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
         J.   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal
or vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
         K.   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
      (4)   Accessory dwelling units—detached.
         A.   Only one additional single-family dwelling unit is allowed and
one of the units must be owner-occupied.
         B.   Additional off-street parking is required per §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) as an additional
single-family dwelling.
         C.   The detached accessory dwelling units have the following
standards:
            1.   The unit must not be any more than 40% of the square feet of
principal building not including the garage.
            2.   The unit is only allowed in the rear yard.
            3.   The unit must be at least ten feet from the main dwelling.
            4.   The unit must maintain the same required yards as the main or
principal building.
   (b)   Conditional use. The following accessory uses with a DD2 form if a
conditional use permit for such use has been obtained in conformance with the
requirements of §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use):
      (1)   Bed and breakfast establishments.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.074 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the DD2 form
shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet* 1.
Required Side Yard:    5 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    25 feet—15 feet on corner lots.
Required Lot Frontage: 50 feet—65 feet on corner lots.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Minimum Lot Size:      5,000 square feet.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to highways.
*1 One required front yard may be 20 feet on corner lots.
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots.
      (1)   The yard with access to parking situated on a lot as provided by
this title shall always be considered a front yard.
      (2)    Any front yard without access to legal parking and is not a buffer
yard shall be considered to have a ten-foot required yard and shall comply with
the driveway safety zone.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.075 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
      (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
      (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
      (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
      (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM DD3: DETACHED DWELLING—TRADITIONAL
§ 160.080 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
DD3: detached dwelling—traditional.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.081 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RT-1, RT-2.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.082 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as a DD3 form:
Dwelling, single-family detached.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.083 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD3 form.
   (a)   Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
      (1)    Family day care.
         A.    A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
         B.   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier
such as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
         C.   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
      (2)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
         B.   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
personal/passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
         C.   Vegetable or flower garden.
         D.   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
         E.   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
         F.   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
      (3)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses
allowed on the premises in conjunction with the following:
         A.   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
         B.   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
         C.   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
         D.   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not
have its own separate outside entrance.
         E.   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
F. below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
         F.   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than
a nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
         G.   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a
dwelling.
         H.   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
         I.   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
         J.   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal
or vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
         K.   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
      (4)   Accessory dwelling units—detached.
         A.   Only one additional single-family dwelling unit is allowed and
one of the units must be owner-occupied.
         B.   Additional off-street parking is required per §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) as an additional
single-family dwelling.
         C.   The detached accessory dwelling units have the following
standards:
            1.   The unit must not be any more than 40% of the square feet of
main structure.
            2.   The unit is only allowed in the rear yard.
            3.   The unit must be at least ten feet from main dwelling.
            4.   The unit must maintain the same required yards as the main or
principal building.
   (b)   Conditional use. The following accessory uses with a DD3 form if a
conditional use permit for such use has been obtained in conformance with the
requirements of §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use):
      (1)    Bed and breakfast establishments.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.084 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the DD3 form
shall be as follows:
 
Required Front Yard:   20 feet 1 or corner lot 2 .
Required Side Yard:    5 feet 3 .
Required Rear Yard:    10 feet.
Required Lot Frontage: 25 feet.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total (Level A) adjacent to highways.
1 The front yard may be reduced up to 10 feet when a front garage is recessed
back 10 feet from the front of the house.
2 On a corner lot, the two required front yards must be equal in the aggregate
to at least 30 feet as long as one required front yard is 10 feet and a garage
that has direct access to a street must have a minimum of a 20-foot required
front yard.
3 One required side yard may be reduced to 2 feet as long as the abutting
sideyard has not been reduced, building code can be maintained, and no other
sideyard on the parcel has been reduced (see §
160.672).
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots.
      (1)   The yard with access to parking situated on a lot as provided by
this title shall always be considered a front yard.
      (2)   Any front yard without access to legal parking and is not a buffer
yard shall be considered to have a ten-foot required yard and shall comply with
the driveway safety zone.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 160.085 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM DD4: DETACHED DWELLING— HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 160.090 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
DD4: detached dwelling—historic preservation.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.091 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD4 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RHP district.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.092 PRINCIPAL USES.
   (a)   Permitted special. The following building or premises include
additional restrictions for each specific use. A conditional use with standards
within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Dwelling, single-family detached.
         A.   The city planning and building services director shall review the
construction, rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction of any principal
building through the guidance of the Secretary of Interior's Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties as administered by the National Park Service.
If the applicant is unable to meet these standards, a conditional use permit is
required with the recommendation of the Sioux Falls Board of Historic
Preservation.
         B.   No demolition of a primary building shall be allowed unless the
structure is found by the city planning and building services director to be
structurally deficient and unsafe. Otherwise, a conditional use permit is
required.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.093 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD4 form.
   (a)    Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with
standards within §
160.616 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
      (1)    Family day care.
         A.   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
         B.   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier
such as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
         C.   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
      (2)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
         B.   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
personal/passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
         C.   Vegetable or flower garden.
         D.   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
         E.   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
         F.   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
      (3)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses
allowed on the premises in conjunction with the following:
         A.   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
         B.   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
         C.   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
         D.   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not
have its own separate outside entrance.
         E.   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
F. below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
         F.   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than
a nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
         G.   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a
dwelling.
         H.   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
         I.   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
         J.   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal
or vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
         K.   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
      (4)   Accessory dwelling units—detached.
         A.   Only one additional single-family dwelling unit is allowed and
one of the units must be owner-occupied.
         B.   Additional off-street parking is required per §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) as an additional
single-family dwelling.
         C.   The detached accessory dwelling units have the following
standards:
            1.   The unit must not be any more than 40% of the square feet of
main structure.
            2.   The unit is only allowed in the rear yard.
            3.   The unit must be at least ten feet from main dwelling.
            4.   The unit must maintain the same required yards as the main or
principal building.
   (b)    Conditional use. The following accessory buildings or premises may be
used with a DD4 form if a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained
in conformance with the requirements of §
160.616:
      (1)    Bed and breakfast establishments.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.094 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements
within the DD4 form shall be as follows except that before building,
renovating, or reconstructing the owner must first adhere to the standards of §
160.092:
 
Required Front Yard:   20 feet 1 or corner lot 2 .
Required Side Yard:    5 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    10 feet.
Required Lot Frontage: 25 feet.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total (Level A) adjacent to highways.
1 The front yard may be reduced up to ten feet when a front garage is recessed
back ten feet from the front of the house.
2 On a corner lot the two required front yards must be equal in the aggregate
to at least 30 feet as long as one required front yard is ten feet and a
garage that has direct access to a street must have a minimum of a 20-foot
required front yard.
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots.
      (1)   The yard with access to parking situated on a lot as provided by
this title shall always be considered a front yard.
      (2)   Any front yard without access to legal parking and is not a buffer
yard shall be considered have a 10-foot required yard and shall comply with the
driveway safety zone.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.095 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD4 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM DD5: DETACHED DWELLING—OLDER MANUFACTURED HOME
§ 160.100 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
DD5: detached dwelling-older manufactured home. The manufactured housing for
this form are typically in older manufactured housing subdivisions.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.101 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD5 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): MH district.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.102 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purpose as a DD5 form: Manufactured home.
   (b)    Permitted special. The following uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special use cannot
be obtained except for home occupations: Licensed manufactured home park
established prior to March 26, 1970.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.103 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD5 form.
   (a)   Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with
standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
      (1)    Family day care.
         A.   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
         B.   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier
such as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
         C.   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
      (2)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed
on the premises in conjunction with the following:
         A.   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
         B.   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
         C.   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
         D.   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not
have its own separate outside entrance.
         E.   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
F. below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
         F.   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than
a nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
         G.   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a
dwelling.
         H.   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
         I.   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
         J.   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal
or vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
         K.   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
      (3)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
         B.   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
personal/passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
         C.   Vegetable or flower garden.
         D.   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
         E.   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
         F.   Residential accessory buildings also include the following
locational standards:
            1.   A garage, canopy, accessory building over 200 square feet, or
carport may project into a required side or rear yard provided it is located no
closer than ten feet to another manufactured home, garage, canopy, accessory
building over 200 square feet, carport, or addition thereto. A garage, canopy,
or carport shall not exceed a maximum depth of 28 feet.
            2.   A deck may project into a required side or rear yard provided
it is located no closer than four feet to another structure.
            3.   An enclosed vestibule 40 square feet in floor area or less may
project into a required yard for a distance not to exceed four feet, but in no
event closer than ten feet to another manufactured home, garage, canopy,
accessory building over 200 square feet, carport, or addition thereto.
            4.   Detached accessory buildings with a projected roof area of not
more than 200 square feet may project into a required side or rear yard,
provided it is located no closer than four feet to another structure.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.104 BULK REGULATIONS.
   Spacing and yard requirements. All manufactured homes will be positioned on
the manufactured home space in compliance with the following:
   (a)   All licensed manufactured home parks established or annexed, prior to
January 1, 1950, will maintain as minimum yards the same yards as shown on the
individual manufactured home park layout plan on file in the office of the
planning and building services department, provided said yards are less than
those shown in spacing Chart A [immediately following this section].
   (b)   Licensed manufactured home parks established or annexed between
January 1, 1950, and March 26, 1970, will comply with the minimum spacing set
forth in spacing Chart A [immediately following this section].
   The maximum height and buffer yard requirements within the DD5 form shall be
as follows:
 
Distance Between Homes: 16 feet except as shown on Chart A.
Maximum Height:         35 feet.
                        10 feet total (Level A) adjacent to designated
Required Buffer Yard:   highways.
                        30 feet total (Level C) adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3, DD4.
 
CHART A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7666.png]
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 160.105 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD5 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM DD6: DETACHED DWELLING—NEWER MANUFACTURED HOME
§ 160.110 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
DD6: detached dwelling—newer manufactured home. The manufactured housing for
this form are typically in newer manufactured housing subdivisions.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.111 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD6 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): MH.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.112 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot.
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purpose as a DD6 form: Manufactured home.
   (b)   Permitted special. The following uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with standards §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
      (1)    Licensed manufactured home park established after March 26, 1970.
Regulations regarding licensed manufactured home parks shall be as follows:
         A.   Streets. Each manufactured home lot shall abut or face a public
or private roadway or street, such roadway or street having a curb to curb,
hard surface at least 34 feet in width where parking is permitted on both
sides, 28 feet in width where parking is restricted to one side only, or be
connected to such street or roadway by a private driveway not less than 12 feet
in width, serving no more than four lots.
         B.   Licensed manufactured home parks established after March 26,
1970, will comply with the following spacing requirements:
            1.   The use of flat or corrugated sheet metal for the exterior
walls of any manufactured home or garage is prohibited.
            2.   Each manufactured home or garage shall have a roof structure
with a minimum slope corresponding to three inches of vertical rise for each 12
inches of horizontal run. Metallic roofing surfaces shall not be permitted.
            3.   Each manufactured home shall meet HUD Safety Standards Act of
1974, effective 1976.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.113 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD6 form.
   (a)    Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use listed below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Family day care.
         A.   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
         B.   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier
such as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
         C.   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
      (2)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses
allowed on the premises in conjunction with the following:
         A.   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
         B.   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
         C.   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
         D.   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must be from
within the building.
         E.   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
F. below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
         F.   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than
a nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
         G.   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a
dwelling.
         H.   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
         I.   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
         J.   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal
or vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
         K.   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
      (3)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
         A.   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
         B.   A private residential garage used only for the housing of
personal/passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
         C.   Vegetable or flower garden.
         D.   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
         E.   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
         F.   Spacing and yard requirement exceptions.
            1.   A garage, canopy, accessory building over 200 square feet, or
carport may project into a required side or rear yard provided it is located no
closer than ten feet to another manufactured home, garage, canopy, accessory
building over 200 square feet, carport, or addition thereto. A garage, canopy,
or carport shall not exceed a maximum depth of 28 feet.
            2.   A deck may project into a required side or rear yard provided
it is located no closer than four feet to another structure.
            3.   An enclosed vestibule 40 square feet in floor area or less may
project into a required yard for a distance not to exceed four feet, but in no
event closer than ten feet to another manufactured home, garage, canopy,
accessory building over 200 square feet, carport, or addition thereto.
            4.   Detached accessory buildings with a projected roof area of not
more than 200 square feet may project into a required side or rear yard,
provided it is located no closer than four feet to another structure.
            5.   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 15 feet will be
required on each street frontage. A front yard for garages/carports of not less
than 20 feet will be required on a street front where the garage/carport is
entered directly from the street. The distance will be measured from the wall
or roof line of the structure to the street or roadway at the closest point.
            6.   Side and rear yards. Spacing between manufactured homes will
be 20 feet. The distance will be measured at the closest point.
            7.   Wind-resistant structure. A wind-resistant structure
containing seven square feet of area from each manufactured home space in the
park shall be provided. The structure shall be constructed in accordance with
the International Building Code with a Category III Importance Factor
Classification of Buildings (Table 1604.5).
      (4)   All accessory buildings shall also comply with the bulk regulations
of §
160.114.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 160.114 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the DD6 form shall be as follows and as shown on Chart B below:
 
Required Front Yard:  15 feet to street.
Required Side Yard:   20 feet between homes.
Required Rear Yard:   20 feet between homes.
Minimum Park Size:    10 acres.
Maximum Height:       35 feet.
                      30 feet (Level C) adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3, DD4.
Required Buffer Yard: 15 feet (Level B) adjacent to DD5, AD1, AD2, AD3, GW, and
                      HW.
 
CHART B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7668.png]
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 114-22, passed
10-4-2022)
§ 160.115 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD6 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM DD7: DETACHED DWELLING—HIGH DENSITY
§ 160.120 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
DD7: detached dwelling—high density.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.121 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The DD7 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RCD Residential Cluster Development PUD.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.122 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as a DD7 form:
Dwelling, single-family detached.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.123 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a DD7 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)   Family day care.
      (1)   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
      (2)   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier such
as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
      (3)   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
   (b)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed on
the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance. There can be no evidence other than the
nameplate referred to in (5) below that will indicate from the exterior that
the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a
dwelling.
      (5)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (6)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (7)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (8)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (9)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (10)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
   (d)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   Only one additional single-family dwelling unit is allowed and one
of the units must be owner-occupied.
      (2)   Additional off-street parking is required per §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) as an additional
single-family dwelling.
      (3)   The detached accessory dwelling units have the following standards:
         A.   The unit must not be any more than 40% of the square feet of main
structure.
         B.   The unit is only allowed in the rear yard.
         C.   The unit must be at least ten feet from main dwelling.
         D.   The unit must maintain the same required yards as the main or
principal building.
   (e)   Accessory dwelling units—detached.
      (1)   Only one additional single-family dwelling unit is allowed and one
of the units must be owner-occupied.
      (2)   Additional off-street parking is required per §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) as an additional
single-family dwelling.
      (3)   Detached accessory dwelling units have the following standards.
         A.   The unit must not be any more than 40% of the square feet of main
structure.
         B.   The unit is only allowed in the rear yard.
         C.   The unit must be at least ten feet from main dwelling.
         D.   The unit must maintain the same required yards as the main or
principal building.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.124 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the DD7 form shall be as follows and see §
160.452 (RCD PUD) for more guidance:
 
Required Front Yard:   10 feet average; 20 feet required for driveway to garage
                       in required front yard.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet on one side; 5 feet on the opposite side.
Required Rear Yard:    10 feet average; 20 feet required for driveway in
                       required rear yard.
Required Lot Frontage: 25 feet.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total adjacent to highways.
                       15 feet total adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.125 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a DD7 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM AD1: ATTACHED DWELLING— SUBURBAN TWIN HOME/DUPLEX
§ 160.130 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
AD1: attached dwelling—suburban twin home/duplex.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.131 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The AD1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RD-1, RD-2, RA-1, RA-2, LW, and S-2 (PUD).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 160.132 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as an AD1 form:
Dwelling, twin home/duplex.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.133 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an AD1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)   Family day care.
      (1)   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
      (2)   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier such
as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
      (3)   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
   (b)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed on
the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance. There can be no evidence other than the
nameplate referred to in (5) below that will indicate from the exterior that
the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a
dwelling.
      (5)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (6)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (7)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (8)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (9)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (10)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%of
the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
   (d)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.134 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements
within the AD1 form shall be as follows:
 
Required Front Yard:   25 feet; on a corner lot, one required front yard may be
                       20 feet.
Required Side Yard:    5 feet on nonparty wall side; 0 feet on the party wall
                       side.
Required Rear Yard:    25 feet; 15 feet on corner lots; 0 feet on the party
                       wall side.
Required Lot Frontage: 25 feet.
                       50 feet for two dwellings on one lot.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to highways.
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots.
      (1)   A.   The yard with access to parking situated on a lot as provided
by this subchapter shall always be considered a front yard.
         B.   Any front yard without access to legal parking and that is not a
buffer yard shall be considered to have a ten-foot required yard and shall
comply with the driveway safety zone.
      (2)   Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same
lot: ten feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the required side
yards and 50 feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the rear or
front required yards.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 16-21, passed
2-2-2021)
§ 160.135 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an AD1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM AD2: ATTACHED DWELLING—SUBURBAN FOUR-UNIT TOWNHOME
§ 160.140 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
AD2: attached dwelling—suburban four-unit townhome.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.141 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The AD2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RD-1, RD-2, RA-1, RA-2, LW, S-2, PO-PUD.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.142 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an AD2 form:
      (1)    Dwelling, townhome—three to four attached dwelling units in RD-2,
RA-1, RA-2, S-2, PO-PUD, and LW Districts.
   (b)    Permitted special. The following building or premises include
additional restrictions for each specific use. A conditional use is not
available when standards cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Dwelling townhome—three to four attached dwelling units in RD-
1 Districts.
         A.   One of the principal frontage shall be adjacent to the
intersection of two arterial roadways or adjacent to the intersection of an
arterial and a collector roadway.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.143 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an AD2 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)   Family day care.
      (1)   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
      (2)   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier such
as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
      (3)   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
   (b)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed on
the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance.
      (5)   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
(6) below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
      (6)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (7)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (8)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (9)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (10)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (11)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (d)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.144 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements
within the AD2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet; on a corner lot, one required front yard may be
                       20 feet.
Required Side Yard:    7 feet on the nonparty wall side; 0 feet on the party
                       wall side.
Required Rear Yard:    25 feet; 15 feet on corner lots; 0 feet on the party
                       wall side.
Required Lot Frontage: 16 feet.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Maximum Size:          3 to 4 units per structure.
Required Buffer Yard*: 10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                       highways.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots.
      (1)   The yard with access to parking situated on a lot as provided by
this chapter shall always be considered a front yard.
      (2)   Any front yard without access to legal parking and that is not a
buffer yard shall be considered to have a ten foot required yard and shall
comply with the driveway safety zone.
   (c)   Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot:
14 feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the required side yards
and 50 feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the rear or front
required yards.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 16-21, passed
2-2-2021)
§ 160.145 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an AD2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM AD3: ATTACHED DWELLING—SUBURBAN EIGHT-UNIT TOWNHOME
§ 160.150 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
AD3: attached dwelling—suburban eight-unit townhome.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.151 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The AD3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044  (Districts and Boundaries): RD-2, RA-1, RA-2, LW, S-2, PO-PUD.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.152 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as a AD3 form: Dwelling
townhome—five to eight attached dwelling units.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.153 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an AD3 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)   Family day care.
      (1)   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
      (2)   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier such
as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
      (3)   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
   (b)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed on
the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance.
      (5)   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
(6) below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
      (6)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (7)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (8)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (9)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (10)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (11)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (d)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.154 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements
within the AD3 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet; 2 front yards, 1 can be 15 feet on corners.
Required Side Yard:    7 feet on the nonparty wall side; 0 feet on the party
                       wall side.
Required Rear Yard:    25 feet; 15 feet on corner lots; 0 feet on the party
                       wall side.
Required Lot Frontage: 16 feet.
Maximum Height:        35 feet.
Maximum Size:          5 to 8 units per structure.
                       10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to highways.
Required Buffer Yard*: 10 feet total (Level A) adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3, and
                       DD4.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
 
   (b)   Double frontage lots.
      (1)   The yard with access to parking situated on a lot as provided by
this chapter shall always be considered a front yard.
      (2)   Any front yard without access to legal parking and that is not a
buffer yard shall be considered to have a ten-foot required yard and shall
comply with the driveway safety zone.
      (3)   Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same
lot: 14 feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the required side
yards and 50 feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the rear or
front required yards.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021 )
§ 160.155 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an AD3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM AD4: ATTACHED DWELLING—TRADITIONAL EIGHT-UNIT TOWNHOME
§ 160.160 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
AD4: attached dwelling—traditional eight-unit townhome.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.161 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The AD4 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RA-1, RT-2, S-2, and POPUD Districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.162 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot. Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purposes as an AD4 form:
   (a)   Dwelling, twin home/duplex.
   (b)   Dwelling, townhome, three to eight units.
   (c)   Dwelling, converted single-family—two to eight units.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.163 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a AD4 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)    Family day care.
      (1)   A petition signed by 75% of property owners within 250 feet.
      (2)   Adequate outdoor play area(s) protected by a four-foot barrier such
as a fence, wall, berm, or hedge.
      (3)   The zoning permit shall state that a health department license is
required before the beginning of operation.
   (b)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed on
a premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must be from
within the building.
      (5)   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
(6) below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
      (6)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (7)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (8)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (9)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (10)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (11)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (d)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.164 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the AD4 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:    20 feet 1 or corner lot 2 .
Required Side Yard:     5 feet on the nonparty wall side; 0 feet on the party
                        wall side.
Required Rear Yard:     10 feet.
Required Lot Frontage:  NA.
Maximum Height:         35 feet.
Maximum Size:           No more than 8 units per structure.
                        10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3,
3 Required Buffer Yard: and DD4 forms only with three to eight units.
                        10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to highways.
1 The front yard may be reduced up to ten feet when a front garage is recessed
back ten feet from the front of the house.
2On a corner lot the two required front yards must be equal in the aggregate to
at least 30 feet as long as one required front yard is ten feet. Any front yard
without access to legal parking and that is not a buffer yard shall be
considered to have a ten foot required yard and shall comply with the driveway
safety zone.
3See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: ten feet
when the edge of the building is parallel to the required side yards and 20
feet when the edge of the building is parallel to the rear or front required
yards.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021 )
§ 160.165 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an AD4 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM MD1: MULTIPLE DWELLING—SMALL
§ 160.170 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
MD1: multiple dwelling—small.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.171 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The MD1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, S-2, LW, PO-PUD
districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.172 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as an MD1 form:
Dwelling, Multiple Family.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.173 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an MD1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.616 et seq. (Conditional Use Standards) may be obtained when the standards
for a permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home
occupations.
   (a)   Day care center.
      (1)   Located in an existing community room or no more than 50% of the
square footage of the first story of an apartment building.
      (2)   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
      (3)   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
   (b)   Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed on
the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance.
      (5)   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
(6) below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
      (6)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (7)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (8)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (9)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (10)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (11)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
   (d)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.174 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the MD1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet.*, **
Required Side Yard:    10 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    10 feet.
Required Lot Frontage: 25 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 2 stories and no more than 35 feet.
Maximum Size:          No more than 24 units per structure.
Required Buffer Yard:  10 feet total (Level A) when adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3,
                       DD4, and HW forms. ***
* A reduction to 15 feet (front yard) with approved common open space
alternative plan (see §§
160.594 et seq.). (Alternative Site Plans)
** One required front yard on corner lots may be 20 feet.
*** Parking lots or accessory buildings such as garages may be counted as the
HW (Highway) buffer yard. See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20
feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 160.175 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an MD1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM MD2: MULTIPLE DWELLING—MEDIUM
§ 160.180 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
MD2: multiple dwelling—medium.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.181 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The MD2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §
160.171: RA-2, RA-3, S-2, LW, PO-PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.182 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as an MD2 form:
dwelling, multiple family.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.183 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an MD2 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)   Day care center.
      (1)   Located in an existing community room or no more than 50% of the
square footage of the first story of an apartment building.
      (2)   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
      (3)   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
   (b)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed
on the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance.
      (5)   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
(6) below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
      (6)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (7)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (8)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (9)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (10)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (11)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
   (d)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.184 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the MD2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:    25 feet.*, **
Required Side Yard:     10 feet.*
Required Rear Yard:     10 feet.*
Required Lot Frontage:  25 feet.
Maximum Height:         A maximum of 3 stories and no more than 45 feet.
                        No more than 48 units per structure. A small one-story
Maximum Size:           breezeway between 2 or more structures will not
                        constitute a joining of the structures into one
                        structure.
                        30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when 3 stories
                        and contiguous to DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.***
                        15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                        DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.***
                        15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when 3 stories
Required Buffer Yard:   and contiguous to DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4,
                        HW, and GW forms.***
                        10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                        DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, HW, and GW forms.***
                        Parking lots or accessory buildings such as garages may
                        be counted as the HW (Highway) buffer yard.***
Buffer Yard Reduction : Up to a 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is
                        adjacent to a buffer yard.***
* A reduction to 15 feet (front yard), 5 feet (side and rear yard) with
approved common open space alternative plan (see §§
160.594 et seq.). (Alternative Site Plans)
** One required front yard on corner lots may be 20 feet.
*** See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 41-19, passed
4-2-2019)
§ 160.185 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an MD2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM MD3: MULTIPLE DWELLING—LARGE
§ 160.190 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
MD3: multiple dwelling—large.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.191 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The MD3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RA-3 district.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 160.192 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following use shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purpose as an MD3 form:
dwelling, multiple family.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.193 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an MD3 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained except for home occupations.
   (a)   Day care center.
      (1)   Located in an existing community room or no more than 50% of the
square footage of the first story of an apartment building.
      (2)   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
      (3)   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
   (b)    Home occupations. Home occupations are those secondary uses allowed
on the premises in conjunction with the following:
      (1)   The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   The occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may
be employed by or participate in the home occupation.
      (4)   The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation must not have
its own separate outside entrance.
      (5)   There can be no evidence other than the nameplate referred to in
(6) below that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
      (6)   There is used no sign that is attached to the building other than a
nameplate. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than one
square foot in area.
      (7)   Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external
alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling.
      (8)   No merchandise, including samples, can be sold on the premises.
      (9)   The business will generate no more than four visits per day from
clients or customers.
      (10)   Materials that are combustible, toxic, or consist of any animal or
vegetable matter cannot be stored on the premises.
      (11)   Any process that will cause odor, dust, glare, noise, heat, or
vibration which would have a negative effect on adjacent properties would not
be allowed.
   (c)   Residential accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be
constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been
actually commenced, and no accessory buildings shall be used unless the main
building on the lot is also being used. Residential accessory buildings
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area on the main building.
      (2)   A private residential garage used only for the housing of personal/
passenger motor vehicles or recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Vegetable or flower garden.
      (4)   Enclosures necessary for the raising and keeping of small animals
and fowl shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any dwelling on an
adjacent lot.
      (5)   Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental
gate, barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to
residential uses.
      (6)   Locational standards for residential accessory buildings are in §
160.507.
   (d)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.194 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the MD3 form shall be as follows:
Required   25 feet—*15 feet if provide open space through an alternative site plan [see §§
Front      160.594 et seq. (Alternative Site Plans)]. *One required front yard on corner lots
Yard:      may be 20 feet.
Required   10 feet—*5 feet if provide open space through an alternative site plan [see §§
Side Yard: 160.594 et seq. (Alternative Site Plans)].
Required   10 feet—*5 feet if provide open space through an alternative site plan [see §§
Rear Yard: 160.594 et seq. (Alternative Site Plans)].
Required
Lot        25 feet.
Frontage:
           No limit; except 45 feet when located within 150 feet of AD and DD forms.
Maximum    *Additional setback is required when the building is above 55 feet in height. In
Height:    these cases, add 1 additional foot for all setbacks for every 2 additional feet in
           height up to 20 feet additional feet of setback.
Maximum    No limit—comply with fire and building codes.
Size:
           *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3 and DD4
Required   forms.
Buffer     *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2,
Yard:      AD3, AD4. and GW, HW.
           * Parking lots or accessory buildings such as garages may be counted as the HW
           (Highway) buffer yard.
Buffer
Yard       10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to a buffer yard.
Reduction:
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 114-22, passed
10-4-2022)
§ 160.195 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an MD3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM NF1: NEIGHBORHOOD FACILITIES
§ 160.200 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
NF1: Neighborhood Facilities.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.201 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The NF1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RS, RT-1, RCD-PUD, MH, RD-1, RD-2, RT-2,
RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, O, S-1, S-2, LW, and PO PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.202 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purpose as an NF1 form: Neighborhood Park.
   (b)   Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Places of worship.
         A.    One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut to an
arterial or collector street as defined in the Engineering Design Standards.
      (2)    Public service facility.
         A.   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut to an
arterial or collector street as defined in the Engineering Design Standards.
      (3)    Elementary schools.
         A.   One of the principal frontages of the premises shall abut to an
arterial or collector street as defined in the Engineering Design.
      (4)    Recreational facilities—subdivision.
         A.   The recreational facility shall be operated by the subdivision it
serves. No other recreational facility is allowed with this form.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.203 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an NF1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Dwelling for religious orders—accessory to places of worship.
      (1)   Located on the same lot or adjacent to places of worship.
      (2)   Single dwelling unit.
      (3)   No more than 30 percent of the size of the places of worship.
      (4)   Parking only for those residing in premises.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (c)   Day care center.
      (1)   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
      (2)   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (3)   The day care center is clearly subordinate to the principal use of
the building and no more than 10,000 square feet of floor area dedicated to the
day care use.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 160.204 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the NF1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet. One required front yard on corner lots may be
                       20 feet.
Required Side Yard:    10 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    10 feet.
                       35 feet or 2 stories. Spires, steeples, towers, or other
Maximum Height:        architectural ornamentation may exceed the allowable
                       height.
Maximum Size:          NA—comply with building and fire codes.
Required Buffer Yard:  15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.*
Buffer Yard Reduction: Up to a 5-foot reduction is allowed when parking is
                       adjacent to a buffer yard.*
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 22-15, passed
3-3-2015; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.205 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an NF1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM NF2: NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
§ 160.210 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
NF2: Neighborhood Residential Facilities.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.211 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The NF2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): RD-2, RT-2, RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, O, S-1, S-2,
LW, and PO-PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.212 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purposes as an NF2 form:
   (a)   Community residential home.
   (b)    Nursing home.
   (c)    Assisted living center facility.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 106-23, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 160.213 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an NF2 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)    Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.214 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the NF2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet.*, **
Required Side Yard:    10 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    10 feet.
Maximum Height:        35 feet or two stories.
Maximum Size:          NA—comply with building and fire codes.
                       15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
Required Buffer Yard:  DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.***
                       10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW.***
Buffer Yard Reduction: Up to a 5-foot reduction is allowed when parking is
                       adjacent to a buffer yard.***
* A reduction to 15 feet (front yard) with approved common open space
alternative plan (see §§
160.594 et seq. (Alternative Site Plans)
** One required front yard on corner lots may be 20 feet.
*** See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20
feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 160.215 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an NF2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM BCF1: BUSINESS AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES—SMALL
§ 160.220 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
BCF1: business and community facilities—small.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.221 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The BCF1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): O, LW, S-1, S-2, I-1, and PO-PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.222 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted special. The following
principal uses are grouped together and include additional standards for the
specified uses. A conditional use permit with standards provided within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the following standards
for a permitted special use cannot be obtained:
   (a)   Offices, college, university, or post high school, elementary school,
middle/high school dwelling(s) above the first story, recreation facility,
private, cultural facility, and research facility.
      (1)   A pitched roof at least a minimum of 4:12 with brick siding when
adjacent to DD forms.
      (2)   Parking behind or below the building if front yard is across the
street from DD forms.
   (b)   Day care centers.
      (1)   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
      (2)   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (3)   All structure façades visible from public streets shall include
standard brick masonry units at least 32 inches high all sides.
      (4)   A pitched roof at least a minimum of 4:12 with brick siding when
adjacent to DD forms.
   (c)   Residential-compatible self-storage.
      (1)   The storage structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof
that shall be a minimum pitch of 4:12.
      (2)   The storage structures should not be longer than one to four width
to length before a break. Breaks are considered to be at least three feet
horizontal or vertical in building elevations.
      (3)   All structure façades visible from public streets shall include
standard brick masonry units at least 32 inches high all sides.
      (4)   Each building unit shall have an architectural element such as
columns, gables, or roof vents within dormers.
      (5)   Residential-style lighting shall be in conformance with §
160.491 (Outdoor lighting).
      (6)   Residential fencing materials and in conformance with §
160.480 (Fences).
      (7)   No outside storage allowed.
   (d)   Funeral homes and mortuary.
      (1)   Placed beyond 250 feet of any DD, AD, and MD forms.
      (2)   All standards within §
160.222(a).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021 )
§ 160.223 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a BCF1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained.
   (a)    Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses (sensitive land uses include
DD, AD, MD forms, churches, schools, day care, public use facility, and parks).
   (b)    Accessory drive-up service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555 (Stacking and Queuing).
   (c)    Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (d)   Accessory living units.
      (1)   No more than one residential unit per structure is allowed.
      (2)   Two additional parking spaces are required.
      (3)   All building and fire codes must still be met.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.224 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the BCF1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   15 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 2 stories and no more than 35 feet.
                       1 story: no more than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
Maximum Size:          area per structure.
                       2 stories: no more than 60,000 square feet of gross
                       floor area per structure.
                       *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
Required Buffer Yard:  DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.
                       *10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, and AD1 thru AD4, GW, MD1, and MD2.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.225 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a BCF1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM BCF2: BUSINESS AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES—COMMUNITY SERVICE
§ 160.230 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
BCF2: business and community facilities—community service.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.231 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The BCF2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): S-1, S-2, I-1, and I-2 districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
2014 S-12
§ 160.232 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted special. The following
principal uses include the same additional restrictions for all listed uses
below. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special use cannot
be obtained.
   (a)    Halfway house.
      (1)   1,000 feet to any K-8 school, park, day care, or residential area.
      (2)   An approved security management plan.
   (b)    Temporary or emergency shelter.
      (1)   1,000 feet to any K-8 school, park, day care, or residential area.
      (2)   An approved security management plan.
   (c)    Human service facility.
      (1)   1,000 feet to any K-8 school, park, day care, or residential area.
      (2)   An approved security management plan.
   (d)   Detention facility.
      (1)   1,000 feet to any K-8 school, park, day care, or DD, AD, or MD
form.
      (2)   An approved security management plan.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 106-23, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 160.233 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a BCF2 form.
   (a)   Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §
160.605 may be obtained when the standards for a permitted special accessory
use cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Accessory off-site parking.
         A.   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
         B.   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
         C.   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.234 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the BCF2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   15 feet.
Required Side Yard     0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 3 stories and no more than 45 feet.
                       No limit--comply with fire and building codes; except
Maximum Size:          limit to a maximum of 3 stories and no more than 45 feet
                       when within 100 feet of DD and AD forms.
                       30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.*
Required Buffer Yard:  15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4 and GW forms.*
                       10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.*
                       Up to a 10-foot reduction (Level C), 5-foot reduction
Buffer Yard Reduction: (Level B) is allowed when parking is adjacent to a
                       buffer yard.*
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 37-19, passed
4-2-2019)
§ 160.235 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a BCF2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM BCF3: BUSINESS AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES—LARGE
§ 160.240 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
BCF3: Business and community facilities—large.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.241 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The BCF3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): S-1, S-2 LW, I-1, and I-2 districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.242 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted.
      (1)   A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for the
following purposes as a BCF3 form:
         A.   Office.
         B.   Hospital.
         C.   Research facility.
         D.   College, university, or post high school.
         E.   Middle/high school, elementary school.
         F.   Recreation facility, private.
         G.   Cultural facility.
         H.   Places of worship.
         I.   Public service facility.
         J.   Dwelling(s) above first story.
         K.   Assisted living center facility.
      (2)   Standard for all above uses: Streets should be boundary for campus
area.
   (b)    Permitted special. The following principal uses are grouped together
and include additional standards for the specified uses. A conditional use
permit with standards provided within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the following standards
for a permitted special use cannot be obtained:
      (1)   Day care centers.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (2)   Funeral homes and mortuary.
         A.   Placed beyond 250 feet from any DD, AD, and MD forms.
         B.   All standards within §
160.222(a).
      (3)   Residential-compatible self-storage.
         A.   The storage structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof
that shall be a minimum pitch of 4 in 12.
         B.   The storage structures should not be longer than one to four
width to length before a break. Breaks are considered to be at least three feet
horizontal or vertical in building elevations.
         C.   All structure façades visible from public streets shall include
standard brick masonry units at least 32 inches high all sides.
         D.   Each building unit shall have an architectural element such as
columns, gables, or roof vents within dormers.
         E.   Residential-style lighting shall be in conformance with §
160.491.
         F.   Residential fencing materials and in conformance with §
160.480.
         G.   No outside storage allowed.
      (4)   Hotel/motel.
         A.   Any other retail and services use within the hotel/motel such as
restaurants, meeting facilities, and on-sale alcohol establishments must be
accessory to the hotel/motel.
         B.   Placed beyond 250 feet from any DD, AD forms.
      (5)   Public assembly facilities.
         A.   Placed beyond 500 feet of any AD, DD, or MD forms.
         B.   Located in an area where traffic to and from the site is not on a
local or residential street.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 106-23,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 160.243 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a BCF3 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)    Heliport.
      (1)   Hard-surfaced site-landing site.
      (2)   Landing pad must be constructed in a way that the public may not be
able to access the site.
   (b)    Drive-through service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555 (Stacking and Queuing).
   (c)    Parking ramps.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Limit height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not
deprived of sunlight.
      (3)   Locate in an area where traffic to and from the site is not on a
local or residential street.
      (4)   Must be placed beyond 500 feet of any AD or DD forms.
      (5)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
   (d)    Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses.
   (e)    Off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.244 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the BCF3 form shall be as follows:
Required
Front      20 feet.
Yard:
Required   0 feet.
Side Yard
Required   0 feet.
Rear Yard:
           No limit—comply with fire and building codes; except limit to a maximum of 3
Maximum    stories and no more than 45 feet when with 100 feet of DD and AD forms.
Height:    •   Additional setback is required when the building is above 55 feet in
           height. In these cases, add 1 additional foot for all setbacks for every 2
           additional feet in height up to 20 feet additional feet of setback.
Maximum    No limit—comply with fire and building codes.
Size:
           45 feet total and Level D buffer yard when adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4
Required   forms.*
Buffer     30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1,
Yard:      AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW forms.*
           15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to MD1 and MD2 forms.*
Buffer     Up to a 10-foot reduction (Level D and C), 5-foot reduction (Level B) is
Yard       allowed when parking is adjacent to a buffer yard.*
Reduction:
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 20 feet plus 1
foot for every 1 foot of additional height above 55 feet up to 20 feet of distance.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 160.245 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a BCF3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM BCF4: BUSINESS AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES—OPEN SPACE
§ 160.250 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
BCF4: business and community facilities—open space.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.251 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The BCF4 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): REC and CN districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.252 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purposes as a BCF4 form:
   (a)   Club house.
   (b)   Public recreation facility.
   (c)   Cultural facility.
   (d)   Fairgrounds.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.253 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a BCF4 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use Permits) may be obtained when the standards
for a permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.254 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the BCF4 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   15 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 2 stories and no more than 35 feet.
Maximum Size:          No limit.
                       *45 feet total and Level D buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms and the form is over 15,000
                       square feet of gross floor area on the 1st floor or when
                       over a total of 30,000 square feet of gross floor area
Required Buffer Yard:  on all floors; otherwise,
                       *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, and DD3, and DD4 forms.
                       *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 10 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.255 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a BCF4 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM RE1: LIMITED RETAIL EMPLOYMENT
§ 160.260 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
RE1: limited retail employment.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.261 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The RE1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): O, S-1, S-2, LW, C-1, I-2 districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.262 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an RE1 form:
      (1)   Office.
      (2)   Places of worship.
      (3)   Dwelling(s) above the first story.
   (b)   Permitted special. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Limited retail and services.
         A.    Hours limited to: Sunday through Thursday, 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.; and on weekends, Friday and Saturday, 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
         B.   Drive-through facilities or stacking of motor vehicles
prohibited.
         C.   Outdoor speakers prohibited.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 160.263 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an RE1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses. Sensitive land uses include
DD, AD, MD forms, places of worship, schools, day care, public use facility,
and parks.
   (b)   Accessory retail warehouse or processing.
      (1)   It should be subordinate to the retail principal use and all retail
merchandise shall be stored indoors.
   (c)   Accessory food product manufacturing.
      (1)   It must be accessory to retail.
      (2)   The food product manufacturing shall include the retail sale of
such goods being manufactured.
      (3)   The food product manufacturing process is carried on within a fully
enclosed building and is not offensive due to dust, noise, or vibration.
   (d)   Drive-through service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
      (2)   Orient away or screen from public streets or adjacent DD, AD, MD
forms.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.264 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the RE1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   10 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 2 stories and no more than 25 feet.
                       The building or that portion of the building
Maximum Size:          attributable to an RE1 form that is no more than 4,000
                       sq ft of gross floor area or 13 parking spaces dedicated
                       to the tenant space of RE1 building.
Required Buffer Yard:  *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.265 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an RE1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM RE2: STREETCAR RETAIL EMPLOYMENT
§ 160.270 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
RE2: streetcar retail employment.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.271 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The RE2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): C-2, S-2, PO-PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.272 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an RE2 form:
      (1)   General retail and services.
      (2)   Office.
      (3)   Places of worship.
      (4)   Public service facility.
      (5)   Recreation facility, private.
      (6)   Cultural facility.
      (7)   Dwelling(s) above the first story.
   (b)   Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§ 160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the
standards for a permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Retail and services, motor vehicle.
         A.   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
         B.   No automobile drive-through areas including stacking areas
oriented to DD/AD forms, but not including circulation areas and parking.
         C.   Gasoline pumps and islands shall be located more than 12 feet
from the nearest property line.
         D.   Car washes shall be no closer than 250 feet from any DD or AD
form.
      (2)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from
school.
      (3)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from any
sensitive uses.
      (4)   Full-service restaurant beyond 250 feet of any sensitive uses.
      (5)   Kennel.
         A.   Primary care and kenneling shall be contained indoors.
         B.   Pet exercise and walk areas shall be fenced.
         C.   Beyond 1,000 feet from any DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (6)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (7)   Funeral establishment and/or mortuary placed beyond 250 feet from
any DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (8)   Motor Vehicle Sales, Display, and Rental. Parking lots with hard-
surfaced areas of greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer
than 250 feet from any DD or AD form.
      (9)   Storage, Motor Vehicle. Parking lot with hard-surfaced areas of
greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer than 250 feet from
any DD or AD form.
      (10)   Medical cannabis dispensary.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from sensitive uses.
         B.   One thousand feet separation of medical cannabis dispensary from
each other.
         C.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
         D.   No part of the interior of the medical cannabis dispensary shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
      (11)   Medical cannabis testing facility.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from any sensitive uses.
         B.   A medical cannabis testing facility shall not be permitted within
1,000 feet of another medical cannabis testing facility.
         C.   Posting a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of the
business.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 34-18, passed
5-2-2018; Ord. 104-21, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 160.273 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an RE2 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (c)   Drive-through service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
      (2)   Orient away from abutting DD, AD, MD forms as required by §
160.485 (landscape standards).
   (d)   Accessory living units.
      (1)   No more than one residential unit per structure is allowed.
      (2)   Two additional parking spaces are required.
      (3)   All building and fire codes must still be met.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.274 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. To utilize this form, the primary building must be
abutting more than 35% of the required front yard setback. The maximum height
and minimum lot requirements within the RE2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   10 feet.*
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required RearYard:     0 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 2 stories and no more than 35 feet.
Maximum Size:          Each building no more than 25,000 sq ft of gross floor
                       area.
                       30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.**
Buffer Yard:           15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW forms.**
                       10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.**
                       Up to a 10-foot reduction (Level C), 5-foot reduction
Buffer Yard Reduction: (Level B) is allowed when parking is adjacent to a
                       buffer yard.**
* 5-foot front yard is an option if the front door entrance has recessed
doors. 30% of the front wall façade are windows and 10% of lot other than the
buffer yard is landscaped.
* 0 feet setbacks are allowable with a streetcar alternative site plan.
** See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 34-18, passed
5-2-2018)
§ 160.275 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an RE2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM RE3: PARKING-ORIENTED RETAIL EMPLOYMENT
§ 160.280 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
RE3: parking-oriented retail employment.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.281 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The RE3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): C-2, C-3, C-4, S-2, I-1, and PO-PUD
districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.282 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an RE3 form:
      (1)    General retail and services.
      (2)    Office.
      (3)    Public service facility.
      (4)    Recreational and facility, private.
      (5)   Cultural facility.
      (6)    Places of worship.
      (7)    Dwelling(s) above first story.
   (b)   Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Retail and services, motor vehicle.
         A.   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
         B.   No automobile drive-through areas including stacking areas
oriented to DD/AD forms, but not including circulation areas and parking.
         C.   Gasoline pumps and islands shall be located more than 12 feet
from the nearest property line.
         D.   Car washes shall be no closer than 250 feet from any DD or AD
form.
      (2)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from any
school.
      (3)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from
sensitive uses.
      (4)    Full-service restaurant beyond 250 feet of sensitive uses.
      (5)    Kennel.
         A.   Primary care and kenneling shall be contained indoors.
         B.   Pet exercise and walk areas shall be fenced.
         C.   The kennel must be at least 1,000 feet from any DD, AD, or MD
forms.
      (6)    Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (7)    Funeral establishment and/or mortuary placed beyond 250 feet from
any DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (8)   Adult use.
         A.   1,000 feet from schools, parks, churches, arcades, and all
residential forms.
         B.   1,000 feet separation of sexually-oriented businesses from each
other.
         C.   No part of the interior of the sexually-oriented business shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
         D.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
      (9)    Self-storage facility.
         A.   No on-site working—only for storage.
         B.   Screen units from street view and greenway areas with a six-foot
barrier such as a fence or hedge or orient the garage doors to the interior of
the site.
      (10)   Motor vehicle display and Sales. Parking lots with hard-surfaced
areas of greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer than 250
feet from any DD or AD form.
      (11)   Storage, motor vehicle. Parking lots with hard-surfaced areas of
greater than one acre [45,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer than 250 feet from
any DD or AD form.
      (12)   Medical cannabis dispensary.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from sensitive uses.
         B.   One thousand feet separation of medical cannabis dispensary from
each other.
         C.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
         D.   No part of the interior of the medical cannabis dispensary shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
      (13)   Medical cannabis testing facility.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from any sensitive uses.
         B.   A medical cannabis testing facility shall not be permitted within
1,000 feet of another medical cannabis testing facility.
         C.   Posting a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of the
business.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 104-21, passed
9-7-2021)
§ 160.283 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an RE3 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (c)   Accessory motor vehicle display and sales within an existing
commercial parking lot/facility.
      (1)   Off-street minimum parking requirements for the primary use must be
maintained.
      (2)   A fire lane through the parking area must be maintained. Signs
shall be uniform in shape and color.
   (d)   Accessory outdoor retail sales.
      (1)    Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)    Placed beyond 25 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within
the required buffer yard.
   (e)   Accessory outdoor storage.
      (1)    Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)    Placed beyond 25 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within
the required buffer yard.
      (3)    Must not be more than 10% of the total building square footage.
      (4)    Must be screened with a six-foot opaque fence.
   (f)   Accessory living units.
      (1)   No more than one residential unit per structure is allowed.
      (2)   Two additional parking spaces are required.
      (3)   All building and fire codes must still be met.
   (g)    Drive-through service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
      (2)   Orient away from abutting DD, AD, MD forms.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.284 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the RE3 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   10 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        A maximum of 2 stories or no more than 35 feet.
Maximum Size:          Each building no more than 25,000 sq ft of gross floor
                       area.
                       *30 feet total and Level C when adjacent to DD1, DD2,
                       DD3 and DD4 forms.
Required Buffer Yard:  *15 feet total and Level B when adjacent to DD5, DD6,
                       DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, GW forms.
                       *10 feet total and Level A when adjacent to MD1 and MD2
                       forms.
                       Up to a 10-foot reduction (Level C), 5-foot reduction
Buffer Yard Reduction: (Level B) is allowed when parking is adjacent to a
                       buffer yard.*
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 34-18, passed
5-2-2018)
§ 160.285 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an RE3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM RE4: COMMUNITY RETAIL EMPLOYMENT
§ 160.290 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
RE4: community retail employment.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.291 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The RE4 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): C-3, C-4, PO-PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.292 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an RE4 form:
      (1)    General retail and services.
      (2)    Office.
      (3)   Places of worship.
      (4)   Public service facility.
      (5)   Recreation facility, private.
      (6)   Cultural facility.
      (7)   Dwelling(s) above the first story.
   (b)   Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Retail and services, motor vehicle.
         A.   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
         B.   No automobile drive-through areas including stacking areas
oriented to DD/AD forms, but not including circulation areas and parking.
         C.   Gasoline pumps and islands shall be located more than 12 feet
from the nearest property line.
      (2)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from
schools.
      (3)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from
sensitive uses.
      (4)   Full-service restaurant placed beyond 250 feet of any sensitive
uses.
      (5)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (6)   Funeral establishment or mortuary placed beyond 250 feet from any
DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (7)   Adult use.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from any sensitive uses.
         B.   1,000 feet separation of sexually oriented businesses from each
other.
         C.   No part of the interior of the sexually oriented business shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semi-public area.
         D.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
      (8)   Self-storage facility.
         A.   No on-site working—only for storage.
         B.   Screen units from street view and greenway areas.
      (9)   Motor vehicle sales, display, and rental. Parking lots with hard-
surfaced areas of greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer
than 250 feet from any DD or AD form.
      (10)   Storage, motor vehicle. Parking lots with hard-surfaced areas of
greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer than 250 feet from
any DD or AD form.
      (11)   Medical cannabis dispensary.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from sensitive uses.
         B.   1,000 feet separation of medical cannabis dispensary from each
other.
         C.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
         D.   No part of the interior of the medical cannabis dispensary shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
      (12)   Medical cannabis testing facility.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from any sensitive uses.
         B.   A medical cannabis testing facility shall not be permitted within
1,000 feet of another medical cannabis testing facility.
         C.   Posting a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of the
business.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 104-21, passed
9-7-2021)
§ 160.293 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an RE4 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (c)    Accessory motor vehicle display and sales within an existing
commercial parking lot/facility.
      (1)   Off-street minimum parking requirements for the primary use must be
maintained.
      (2)   A fire lane through the parking area must be maintained. Signs
shall be uniform in shape and color.
   (d)   Parking ramp.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not deprived of
sunlight.
      (3)   Locate in an area where traffic to and from the site is not on a
local or residential street.
      (4)   Must be placed beyond 500 feet of any AD or DD forms.
      (5)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
   (e)   Accessory outdoor retail sales.
      (1)    Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)    Placed beyond 40 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within
the required buffer yard.
   (f)   Accessory outdoor storage.
      (1)    Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)    Placed beyond 40 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within
the required buffer yard.
      (3)    Must not be more than 10% of the total building square footage.
      (4)    Must be screened with a six-foot opaque fence.
   (g)    Drive-through service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
      (2)   Orient away from abutting DD, AD, MD forms.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.294 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the RE4 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   15 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
                       0 feet.
                       Maximum Height: A maximum of 4 stories and no more than
                       65 feet; except a maximum of 3 stories and no more than
Required Rear Yard:    45 feet adjacent to DD and AD forms. Additional setback
                       is required when the building is above 55 feet in
                       height. In these cases, add 1 additional foot for all
                       setbacks for every 2 additional feet in height up to 20
                       feet additional feet of setback.
Maximum Size:          Each building no more than 75,000 sq ft of gross floor
                       area.
                       *45 feet and Level D buffer yard total when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.
Required Buffer Yard:  *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW forms.
                       *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 160.295 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an RE4 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM RE5: REGIONAL RETAIL EMPLOYMENT
§ 160.300 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
RE5: regional retail employment.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.301 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The RE5 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): C-4.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.302 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an RE5 form:
      (1)    General retail and services.
      (2)   Office.
      (3)    Places of worship.
      (4)   Public service facility.
      (5)   Recreation facility, private.
      (6)   Cultural facility.
      (7)   Dwelling above the first story.
   (b)   Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)    Retail and services, motor vehicle.
         A.   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
         B.   No automobile drive-through areas including stacking areas
oriented to DD/AD forms, but not including circulation areas and parking.
         C.   Gasoline pumps and islands shall be located more than 12 feet
from the nearest property line.
      (2)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment placed beyond 500 feet
from any schools.
      (3)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet from any
sensitive uses.
      (4)   Full-service restaurant beyond 250 feet of sensitive uses.
      (5)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (6)   Funeral establishment or mortuary beyond 300 feet from DD, AD and
MD forms.
      (7)   Adult use.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from any sensitive land uses.
         B.   1,000 feet separation of sexually-oriented businesses from each
other.
         C.   No part of the interior of the sexually-oriented business shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
         D.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
      (8)   Self-storage facility.
         A.   No on-site working—only for storage.
         B.   Screen units from street view and greenway areas.
      (9)   Motor vehicle sales, display, and rental. Parking lots with hard-
surfaced areas of greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer
than 250 feet from any DD or AD form.
      (10)   Storage, motor vehicle. Parking lots with hard-surfaced areas of
greater than one acre [43,560 sq. ft.] shall be no closer than 250 feet from
any AD or DD form.
      (11)   Medical cannabis dispensary.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from sensitive uses.
         B.   One thousand feet separation of medical cannabis dispensary from
each other.
         C.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
         D.   No part of the interior of the medical cannabis dispensary shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
      (12)   Medical cannabis testing facility.
         A.   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from any sensitive uses.
         B.   A medical cannabis testing facility shall not be permitted within
1,000 feet of another medical cannabis testing facility.
         C.   Posting a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of the
business.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 104-21, passed
9-7-2021)
§ 160.303 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an RE5 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol.
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate portion of the operations of the
business. Does not include restaurants.
      (2)   Beyond 100 feet to sensitive land uses.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (c)   Accessory motor vehicle display and sales within an existing
commercial parking lot/facility.
      (1)   Off-street minimum parking requirements for the primary use must be
maintained.
      (2)   A fire lane through the parking area must be maintained. Signs
shall be uniform in shape and color.
   (d)   Parking ramp.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not deprived of
sunlight.
      (3)   Locate in an area where traffic to and from the site is not on a
local or residential street.
      (4)   Must be placed beyond 500 feet of any AD or DD forms.
      (5)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
   (e)   Accessory outdoor retail sales.
      (1)    Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)    Placed beyond 50 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within
the required buffer yard.
   (f)   Accessory outdoor storage.
      (1)    Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)    Placed beyond 50 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within
the required buffer yard.
      (3)    Must not be more than 10% of the total building square footage.
      (4)    Must be screened with a six-foot opaque fence.
   (g)    Drive-through service window.
      (1)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
      (2)   Orient away from abutting DD, AD, MD forms.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.304 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the RE5 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   15 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
                       Unlimited; except a maximum of 3 stories and no more
                       than 45 feet adjacent to DD, AD forms.
Maximum Height:        Additional setback is required when the building is
                       above 55 feet in height. In these cases, add 1
                       additional foot for all setbacks for every 2 additional
                       feet in height up to 20 feet additional feet of setback.
Maximum Size:          No limitation.
                       *45 feet total and Level D buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD1, DD2, DD3, and DD4 forms.
Required Buffer Yard:  *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       DD5, AD1, AD2, AD3, GW forms.
                       *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.305 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an RE5 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM RE6: VILLAGE MIXED-USE
§ 160.310 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
RE6: village mixed-use.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.311 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The RE6 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.044 (Districts and Boundaries): village PUD and downtown PUD districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.312 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an RE6 form:
      (1)   Permitted: General retail and services.
      (2)   Permitted: Office.
      (3)   Permitted: Recreational facility, private
      (4)   Permitted: Cultural facility.
      (5)   Permitted: Places of worship.
      (6)   Permitted: College, university, or post high school.
      (7)   Permitted: Public service facility.
      (8)   Permitted: Dwelling(s) above the street level story.
      (9)   Permitted: Assisted living center facilities.
   (b)    Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establish-ment subject to a safety
management plan and alcohol license.
      (2)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment subject to a safety
management plan and alcohol license.
      (3)   Full-service restaurant subject to a safety management plan and
alcohol license.
      (4)   Adult use.
         A.   1,000 feet from schools, parks, places of worship, arcades, and
all residential forms.
         B.   1,000 feet separation of sexually-oriented businesses from each
other.
         C.   No part of the interior of the sexually-oriented business shall
be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or
semipublic area.
         D.   Posting of a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of
the business.
      (5)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (6)   Funeral establishment and/or mortuary placed beyond 300 feet from
any DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (7)   Live/work units.
         A.   No more than two persons other than the resident of the dwelling
may be employed.
         B.   No more than 25% of the area of the home, or a garage (or portion
thereof) that does not displace any required parking, or a detached accessory
structure.
         C.   Customer visits and deliveries shall be limited to the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and shall not occur during state
and federal holidays.
         D.   Not more than eight customers or clients shall be allowed to
visit the dwelling for any service or product during any one day nor more than
four customers or clients at any one time.
         E.   No outdoor storage of materials or equipment related to the
business activity shall be permitted. No outdoor activity related to the
business activity shall be permitted.
         F.   Only work activities allowed are those allowed by an RE6 form.
   (c)   Conditional uses. A building or premises may be used for the following
purposes as an RE6 form if the conditional use permit for such use has been
obtained in conformance with the below standards and requirements of §§ 160.605
et seq. (Conditional Use):
      (1)    Temporary or emergency shelter or human service facility.
      (2)   Dwelling, multiple-family on the street level story.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 37-19, passed
4-2-2019; Ord. 106-23, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 160.313 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an RE6 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol that must be incidental and subordinate portion of
the operations of the business. Does not include restaurants.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking determined by the initial development plan.
   (c)   Drive-through service window.
      (1)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (2)    The drive-through window shall not separate the building and its
entrance from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall not separate plazas, parks, water
features, and open spaces from buildings.
      (4)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
   (d)   Accessory living units.
      (1)   No more than one residential unit per structure is allowed.
      (2)   Two additional parking spaces are required or shown on initial
development plan.
      (3)   All building and fire codes must still be met.
   (e)   Outdoor retail sales.
      (1)   Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)   Placed beyond 50 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms and not within the
required buffer yard.
   (f)   Parking ramps.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not deprived of
sunlight.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (4)   The parking ramp shall not separate the building and its entrance
from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (5)   The parking ramp shall not separate plazas, parks, water features,
and open spaces from buildings.
      (6)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.314 PUD REGULATIONS.
   The RE6 form shall also abide by Village or Downtown PUD standards as based
on the zoning for the development (see §
160.450 and §
160.449).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.315 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the RE6 form shall be as follows and core and transition areas shall be
determined by the PUD initial development plan:
         0 feet minimum. Setbacks must be consistent with existing area building
Required footprints. All buildings shall be oriented to street with the exception
Front    that existing buildings shall be allowed to maintain the existing building
Yard:    orientation. (See PUD standards in §
         160.447.)
Required
Rear     0 feet.
Yard:
Maximum  Unlimited.
Height:
Maximum  Unlimited, but must articulate and break up façade as required.
Size:
         Defined by the PUD initial development plan—see standards in the following
Required sections: §
Buffer   160.450, §
Yard:    160.449, §
         160.444 (Submittal Elements), §
         160.443 (Submittal Process).
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.316 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS REGULATIONS.
   Development with a RE6 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
pedestrian regulation provisions, Shape Sioux Falls Comprehensive Plan, Chapter
5.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021)
§ 160.317 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an RE6 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FORM MU1: MIXED-USE—LOW DENSITY
§ 160.320 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
MU1: Mixed-Use—Low Density.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.321 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The MU1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): MMU1, MMU2, and MMU3 districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.322 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)    Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an MU1.
      (1)   General retail and services.
      (2)   Office.
      (3)   Recreational facility, private.
      (4)   Cultural facility.
      (5)   Places of worship.
      (6)   College, university, or post high school.
      (7)   Public service facility.
      (8)   Dwelling(s), multiple family.
      (9)   Funeral establishment and/or mortuary.
   (b)    Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet of a
school.
      (2)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 100 feet from any
sensitive land use.
      (3)   Full-service restaurant subject to a safety management plan and
alcohol license.
      (4)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 104-21, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 30-23, passed
5-2-2023)
§ 160.323 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a MU1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use permit with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol that must be incidental and subordinate portion of
the operations of the business. Does not include restaurants.
   (b)    Drive-through service window.
      (1)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (2)   The drive-through window shall not separate the building and its
entrance from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall not separate plazas, parks, water
features, and open spaces from buildings.
      (4)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
   (c)   Outdoor retail sales.
      (1)   Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)   Placed beyond 50 feet of any DD or AD forms and not within the
required buffer yard.
   (d)   Parking ramps.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not deprived of
sunlight.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (4)   The parking ramp shall not separate the building and its entrance
from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (5)   The parking ramp shall not separate plazas, parks, water features,
and open spaces from buildings.
      (6)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
      (7)   Parking ramp should not be oriented toward the primary street
frontage.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 30-23, passed
5-2-2023)
§ 160.324 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the MU1 form shall be as follows:
Minimum Primary Building Frontage: 50%
Maximum Primary Building Frontage: 75%
Primary Build-to-Zone:             0-5 feet.
Non-Primary Build-to-Zone:         10-20 feet.
Required Side Yard:                0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:                *0 feet.
Minimum Height:                    A minimum of 3 stories.
Maximum Height:                    **A maximum of 3 stories.
Required Buffer Yard:              10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when
                                   adjacent to any DD or AD1 form.
Buffer Yard Reduction:             Up to 5-foot reduction allowed when parking
                                   is adjacent to buffer yard.
*5-foot required rear yard when adjacent to alley.
**A maximum height of 4 stories is allowed when 50% or more of the first floor
is used for retail or office.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.325 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a MU1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM MU2: MIXED-USE—MEDIUM DENSITY
§ 160.327 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
MU2: Mixed-Use—Medium Density.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.328 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The MU2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): MMU2 and MMU3 districts.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.329 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an MU2:
      (1)   General retail and services.
      (2)   Office.
      (3)   Recreational facility, private.
      (4)   Cultural facility.
      (5)   Places of worship.
      (6)   College, university, or post high school.
      (7)   Public service facility.
      (8)   Dwelling(s), multiple family above the first story.
      (9)   Funeral establishment and/or mortuary.
   (b)   Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet of a
school.
      (2)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 100 feet from any
sensitive land use.
      (3)   Full-service restaurant subject to a safety management plan and
alcohol license.
      (4)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (5)   Dwelling(s), multiple family on the first story.
         A.   Up to 50% of the first story may be used for multiple dwellings
as long as they do not have frontage on the primary building frontage right-of-
way.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.330 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an MU2 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol that must be incidental and subordinate portion of
the operations of the business. Does not include restaurants.
   (b)   Drive-through service window.
      (1)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (2)   The drive-through window shall not separate the building and its
entrance from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall not separate plazas, parks, water
features, and open spaces from buildings.
      (4)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
   (c)   Outdoor retail sales.
      (1)   Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)   Placed beyond 50 feet of any DD or AD forms and not within the
required buffer yard.
   (d)   Parking ramps.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not deprived of
sunlight.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (4)   The parking ramp shall not separate the building and its entrance
from the street and should
be hidden from view.
      (5)   The parking ramp shall not separate plazas, parks, water features,
and open spaces from buildings.
      (6)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
      (7)   Parking ramp should not be oriented toward the primary street
frontage.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.331 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the MU2 form shall be as follows:
MU2—BULK REGULATIONS
MU2—BULK REGULATIONS
Minimum Primary Building Frontage: 50%
Maximum Primary Building Frontage: 75%
Primary Build-to-Zone:             0-5 feet.
Non-Primary Build-to-Zone:         10-20 feet.
Required Side Yard:                0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:                *0 feet.
Minimum Height:                    A minimum of 4 stories.
Maximum Height:                    **A maximum of 6 stories.
Required Buffer Yard:              15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when
                                   adjacent to any DD or AD1 form.
Buffer Yard Reduction:             Up to 5-foot reduction allowed when parking
                                   is adjacent to buffer yard.
*5-foot required rear yard when adjacent to alley.
**20-foot building setback required for stories above two when adjacent to DD
forms.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.332 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an MU2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.333 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.334 [RESERVED.]
FORM MU3: MIXED-USE—HIGH DENSITY
§ 160.335 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
MU3: Mixed-Use—High Density
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.336 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The MU3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): MMU3 district.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.337 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an MU3.
      (1)   Permitted: General retail and services.
      (2)   Office.
      (3)   Recreational facility, private.
      (4)   Cultural facility.
      (5)   Places of worship.
      (6)   College, university, or post high school.
      (7)   Public service facility.
      (8)   Dwelling(s), multiple family above the second story.
      (9)   Funeral establishment and/or mortuary.
   (b)   Permitted special uses. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 500 feet of a
school.
      (2)   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment beyond 100 feet from any
sensitive land use.
      (3)   Full-service restaurant subject to a safety management plan and
alcohol license.
      (4)   Day care center.
         A.   Adequate and safe playground with sufficient green areas.
         B.   Safe and convenient access to the day care.
      (5)   Dwelling(s), multiple family on the second story.
         A.   Up to 50% of the second story square footage can be used for
multiple family dwellings.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.338 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an MU3 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory alcohol that must be incidental and subordinate portion of
the operations of the business. Does not include restaurants.
   (b)   Drive-through service window.
      (1)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (2)   The drive-through window shall not separate the building and its
entrance from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall not separate plazas, parks, water
features, and open spaces from buildings.
      (4)   Sufficient room for drive-through stacking per §
160.555.
   (c)   Outdoor retail sales.
      (1)   Must be on a hard surfaced area.
      (2)   Placed beyond 50 feet of any DD, or AD forms and not within the
required buffer yard.
   (d)   Parking ramps.
      (1)   Parking ramps shall be constructed in a manner that will cause a
minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
      (2)   Height of the ramp so that adjacent properties are not deprived of
sunlight.
      (3)   The drive-through window shall be located to the side or rear of
the building.
      (4)   The parking ramp shall not separate the building and its entrance
from the street and should be hidden from view.
      (5)   The parking ramp shall not separate plazas, parks, water features,
and open spaces from buildings.
      (6)   Care should be taken so that any lighting of the facility should be
of a type which would not reflect onto the adjacent residential area.
      (7)   Parking ramp should not be oriented toward the primary street
frontage.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.339 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the MU3 form shall be as follows:
MU3—BULK REGULATIONS
MU3—BULK REGULATIONS
Minimum Primary Building Frontage: 50%
Maximum Primary Building Frontage: 75%
Primary Build-to-Zone:             0-5 feet.
Non-Primary Build-to-Zone:         10-20 feet.
Required Side Yard:                0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:                *0 feet.
Minimum Height:                    A minimum of 7 stories.
Maximum Height:                    **A maximum of 10 stories.
Maximum Size:                      15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when
                                   adjacent to any DD or AD1 form.
Required Buffer Yard:              Up to 5-foot reduction allowed when parking
                                   is adjacent to buffer yard.
*5-foot required rear yard when adjacent to alley.
**20-foot building setback required for stories above two when adjacent to DD
forms.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.340 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development within MU3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.341 [RESERVED.]
FORM WM1: WAREHOUSE AND MANUFACTURING—LIGHT
§ 160.342 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
WM1: warehouse and manufacturing—light.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.343 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The WM1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): I-1 and I-2 districts.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.344 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted special. The following
principal uses include the same additional restrictions for all listed uses
below. A conditional use with standards within §
160.616 (Conditional Use Standards) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Permitted special: Light manufacturing, process, and assembly.
      (1)   Submittal of a site management plan outlining litter, odor, and
product control measures, which is approved by the planning and health
departments.
      (2)   Locate in an area where traffic to and from the site is not on a
local or residential street.
      (3)   Outdoor storage shall be screened with a six-foot opaque fence or
berm with no outdoor storage allowed in the front yard.
      (4)   Operations must be fully enclosed within the building (only in I-
1 districts).
      (5)   Unscreened storage only allowed by alternative landscape plan §
160.599.
   (b)   Permitted special: Light warehouse and freight movement.
      (1)   Locate in areas where traffic to and from site is not on
residential streets.
      (2)   Outdoor storage shall be screened with a six-foot opaque fence or
berm with no outdoor storage allowed in the required front yard.
      (3)   Operations must be fully enclosed within the building (only in I-
1 districts).
      (4)   Unscreened storage only allowed by alternative landscape plan §
160.599.
      (5)   Paved parking is required for any operational vehicle storage.
   (c)   Permitted special: Crematory, so long as such use placed beyond 300
feet of any DD, AD, and MD form.
   (d)   Permitted special: Campground. Campgrounds shall conform to the South
Dakota Department of Health requirements for campgrounds. Campgrounds for
camping units within the urbanized area of the Sioux Falls city limits should
be sited with consideration for vehicular access. The campground should be
designed to minimize the impact from adjacent major streets and highways.
      (1)   There shall not be less than 1,500 square feet for each camping
site provided in the campgrounds. Camping sites shall be located to provide for
convenient vehicular ingress and egress and appropriate maneuvering room. Each
camping site will be provided with a number or letter to facilitate location by
emergency vehicles.
      (2)   The campgrounds shall be supplied with a water supply and sewage
disposal facilities that conform to Appendix E—Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks
and Recreational Vehicle Parks of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
      (3)   Electrically equipped camping sites shall provide electrical
connections, which meet Article 55—Recreational Vehicle and Recreational
Vehicle Parks—of the National Electrical Code.
      (4)   LP tanks for camping units shall be secured against overturning and
not have a capacity of greater than 100 pounds.
      (5)   Yards adjacent to a public street shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
depth. Side yards shall be a minimum of 10 feet and rear yards shall be a
minimum of 25 feet. Camping sites may be located in the rear yard when a screen
fence or wall is provided.
      (6)   The access to public roads and highways shall be paved or surfaced
in a similar manner to the adjacent public roads and shall be approved by the
city.
   (e)   Permitted special: Cannabis testing facility.
      (1)   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from sensitive uses.
      (2)   One thousand feet separation of medical cannabis dispensary from
each other.
      (3)   Posting a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of the
business.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.345 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a WM1 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use permit with standards within §
160.616 (Conditional Use Standards) shall be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
   (b)   Heliport.
      (1)   Hard-surfaced site—landing site.
      (2)   Landing pad must be constructed in a way that the public may not be
able to access the site.
   (c)   Recreation facility, private.
      (1)   The use must be contained within a building.
      (2)   The floor area of the principal use is clearly identified on a
floor plan drawn to scale.
      (3)   The floor area of the private recreation facility is clearly
subordinate to the principal use of the building.
      (4)   Additional on-site parking spaces are provided for the floor area
of the accessory use per the parking calculations table.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.346 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the WM1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
                       45 feet for I-1 habitable structures.
Maximum Height:        55 feet for I-2 habitable structures.
                       No limit for uninhabitable structures.
Maximum Size:          No limit.
                       *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard adjacent to DD1,
                       DD2, DD3, and DD4.
Required Buffer Yard:  *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard also adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4 and GW.
                       *15 feet total and Level B buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.347 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a WM1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM WM2: WAREHOUSE AND MANUFACTURING—HEAVY
§ 160.350 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
WM2: warehouse and manufacturing—heavy.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.351 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The WM2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): I-2 districts.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.352 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot. Permitted special. The following
principal uses include the same additional restrictions for all listed uses
below. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Permitted special: Heavy manufacturing, process, and assembly.
      (1)   1,000 feet from DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (2)   Submittal of a site management plan outlining litter, odor, and
product control measures, which is approved by the planning and health
departments.
      (3)   Locate in areas where traffic to and from site is not on local
residential streets.
      (4)   Outdoor storage shall be screened with a six-foot opaque fence or
berm with no outdoor storage allowed in the front yard.
      (5)   Unscreened storage only allowed by alternative landscape plan §
160.599.
   (b)   Permitted special: Heavy warehouse and freight movement.
      (1)   1,000 feet from DD, AD, or MD forms.
      (2)   Locate in areas where traffic to and from site is not on local
residential streets.
      (3)   Outdoor storage shall be screened with a six-foot opaque fence or
berm. Operations must be fully enclosed within the building (only in I-
1 districts).
      (4)   Unscreened storage only allowed by alternative landscape plan §
160.599.
   (c)   Permitted special: Cannabis testing facility.
      (1)   Placed beyond 1,000 feet from sensitive uses.
      (2)   One thousand feet separation of medical cannabis dispensary from
each other.
      (3)   Posting a sign at the entrance that shall state the nature of the
business.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.353 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a WM2 form.
Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional restrictions
for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§ 160.605 et
seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a permitted
special accessory use cannot be obtained.
   (a)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the Director of Planning and
Development Services or designee.
   (b)   Heliport.
      (1)   Hard-surfaced site—landing site.
      (2)   Landing pad must be constructed in a way that the public may not be
able to access the site.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.354 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the WM2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        55 feet for habitable structures.
                       No limit for uninhabitable structures.
Maximum Size:          No limit.
                       *45 feet total and Level D buffer yard adjacent to DD1,
                       DD2, DD3 and DD4.
Required Buffer Yard:  *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard also adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW.
                       *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.355 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a WM2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM WM3: WAREHOUSE AND MANUFACTURING—MINING AND WASTE
§ 160.358 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
WM3: warehouse and manufacturing—mining and waste.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.359 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The WM3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016-
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): AG and I-2 districts.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.360 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot. Conditional uses. A building or
premises may be used for the following purposes as a WM3 form if the
conditional use permit for such use has been obtained in conformance with the
below standards and requirements of §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use):
   (a)   Sanitary landfill, water plant, and wastewater plant.
      (1)   Locate in areas where traffic to and from site is not on
residential streets.
      (2)   When within 150 feet of a residential area a site management plan
for litter, odor, and noise control is required.
   (b)   Quarry, mining, and mineral exploration.
      (1)   Locate in areas where traffic to and from site is not on
residential streets.
      (2)   When within 150 feet of a residential area a site management plan
for litter, odor, and noise control is required.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide:
         A.   A description of the mineral or minerals that are the subject of
the exploration.
         B.   Maps showing the general area within which the exploration
operation will be conducted.
         C.   A detailed description of the regional environmental conditions,
to include surface land use and vegetation, as well as a detailed description
of the area's geologic formations and hydrology from the best available
scientific sources.
         D.   Maps indicating the location of the drill sites to the nearest
section of land, a technical description of the exploration process, the types
of equipment to be used, and the estimated timetable for each phase of work and
for final completion of the program.
         E.   A description of the major environmental impacts upon air
quality, water quality and quantity, and land use modification presented by the
proposed exploration.
         F.   A description of the proposed plan to address the identified
environmental impacts, to include all measures to be taken to prevent soil
erosion, water contamination, air contamination, disruption of the area's
ecological balance, and any other related hazard to public health and safety.
         G.   A plan for reclamation of the land to its original condition
after exploration is completed. Measures to be taken for surface reclamation
shall take into account the impact on adjacent land uses and natural resources
and the proposed future use of the lands explored and adjacent lands. The
reclamation plans shall include:
            1.   Reclamation schedule.
            2.   Methods of plugging drill holes.
            3.   Methods of severing and returning topsoil and subsoil.
            4.   Methods of grading, backfilling, and contouring of exploration
sites and access roads.
            5.   Methods of waste management and disposal, including liquid and
solid wastes.
            6.   Method of revegetation.
         H.   A surety performance bond in an amount to be determined by the
city council to assure that sufficient funds will be available to carry out
required reclamation and, if necessary, decontamination of the affected ground
and surface waters. The amount shall be set by the city council based on an
estimate of the cost of reclamation and decontamination. The bond shall be
released five years after exploration has ceased unless the city council finds,
for good cause shown, that the water quality of the affected area has not been
restored or the reclamation plan has not been completed. The amount of the
surety bond may be reduced by the city council, if a bond is held by the state
of South Dakota for the same purpose, by the same amount of the latter bond.
      (4)   The applicant shall identify specific phases when monitoring; and
inspection of the exploration activities shall be conducted by city, county,
state, federal, or independent personnel to assure compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. If a conditional use permit is granted, the
permit shall identify such inspection agency; and it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to notify said agency when monitoring or
inspection is required. The applicant shall bear the burden of the cost of the
monitoring and inspection program as determined by the city council.
      (5)   A conditional use permit shall be issued only after all of the
conditions specified herein have been met. Evidence of violation of the
regulations including, but not limited to, air and water contamination shall be
cause for an immediate cessation of exploration activities.
      (6)   Mineral extraction and/or mining may be approved by conditional use
only as long as the following minimum requirements are met:
         A.   The applicant shall provide:
            1.   A description of the mineral or minerals to be mined or
milled.
            2.   Maps showing the area within which the mining or milling
operations will be conducted.
            3.   A description of the surface land use and vegetation, as well
as a description of the nature and depth of the topsoil and subsoil.
            4.   An environmental assessment that establishes baseline
conditions for radioactive intoxicant materials and air, ground and surface
waters, soils, vegetation, and animals.
            5.   A description of the overburden, mineral seams, and other
geologic formations, their conductivities and hydraulic gradients, known to
exist above the deepest projected depth of the mining operation.
            6.   A description of the hydrology to the deepest projected depth
of the mining operation, including mapping of the depth, water table level,
extent, and flow characteristics of groundwater and aquifers for the hydrologic
regime of the groundwater and drainage basins affected by the mining or milling
operation.
            7.   A technical description of the mining or milling, types of
equipment to be used, detailed site plan of all anticipated construction, an
estimated timetable for each phase of work and for final completion of the
program, a statement of source, quality and quantity of water to be used in the
mining or milling operations, as well as the chemical and radioactive
characteristics of all mined or milled products, waste products, and emissions
to the environment.
            8.   A description of the major environmental impacts upon air
quality, water quality and quantity, and land use modification presented by the
mining or milling operations.
            9.   A description of the proposed plan to address the identified
environmental impacts, to include:
               a.    Methods of separating the topsoil, subsoil, and soil
piles, protecting them from erosion before reclamation begins, and keeping the
topsoil free from acid or toxic materials.
               b.   Plan for ensuring that acid-forming or toxic materials
constituting a hazard uncovered or created during mining or milling are
promptly treated in a manner to prevent water and air contamination.
               c.    Measures to maintain the quantity and quality of ground
and surface water, hydrologic balance, productivity of farmland, and soil and
water recharge capacity.
               d.    Procedures to prevent water and air contamination through
radioactive or toxic seepage of runoff from tailings, ponds, mine wastes, mine
dewatering discharge, or other mining and milling related operations.
            10.   A plan for the reclamation of the land after mining is
completed. Measures to be taken for surface reclamation shall take into account
the impact on adjacent land uses and natural resources, and the proposed future
use of the lands mined and adjacent lands, and shall include:
               a.   A reclamation schedule.
               b.    Methods of grading, backfilling, and contouring of
disturbed areas and access roads.
               c.    Methods of waste management and disposal, including liquid
and solid wastes.
               d.    Methods of revegetation.
            11.   A surety performance bond in an amount to be determined by
the city to assure that sufficient funds will be available to carry out
required reclamation and, if necessary, decontamination of affected ground and
surface waters. The amount shall be set by the city council based on an
estimate of the cost of reclamation and decontamination. The bond shall be
released five years after mining and milling has ceased unless the city council
find, for good cause shown, that the water quality of the affected area has not
been restored or the reclamation plan has not been completed. The amount of the
bond may be reduced by the city council if a bond is held by the state of South
Dakota for the same purpose, by the same amount of the latter bond.
         B.   The applicant shall identify specific phases when monitoring and
inspection of the mining and milling process shall be conducted by city,
county, state, federal, or independent personnel to assure compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. If the conditional use permit is granted, the
permit shall identify the inspection agency; and it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to notify said agency when monitoring or inspection is
required. The applicant shall bear the burden of the cost of the monitoring and
inspection program as determined by the city council.
         C.   A conditional use permit shall be issued only after all
conditions specified herein have been met. Evidence of violation of the
regulations including, but not limited to, air and water contamination shall be
cause for an immediate cessation of the mining and milling.
      (7)   Solution mining and/or in situ mining of an ore body with the
circulation of chemicals through injection and recovery wells for minerals is
prohibited.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.361 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a WM3 form.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.362 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the WM3 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:   25 feet.
Required Side Yard:    0 feet.
Required Rear Yard:    0 feet.
Maximum Height:        55 feet for habitable structures.
                       No limit for uninhabitable structures.
Maximum Size:          No limit.
                       *45 feet total and Level D buffer yard adjacent to DD1,
                       DD2, DD3, and DD4.
Required Buffer Yard:  *45 feet total and Level D buffer yard also adjacent to
                       DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3, AD4, and GW.
                       *30 feet total and Level C buffer yard when adjacent to
                       MD1 and MD2 forms.
Buffer Yard Reduction: 10-foot reduction is allowed when parking is adjacent to
                       a buffer yard.
* See §
160.488 for more buffer yard standards.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 0 feet.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.363 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a WM3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM WM4: WAREHOUSE AND MANUFACTURING—AIRPORT FACILITIES
§ 160.364 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
WM4: warehouse and manufacturing—airport facilities.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.365 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The WM4 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): AP district.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.366 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Airport facilities.
   (b)   Airport passenger terminal.
   (c)   Air national guard facilities.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.367 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a WM4 form. For
example, airport passenger terminals shall be allowed to permit reasonable
commercial, parking and office uses that are accessory.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.368 BULK REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within the WM4 form shall be
determined by the Sioux Falls Airport Authority based upon the Sioux Falls
Airport Master Plan.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.369 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a WM4 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
airport master plan.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.370 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.371 [RESERVED.]
FORM OPEN1: CONSERVATION OPEN SPACE
§ 160.372 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
OPEN1—conservation open space.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.373 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The OPEN1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): CN district.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.374 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an OPEN1 form:
      (1)   Tree farm/wholesale nurseries.
      (2)   Golf course (does not include club houses—see BCF4 form).
      (3)   Cemeteries.
      (4)   Nature preserve.
      (5)   Natural drainage facilities.
      (6)   Community gardens.
   (b)   Permitted special. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Pet cemetery.
         A.   Animals shall be buried to a depth of at least six feet.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.375 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an OPEN1 form.
Country clubs that are accessory to a golf course shall not be considered
accessory under this zoning ordinance. Country clubs are within the BCF4 form.
   (a)   Permitted special. The following accessory uses include additional
restrictions for each specific use. A conditional use with standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special accessory use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Crematory and/or funeral establishment.
         A.   Such use is accessory to a cemetery.
         B.   Such use placed beyond 300 feet of any residential district.
         C.   One principal frontage of the premises shall abut on a collector
or arterial.
         D.   A neighborhood meeting shall be conducted to address site and
building design issues.
   (b)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.376 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the OPEN1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:  15 feet.
Required Side Yard:   15 feet.
Required Rear Yard:   15 feet.
Maximum Height:       45 feet.
Maximum Size:         No limit.
Required Buffer Yard: None.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 30
feet.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.377 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an OPEN1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM OPEN2: RECREATION OPEN SPACE
§ 160.380 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
OPEN2: recreation open space.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.381 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The OPEN2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016—
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): REC district.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.382 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as an OPEN2 form:
      (1)   Public parks and public recreation areas.
      (2)   Recreation facility, public.
      (3)   Golf course.
      (4)   Cultural facility.
   (b)   Conditional uses. A building or premises may be used for the following
purposes as an OPEN2 form if the conditional use permit for such use has been
obtained in conformance with the below standards and requirements of §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use):
      (1)   Archery range.
         A.   Noise from such operation shall not have a detrimental effect on
adjacent properties.
         B.   Ensure safety through limited public access provisions.
         C.   Must be licensed for safety by the police department.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.383 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an OPEN2 form.
   (a)   Accessory off-site parking.
      (1)   The accessory off-site parking must be within 250 feet of the
application's principal use.
      (2)   The accessory off-site parking must be no closer than 250 feet to
any DD or AD forms.
      (3)   If the off-site parking lot is across an arterial street, a
pedestrian safety plan must be approved by the planning director.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.384 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the OPEN2 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:  15 feet.
Required Side Yard:   15 feet.
Required Rear Yard:   15 feet.
Maximum Height:       45 feet.
Maximum Size:         No limit.
Required Buffer Yard: None.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 30
feet.
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.385 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an OPEN2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)    §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)    §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)    §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)    §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
FORM OPEN3: AGRICULTURE OPEN SPACE
§ 160.388 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
OPEN3: agriculture open space.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.389 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The OPEN3 form shall be allowed in the following zoning district as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): AG district.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.390 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot: Permitted. A building or premises
shall be permitted to be used for the following purposes as an OPEN3 form:
   (a)   Agriculture.
   (b)   Detached dwelling farm.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.391 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as an OPEN3 form.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.392 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the OPEN3 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:  30 feet.
Required Side Yard:   25 feet.
Required Rear Yard:   30 feet.
Maximum Height:       45 feet for inhabitable structures. Unlimited for
                      uninhabitable structures.
Maximum Size:         No limit.
Lot Density:          1 acre.
Required Buffer Yard: None.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 50
feet.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.393 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with an OPEN3 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.394 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.395 [RESERVED.]
FORM UT1: BASIC UTILITIES
§ 160.396 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
UT1: basic utilities.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.397 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The UT1 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): All zoning districts except RHP.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.398 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as a UT1 form:
      (1)   Neighborhood utilities.
      (2)   Electrical substation.
   (b)   Permitted special. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use) may be obtained when the standards for a
permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Antenna support structure.
         A.   Stealth design is required.
            1.   The tower shall be very minor in size and scale to antenna
support structure.
      (2)   Community garden.
         A.   No more than one-acre garden is allowed per site.
         B.   The applicant should receive the operational and management
guidelines for a community garden.
         C.   A community garden is not required to provide a buffer yard.
      (3)   Microcell tower.
         A.   Microcell towers shall not be within a 600' radius of any other
tower.
         B.   25' setback from base of tower to nearest existing structure or
building setback line.
         C.   When constructed within any DD or AD form right-of-ways or front
yard setbacks, microcells shall be within 5' of the side yard lot line.
         D.   Design character.
            1.   Microcell design shall use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that is not in direct conflict with the natural
setting or surrounding structures.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.399 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a UT1 form.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.400 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the UT1 form shall be as follows:
Required Front Yard:  25 feet. One required front yard on a corner lot may be
                      20 feet.
Required Side Yard:   5 feet.
Required Rear Yard:   5 feet.
Maximum Height:       45 feet.
Maximum Size:         No limit.
                      30-foot total and Level C buffer yard setback required
                      adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3 and DD4.
Required Buffer Yard: 15 feet total adjacent to DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3,
                      AD4 and GW.
                      *10 feet total and Level A buffer yard when adjacent to
                      MD1 and MD2 forms.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 10
feet.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.401 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a UT1 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.402 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.403 [RESERVED.]
FORM UT2: TOWER UTILITIES
§ 160.404 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the form regulations of the
UT2: tower utilities.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.405 ALLOWED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The UT2 form shall be allowed in the following zoning districts as detailed
in §§
160.016–
160.047 (Districts and Boundaries): All zoning districts except RS, RT-1, RCD,
RHP, MH, RD-1, RD-2, RT-2.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.406 PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following uses shall be a principal use when a building or premises is
the primary or predominant use of any lot:
   (a)   Permitted. A building or premises shall be permitted to be used for
the following purposes as a UT2 form:
      (1)   Water tower.
      (2)   Solar farm.
   (b)   Permitted special. The following principal uses include the same
additional restrictions for all listed uses below. A conditional use with
standards within §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use Permit) shall be obtained when the standards
for a permitted special use cannot be obtained.
      (1)   Telecommunications tower.
         A.   Intent of regulations. Regulations regarding development of
telecommunications towers and wireless communications facilities are intended
to encourage the development of a competitive wireless communications
marketplace while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the public and
maintaining the aesthetic integrity of the community. The regulations cover the
placement, construction, and modification of telecommunications towers and
wireless communications facilities. The specific intent of this section is:
            1.   To regulate the location of telecommunications towers and
wireless communications facilities in the city.
            2.   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impact of telecommunications towers and wireless communications
facilities.
            3.   To minimize adverse visual impact of telecommunications towers
and wireless communications facilities through careful design, siting,
landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques.
            4.   To promote and encourage shared use/colocation of
telecommunications towers and wireless communications facilities.
            5.   To avoid potential damage to property caused by
telecommunications towers and wireless communications facilities by ensuring
that such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified,
maintained, and removed when no longer used or when determined to be
structurally unsound.
            6.   To ensure that telecommunications towers and wireless
communications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses.
            7.   To facilitate the provision of wireless communications
services to the residents and the businesses of the city in an orderly fashion.
            8.   To promote the location of telecommunications towers in
nonresidential areas.
         B.   Colocation as a first alternative.
         C.   Telecommunication towers shall not be within a 600' radius of any
other tower.
         D.   Stealth design is required.
         E.   The clear distance should only block one-half of a streets width.
         F.   When adjacent to residential or a non-arterial street, the
tower’s base station [definition] shall be screened with a 6' opaque fence plus
50 landscaping units to act as the buffer yard.
         G.   Application required. The following item must be satisfactorily
addressed in a formal application to obtain a building permit at any given
location in any zoning district in the city:
            1.   Compliance with all applicable building codes, Federal
Aviation Administration Regulations, FCC Section 6409 (hereafter “Section
6409”) of the Spectrum Act and §§
160.419,
160.420, and
160.421 (Airport Approach Zones).
         H.   Location/setbacks.
            1.   The minimum distance from the telecommunication tower base to
the nearest existing residential structure or residential building setback line
is not less than the proposed height of the telecommunication tower or 150',
whichever is greater.
            2.   Excluding the parcels’ structure itself, the minimum distance
from the telecommunication tower base to the nearest existing structure or
building setback line is not less than half the proposed height of the
telecommunication tower or 75', whichever is greater.
            3.   Where a telecommunications tower is required to meet Federal
Aviation Administration paint and/or lighting regulations, the distance between
the telecommunications tower and any residential zoning district or use, or any
recreation/conservation, design review overlay, or historic district, shall not
be less than one-half mile.
         I.   Design character.
            1.    Telecommunications towers and antenna support structure
design shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that
is not in direct conflict with the natural setting or surrounding structures.
            2.    Telecommunications towers shall be protected from corrosion
or rusting, and if painted, be a neutral color, unless otherwise required by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
            3.   Stealth. Telecommunications towers in historic or design
review overlay districts, or in any nonresidential district where located
within 300' of a residential zoning district or use, shall be monopole design.
         J.   Illumination. Telecommunications towers shall not be artificially
lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
         K.   Maintenance.
            1.   All telecommunications towers, antenna support structures, and
wireless communications facilities shall be maintained in good condition,
order, and repair so that they shall not endanger the life or property of any
person.
            2.    Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures, and
wireless communications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with
Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association
Standard EIA/TIA 222 (latest revision), all applicable laws, and so as not to
interfere with the use of other property. Upon the city’s determination that a
tower structure may be a hazard to public safety, the city may require the
owner to perform an inspection by a registered professional engineer and make
all recommended corrections.
            3.   All maintenance or construction on telecommunications towers,
antenna support structures, and wireless communications facilities shall be
performed by persons employed by or under contract to the owner.
            4.   If an owner discontinues use of a telecommunications tower, or
if an owner files notice with the Federal Communications Commission of its
intent to cease operating the tower, the owner shall give written notice to the
director of planning and building services of the date of such discontinuance.
         L.   Abandonment.
            1.   If the city receives notice of discontinuance of use, or if
any telecommunications tower is not used for 365 consecutive days, the city may
notify the owner that the city intends to determine that the site has been
abandoned. If, within 30 days of receipt of notice, the owner fails to show
that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the city may
determine that the site has been abandoned.
            2.   Within 75 days of notice of such determination of abandonment,
the owner shall remove the tower from the site. If an owner fails to do so, the
city may remove the tower and recover the cost from the owner.
   (c)   Conditional uses. A building or premises may be used for the following
purposes as a UT2 form if the conditional use permit for such use has been
obtained in conformance with the below standards and requirements of §§
160.605 et seq. (Conditional Use):
      (1)   Broadcast tower.
         A.   Colocation as a first alternative.
         B.   Stealth design is required.
         C.   Fall-down clear distance shall be at least as tall as the tower.
         D.   The fall-down distance should only block one-half of a street.
         E.   When adjacent to residential or a nonarterial street, the tower
base shall be screened.
         F.   Only allowed beyond 1,000 feet of a residential area.
      (2)   Wind energy conversion system.
         A.   Stealth design is required.
         B.   Fall-down clear distance shall be at least as tall as the tower.
         C.   The fall-down distance should only block one-half of a street.
         D.   When adjacent to residential or a nonarterial street, the tower
base shall be screened.
         E.   Only allowed beyond 1,000 feet of a residential area.
         F.   Limited use. No WECS installed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter shall generate power as a commercial enterprise as
defined by the public utilities commission.
         G.   Setback requirements. The minimum distance between the property
line, overhead utility lines or another wind turbine, and any tower support
base of a WECS shall be equal to the proposed tower height (plus the radius of
the rotor for the horizontal axis machines).
         H.   Contiguous property owners and planned developments may construct
a WECS for their use in common. If property held by more than one single owner
is used to meet the setback requirements, a site plan establishing easements or
reserved areas must be submitted to the planning commission for their approval.
         I.   Tower access: Climbing access to the WECS tower shall be limited
either by means of a fence six feet high around the tower base with a locking
portal, or by limiting tower climbing apparatus so there is access to it no
lower than 12 feet from the ground.
         J.   Electromagnetic interference. If a WECS is installed in any
location along or within the major access of an existing microwave
communications link, the person desiring to install the WECS shall be required
to provide a letter from the business whose link they are within or adjacent to
stating that the business whose link is affected would have no objection to the
installation of the WECS.
         K.   Air space. A WECS shall be located or installed in compliance
with the guidelines of the federal aviation regulations with regard to §§
160.419,
160.420, and
160.421 (airport approach zones) and clearance around VOR stations.
         L.   Noise limits. A WECS operation shall not produce noise in excess
of the limits established by Title 9 of the City Code of Ordinances.
         M.   Interconnect. The WECS, if interconnected to an electric utility
distribution system, shall meet the interconnect requirements of the electric
utility company.
      (2)   Solar farm.
         A.   Intent of regulations. Regulations regarding development of solar
farms are intended to encourage the use of clean alternative energy sources and
to provide for land development, installation, and construction regulations for
solar farm facilities subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public while maintaining the aesthetic
integrity of the community. The regulations cover the placement, construction,
and modification of solar farms. The specific intent of this section is:
            1.   To regulate the location of solar farms in the city.
            2.   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impacts of solar farms.
            3.   To minimize adverse visual impact of solar farms through
careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques.
            4.   To avoid potential damage to property caused by solar farms by
ensuring that such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or when determined to be
structurally unsound.
            5.   To ensure that solar farms are compatible with surrounding
land uses.
            6.   To facilitate the provision of solar farms to the residents
and the businesses of the city in an orderly fashion.
            7.   To promote the location of solar farms in nonresidential
areas.
         B.   Location/setbacks.
            1.   25 feet setback from the base of the solar collection device
from the building setback line.
         C.   Height.
            1.   The total height of a solar collection device shall not exceed
15' in height when orientated at maximum tilt.
         D.   Design character.
            1.   Solar collection devices and all supporting components shall
use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that is not in
direct conflict with the natural setting or surrounding structures.
            2.   Solar collection devices and all supporting components shall
be protected from corrosion or rusting, and if painted, be a neutral color.
         E.   Glare. Solar collection devices shall be designed, constructed,
and located to minimize glare or reflection on adjacent properties and roadways
and not to interfere with traffic, including air traffic, or otherwise create a
safety hazard.
         F.   Landscaped buffer. Up to 100% of the required trees may be
evergreen or coniferous trees; however, they shall not be planted in a driveway
or intersection vision clearance zone. Evergreen or coniferous trees must be a
minimum of 6 feet in height.
         G.   Maintenance.
            1.   Solar collection devices and all supporting components shall
be maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that they shall not
endanger the life or property of any person.
            2.   Solar collection devices and all supporting components shall
be maintained in compliance with the electrical ordinance, all applicable laws,
and so as not to interfere with the use of other property. Upon the city's
determination that a panel may be a hazard to public safety, the city may
require the owner to perform an inspection by a registered professional
engineer and make all recommended corrections.
         H.   Abandonment.
            1.   If the city receives notice of discontinuance of use, or if
any solar farm is not used for 365 consecutive days, the city may notify the
owner that the city intends to determine that the site has been abandoned. If,
within 30 days of receipt of notice, the owner fails to show that the solar
farm has been in use or under repair during the period, the city may determine
that the site has been abandoned.
            2.   Within 180 days of notice of such determination of
abandonment, the owner shall remove all solar collection devices and supporting
components, foundations, pads, and underground wires from the site. Hazardous
material from the property must be disposed of in accordance with Federal and
State law.
            3.   If an owner fails to do so, the city may remove the solar farm
and recover the cost from the owner.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.407 ACCESSORY USES.
   A use shall be accessory to a building or premises that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to any principal use allowed as a UT2 form including
structures for office and warehouse.
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.408 BULK REGULATIONS.
   General requirements. The maximum height and minimum lot requirements within
the UT2 form shall be as follows:
 
Required Front Yard:  25 feet. One required front yard on a corner lot may be
                      20 feet.
Required Side Yard:   5 feet.
Required Rear Yard:   5 feet.
                      Water towers are exempt. All other uses are dependent on
Maximum Height:       fall-down distance
                      and FAA standards.
                      30-foot total setback required adjacent to DD1, DD2, DD3,
                      and DD4.
Required Buffer Yard: 15 feet total adjacent to DD5, DD6, DD7, AD1, AD2, AD3,
                      and GW.
                      *10 feet total when adjacent to MD1 and MD2 forms.
See §§
160.505 et seq. (Additional Yard Regulations) for more information.
Minimum distance between multiple principal buildings on the same lot: 10 feet.
 
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.409 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   Development with a UT2 form shall be regulated in conformance with the
applicable provisions of:
   (a)   §
160.480 (Fences).
   (b)   §§
160.485 et seq. (Landscape and Buffer Yard).
   (c)   §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations).
   (d)   §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations).
   (e)   §
160.491 (Standards for Outdoor Lighting).
(Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 160.410 INTENT; SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Intent. This district is intended to provide both developing and
redeveloping areas with special standards to protect and enhance the unique
features of the area. It is not intended that these regulations interfere with,
abrogate or annul any other rules or regulations of this chapter; except that
if the design review overlay district imposes a greater restriction than the
underlying zoning district regulations, they shall control.
   (b)   Scope. The regulations set forth in this subchapter or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the district
regulations in the DR design review overlay district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.411 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.
   The boundaries of each design review overlay district are shown upon a map
which is made a part of each overlay district by reference. That part of each
map designating the title and boundaries shall have the same force and effect
as if they were all fully set forth herein.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.412 USES PERMITTED.
   A building or premises may be used for the purposes permitted in the
underlying zoning district provided it is in conformity with the conditions
required in the design review overlay district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.413 ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses and buildings permitted are accessory buildings and uses
customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in the underlying zoning
district which are not prohibited by the overlying design review overlay
district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.414 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   All parking, loading and stacking shall be regulated by the underlying
zoning district and in conformance with the provisions of the overlying design
review district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.415 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs shall be regulated in conformance with §§
160.570 through
160.582 and any regulations imposed by the overlying design review overlay
district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.416 DENSITY, AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The maximum height and minimum lot requirements shall be subject to the
maximum height and minimum lot requirements of the underlying zoning district
and any regulations imposed by the overlying design review overlay district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
2014 S-12
§ 160.417 DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICTS ENUMERATED.
   Design review overlay districts adopted by the city shall be as enumerated
below.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 103-86,
passed 12-1-1986; Ord. 53-87, passed 7-7-1987; Ord. 66-87, passed 8-3-1987;
Ord. 121-88, passed 12-19-1988; Ord. 30-90, passed 4-20-1990; Ord. 39-90,
passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 40-91, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 64-92, passed 8-27-1992;
Ord. 96-92, passed 11-2-1992; Ord. 93-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 97-01, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 109-01, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 120-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord.
27-07, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.418 AIRPORT INFLUENCE OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Boundaries.
      (1)   The airport influence overlay district is composed of lands located
within an area affected by noise or safety hazards associated with aircraft
operations at the Sioux Falls Regional Airport. The land use compatibility
evaluation of the 2007 airport master plan was completed to determine the
highest risks to properties and protect the community. The airport influence
overlay district includes all or portions of the approach zone, transition
zone, conical zone and airport noise exposure zone. The airport influence
overlay district is identified as an overlay district.
      (2)   See map on file with the city zoning office.
   (b)   Intent. In order to secure safety, to promote health and general
welfare of our community, and to avoid undue concentration of land where there
are environmental constraints, an airport influence overlay district has been
placed to address notification aspects of land use encroachment upon an
operating airport. This shall ensure that the Sioux Falls Regional Airport is
an integral part of the local economy and the national aviation system through
the proactive enforcement of the surrounding land uses.
   (c)   Standards. Any zoning district change or zoning permit which lies
within the airport influence overlay district shall conform to the following
regulations and procedures:
      (1)   Zoning permits shall be consistent with the growth management plan
and the zoning ordinances.
      (2)   Residentially platted lots as of June 28, 2007 (date of adoption of
the airport ordinance) are allowed to apply for zoning permits to residential
classification.
      (3)   With zoning permit for any school, hospital, or places of worship,
property owners shall provide Noise Level Reduction (NLR) of at least ten dbl
over standard construction practices (reducing to 55 dbl to 45 dbl).
      (4)   Zoning regulations.
Change of Zone Regulations for Approval
Change   Regulations for Approval
of Zone
         A mitigation plan approved by the Sioux Falls Regional Airport
Ag, REC, Authority which addresses wildlife attractant(s) [Advisory Circular
CN       150/5200-33B, Hazardous Wildlife Attractant, provides specific
         guidance].
C-1, C-  Written documentation from the Sioux Falls Regional Airport Authority
2, C-3,  that occupancy standards meet FAA regulations. Local jurisdictions
C-4, I-  cannot waive federal regulations.
1, I-2
O, S-1,  With three conditions:
S-2, LW
            (1)   The parcel contains three acres of land or less;
            (2)   The building contains 50,000 square feet of area or less; and
            (3)   Signed acknowledgment of the airport influence overlay
         district.
RS, RD-
1, RD-2, An avigation easement for noise and vibrations will be required; NLR*
RA-1,    are recommended for future residents.
RA-2,
RA-3
*   NLR-Noise Level Reduction-Outdoor to indoor reduction to be achieved
through incorporation of noise attenuation into the design and construction of
the structure(s).
 
   (d)   Plan review.
      (1)   Submittal. Items within division (c)(4) above must be submitted
with the application for a zoning district change or zoning permit; they must
be completed and filed by the effective date of the zoning district change or
zoning permit. If regulations are not met by effective date, the zoning
regulations will become a condition of plat approval.
      (2)   Approval of plans. Zoning district change or zoning permit of any
property within the airport influence overlay district shall undergo a review
by the planning commission if the regulations listed in division (c)(4) above
are not in compliance.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.100) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 76-07,
passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 71-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.419 APPROACH ZONE.
   (a)   Within the airspace above the approach zone to each end of a runway
designed to be used for instrument landings, no building, structure or growth
shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a plane with a slope of
one (vertical) to 50 (horizontal) (1:50) projected from a point 200 feet beyond
the end of a runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, the plane to be in the shape
of symmetrical trapezoid 1,000 feet in width at its lowest point and 4,000 feet
in width at its highest point; combined with a second plane with a slope of one
(vertical) to 40 (horizontal) (1:40) extending from the upper edge of the first
plane for an additional distance of 40,000 feet, the plane to be in the shape
of a symmetrical trapezoid 4,000 feet in width at its lowest point and 16,000
feet in width at its highest point.
   (b)   Within the airspace above the approach zone to each end of a runway
not designed to be used for instrument landings, no building or structure shall
be erected or altered to project above a plane with a slope of one (vertical)
to 40 (horizontal) (1:40) projected from a point 200 feet beyond the end of the
runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, the plane to be a symmetrical trapezoid
calculated by representatives of the Sioux Falls Regional Airport Authority.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.102) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 76-07,
passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 71-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.420 TRANSITION ZONES.
   Within the established transition zones adjacent to each instrument and
noninstrument runway and approach zone, no building, structure or growth shall
be erected, altered or permitted to project above a plane with a slope of one
(vertical) to seven (horizontal) (1:7). Transition zones extend outward and
upward from a line (*) feet on either side of the centerline of noninstrument
runways for the length of the runway plus 200 feet on each end; to a height 150
feet above the elevation of the airport reference point. In addition,
transition zones are established adjacent to both instrument and noninstrument
approach zones which flare outward and upward symmetrically along the entire
length of each approach zone to where they intercept to the surfaces of the
horizontal and conical zones.
*   The applicable distance in feet must be based on runway length as set forth
in § 77.25 of part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.104) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 71-09,
passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.421 CONICAL ZONE.
   (a)   Within (*) feet from the established airport reference point, no
building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a horizontal
plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation. This horizontal zone
does not include the approach or transition zones.
   (b)   Within the conical zone, which commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and extends outward there from a distance of (*) feet, no
building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with
a slope of one (vertical) to 20 (horizontal) (1:20).
   (c)   Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height
up to 20 feet above the surface of the land.
(*)   The applicable distance in feet must be based on runway length as set
forth in § 77.25 Civil Airport Imaginary Surfaces of the Federal Aviation
Regulations.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.106) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 76-07,
passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 71-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.422 NOISE EXPOSURE ZONE.
   (a)   The noise exposure zone reflects the 65 DNL as regulated by the
Federal Aviation Administration as shown within the June 28, 2007, adopted
airport master plan, on file with the Sioux Falls Regional Airport Authority.
   (b)   An avigation easement shall be placed on property within the noise
exposure zone when a building permit for substantial improvements to a
habitable residential structure is being requested.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.108) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 71-09,
passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.423 AVIGATION EASEMENT.
   Within the airport influence overlay district, an avigation easement may be
conveyed to the Sioux Falls Regional Airport Authority by property owners
subdividing lands, initiating substantial construction of any habitable
structure on already subdivided lands, or changing zones within the airport
influence overlay district. The Sioux Falls Regional Airport Authority shall be
the grantees of the avigation easement, and shall be able to facilitate an
agreed upon easement between the two parties.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.110) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 76-07,
passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 71-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.424 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF AIRPORT INFLUENCE OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   Property owners within the airport influence overlay district may sign an
acknowledgment notice and submit the notice to be filed with the city.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.43.120) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 76-07,
passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 71-09, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.425 BILLBOARD/OFF-PREMISE SIGN OPPORTUNITY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   The Billboard/Off-Premise Sign Opportunity Overlay District intent,
boundary, and standards are established as part of this code.
(Ord. 88-15, passed 9-1-2015)
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
§ 160.440 INTENT; SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Intent. It is the intent of the PUD district within this section to
provide flexibility from conventional zoning regulations to promote mixed-use
development, well-planned campus institutional, and flexible high-density
single-family cluster development with increased public review consistent with
the Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan—chapter 5. The following planned
unit development districts are enumerated within this section and provide
development options for campus-style, mixed-use, and high-density residential
development projects:
      (1)   Institutional Campus PUD (S-2-PUD)
      (2)   Downtown PUD (DT-PUD)
      (3)   Village PUD (V-PUD)
      (4)   Pedestrian-Oriented Mixed-Use PUD (PO-PUD)
      (5)   Residential Cluster Development PUD (RCD-PUD)
   (b)   Scope. The regulations set forth in §§
160.441 through §§
160.452 or set forth elsewhere in this chapter are the district regulations for
planned unit development districts.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.45.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.441 COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The developments within planned unit development districts shall comply with
the policies and design standards of the Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive
Plan. The development shall be mutually compatible with adjacent existing and
projected developments.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.45.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.442 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   PUD zoning request. A petitioner shall submit a request indicating the
type of PUD zoning district; follow all requirements of §§
160.650 et seq. (Change of Zone) and be consistent with the regulations of the
requested PUD district; and the Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Plan. An initial
development plan may be required for zoning approval by the Planning Commission
contingent upon city council approval of the PUD rezoning.
   (b)   Initial development plan.
      (1)   When a petitioner is ready to proceed with development within the
planned unit development district, the petitioner shall submit an initial
development plan to the planning department, showing the information specified
in §
160.444.
      (2)   This request for an initial development plan is subject to the
requirements for amendment of the regulations specified in §§
160.447. No building permit shall be issued within the development until the
final development plan is approved and the plat is filed.
      (3)   Before any action shall be taken by the planning commission, the
applicant shall first file with the department of planning and building
services a certificate verifying that said signs have been posted at the proper
location before the time specified by this section.
   (c)   Final development plan. Prior to construction on any lots in the
planned development, the petitioner shall submit a final development plan
showing the information specified in §
160.444, to the planning staff, who shall approve or deny based upon
conformance with the initial development plan and standards of the planned unit
development district. Submittal and conformance standards for final development
plans are below in §
160.445 and §
160.446.
   (d)   Amendments. Amendments to the initial development plan shall be
required to be approved with a public hearing in the same manner as provided
for in §
160.443.
   (e)   Conditional use permits. The planning commission or the city council
in issuance of the conditional use permit shall impose conditions as
appropriate and necessary to ensure compliance with the comprehensive plan and
protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Any conditional use permit
approved by the planning commission shall conform to the minimum standards set
forth in §
160.616.
After a public hearing held in the same manner as set forth in §
160.609, a conditional use permit may be authorized by the planning commission
when listed as an eligible form and conditional use within a Planned Unit
Development District.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.45.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 38-84,
passed 3-5-1984; Ord. 95-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 18-96, passed 2-5-1996; Ord.
55-97, passed 8-4-1997; Ord. 56-05, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 89-07, passed 6-4-
2007; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.443 INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMITTAL PROCESS.
   The developer may submit a planned unit development initial development plan
and fee to the planning office before the monthly planning commission deadline.
The process includes the following:
   (a)   To assist the developer, the application may be submitted up to five
working days before the planning commission submittal deadline to review the
application to determine whether it contains all elements required by §
160.444.
   (b)   If the planning office determines that the application does not
contain all elements as required by §
160.444, then the applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific
deficiencies; and that the application shall not be scheduled for a public
hearing until all elements of the application are submitted. The applicant has
until the submittal deadline to submit all elements.
   (c)   When the planning office determines that the application does contain
all elements as required by §
160.444, the application shall be scheduled for a planning commission public
hearing by the planning office on a day when the planning commission is
regularly scheduled to meet as determined by the rules, policies, and
regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the planning
commission for holding public hearings on such requests.
   (d)   The city planning and building services director will review within
ten days to determine compliance with all standards of the appropriate planned
unit development district listed in §§
160.448 through
160.452.
   (e)   If the planning and building services director determines that the
initial development plan does not meet the criteria, a one-month deferral of
the plan may occur and the planning office shall identify specific required
information in its notification to the applicant at the end of the ten-day
review period. After the one-month deferral and a resubmitted preliminary
initial plan, the planning and building services director may schedule the
preliminary plan for a planning commission public hearing.
   (f)   Signs shall be posted on the property for a continuous period of seven
days immediately prior to any public hearing held by the planning commission or
city council to consider any initial development plan. Said signs shall be
furnished by the department of planning and building services and posted by the
applicant in the numbers and locations prescribed by the director.
   (g)   If an amended initial development plan is required in the Downtown
PUD, the amendment must first by reviewed by the Downtown Design Review
Committee with a meeting scheduled before the next monthly planning commission
meeting or the amendment application shall then move forward to the planning
commission. Any recommendation by the downtown design review committee shall be
forwarded to the planning commission for their consideration.
   (h)   The planning commission shall review the initial plan and approve,
disapprove, or approve with conditions.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.444 INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMITTAL ELEMENTS.
   Upon application for an initial development plan to a planned development
district, the petitioner shall present an initial development plan to the
planning commission(s) for review and their approval showing the following
information:
   (a)   Project name and legal description.
   (b)   A scaled digital copy of the initial development plan.
   (c)   The proposed development scheme showing the following information.
      (1)   The proposed land uses of each building, including the number and
type of proposed DD, AD, and MD building forms, the proposed number of dwelling
units per building, and the number and type of any other proposed building form
and their square footage.
      (2)   Circulation, including internal circulation, street design, and
pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.
      (3)   Open space and landscape concept plan.
      (4)    Freestanding signage locations and approximate sizes.
      (5)   The existing and proposed minimum setbacks of all buildings which
may be more or less than the form setback guidelines if specified on the
initial development plan and it complies with the standards of the PUD.
      (6)   The proposed maximum height that may be more than the form height
guideline if specified on the initial development plan and it complies with the
standards of the PUD.
      (7)   Proposed transitions including design features illustrating
compatibility to the surrounding environment and neighborhood.
      (8)   Anticipated phasing plan.
      (9)   In addition the developer shall provide a digital 8.5 x 11 inch
scaled rendering in a digital format at a scale no greater than one to 100 feet
of the approved initial development plan.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.45.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021)
§ 160.445 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN PROCESS AND SUBMITTAL ELEMENTS.
   (a)   Before a building permit can be approved and prior to construction on
any lots in the planned unit development zoning district, the petitioner shall
submit a final development plan for staff review.
   (b)   Final development plan approval shall expire one year from the date
upon which it becomes effective if no work has commenced. Upon written request
to the planning director and prior to the final development plan approval
expiration date, a time extension for the final development plan approval may
be granted.
   (c)   The final development plan shall show the following information:
      (1)   The subdivision name, the legal description, and the individual
project name (if any).
      (2)   Boundaries of the subarea or subareas submitted for approval
superimposed on the map of the initial development plan.
      (3)   A subdivision plat of the subarea or subareas submitted for
approval in compliance with §
157.066 of this Code [the plat].
      (4)   A scale drawing showing the following information will be required:
         A.   Size and location of proposed structures, including height and
number of units.
         B.   Calculated floor area for each structure, and a generic listing
of the uses within the structure.
         C.   Off-street parking lot arrangement designating all parking
spaces, off-street loading spaces and any outdoor trash container.
         D.   Any sidewalks, bikeways or other paths.
         E.   Any outdoor lighting, type, and location, except for standard
street lights provided by the city.
         F.   Landscaping plans showing the type and location of any walls or
fences, the placement, size and species of any trees or shrubs and berms in
areas that will be sod or seeded.
         G.   All existing and proposed utilities, drainage ways, watercourses,
and location of above-ground existing utilities on adjacent property.
         H.   Proposed final ground contours.
         I.   Curb cuts and all private drives.
         J.   Adjacent, existing, and proposed uses.
         K.   First-floor elevation for any structure located in a flood hazard
area.
         L.   Accurate building elevation of all proposed structures.
         M.   Documentation of the ownership and maintenance responsibility of
any common open spaces, structures, or facilities, including private streets.
         N.   Any required open areas as shown on the initial development plan.
Open spaces may be included in a required yard with an alternative site plan
for common open space, but shall be located in the same subarea it is intended
to serve.
         O.   Proposed parking and loading spaces which shall be in conformance
with §§
160.550 through
160.556, except where unique physical, environmental or design characteristics
make those requirements undesirable.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.45.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 21-93,
passed 3-1-1993; Ord. 109-09, passed 12-7-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.446 CONFORMANCE OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   A final development plan shall be reviewed by planning staff based upon
conformance with the initial development plan and the standards of the planned
unit development district within §§
160.448 through
160.452. Conformance with the initial development plan shall begin by
incorporating the final development plan into the overall initial development
plan. Conformance is then approved when the initial development plan stays
within the threshold of standards in §
160.447(b) (Amendment of Initial Development Plans). If the initial development
plan does not stay within the threshold standards in §
160.447(b), an amendment to the initial development plan is then required. Any
initial development plan standard that is not met in the final development plan
may also require an amendment to an initial development plan as required in §
160.447(b).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.447 REZONING OF PUDS AND AMENDMENT OF INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (a)   Rezoning of PUDs. When a developer wishes to rezone to another PUD or
to a conventional zoning district, the proposal shall go through the same
initial rezoning process as included in §§
160.650 through
160.654 (Change of Zone).
   (b)   Amendments to initial development plans— threshold standards. An
amendment to the initial development plan shall follow the same process as
stated in §§
160.443 and
160.444. Any of the following threshold standards will require an initial
development plan amendment.
      (1)   An adjustment in the size of more than a 10% increase or decrease
in the planned number of residential units for each DD, AD, and MD building
form and/or a 10% increase or decrease in the gross square foot building area
for any building form as detailed on the initial development plan.
      (2)   Any adjustment to the shape, setback, or orientation of the
building envelopes where the adjustment reduces the planned connection and
relationship of buildings to each other as based upon the initial development
plan and PUD standards.
      (3)   Any change in the number or location of curb cuts where the
adjustment reduces the planned connection and relationship of buildings to each
other based upon the initial development plan and PUD standards.
      (4)   Any decrease in the size of required open areas.
      (5)   A change in the street pattern that changes the connection and
relationship of the buildings.
      (6)   A change in the approved pedestrian connections and pathways that
no longer meets the PUD intent and standards for the approved initial
development plan.
      (7)   A 10% change in the number of parking or loading spaces for each
building site.
      (8)   A change to the location or size of freestanding signage.
      (9)   A change that results in a 10% increase or decrease in the balance
of residential, office, and commercial land uses for the overall planned unit
development district as determined within the initial development plan. In the
case of the downtown PUD, any 30% change in the balance of the residential,
office, and retail for each individual building site.
   (c)   Any changes to a final development plan should be reviewed on a basis
of how the final development plan affects the initial development plan. Any
amendment to the initial development plan cannot so significantly change the
initial development plan that the overall intent and a majority of the
standards of the planned unit development plan cannot be met.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.45.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 21-93,
passed 3-1-1993; Ord. 51-95, passed 4-3-1995; Ord. 5-97, passed 1-21-1997; Ord.
75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 56-05, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 89-07, passed 6-4-
2007; Ord. 2-12, passed 1-3-2012; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15,
passed 3-3-2015)
§ 160.448 INSTITUTIONAL CAMPUS (S-2) PUD DISTRICT.
   (a)   Intent. The S-2-PUD district is established to provide for coordinated
growth of the major institutions such as hospitals and college campuses. These
institutions provide needed health, educational, and other services to the
citizens of Sioux Falls and the region. The institutions also contribute to
employment opportunities and to the overall diversification of the city's
economy. If not properly planned, major institutions can have negative impacts
such as traffic, loss of housing, and incompatible development. The S-2-PUD
district requires an initial development plan with significant community
involvement in the development, monitoring, implementation, and amendment
including neighborhood meetings before initial development plans are approved
or amended.
   (b)   Scope of regulations. The regulations set forth in this subchapter or
set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the
district regulations in the S-2-PUD district.
   (c)   Forms.
      (1)   Business and Community Facilities— Large (BCF3).
      (2)   Business and Community Facilities— Community Service (BCF2).
      (3)   Business and Community Facilities— Small (BCF1).
      (4)   Multiple Dwelling—Medium (MD2).
      (5)   Multiple Dwelling—Small (MD1).
      (6)   Limited Retail Employment (RE1).
      (7)   Streetcar Retail Employment (RE2).
      (8)   Parking-Oriented Retail Employment (RE3).
      (9)   Attached Dwelling—Suburban Twin Home/Duplex (AD1).
      (10)   Attached Dwelling—Suburban 4-unit Townhome (AD2).
      (11)   Attached Dwelling—Suburban 8-unit Townhome (AD3).
      (12)   Attached Dwelling—Traditional 8-unit Townhome (AD4).
      (13)   Neighborhood Residential Facilities (NF2).
      (14)   Basic Utilities (UT1).
      (15)   Tower Utilities (UT2).
      (16)   Conservation Open Space (OPEN1).
      (17)   Recreation Open Space (OPEN2).
   (d)   Standards.
      (1)   Form setbacks. The forms of development shall generally follow the
yard setbacks of all applicable forms allowed except in the following
situations as shown on the initial development plan.
      (2)   Land use transitions. The initial development plan must show
appropriate transitions of land uses within the S-2-PUD and at the edges with
transitions to adjacent district land uses based upon the Shape Sioux Falls
2035 Comprehensive Plan including the land use compatibility chart and policies
within chapters 3, 4, and 5.
      (3)   Parking. The general parking standards shall be applied except the
entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regards to parking calculations as
referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative parking plan may be
incorporated as a part of the initial development plan.
      (4)   Signage. The general signage standards shall be applied except that
the entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regards to signage placement and
calculations as approved by the initial development plan. An alternative
signage plan may be incorporated as a part of the initial development plan.
      (5)   Landscaping. The general landscape standards of the zoning
ordinance shall be applied except that an alternative landscaping plan may be
incorporated as a part of the initial development plan. Common open space may
be counted toward the site’s landscape requirement if the open space is
adjacent to the site as allowed within chapter 5 of the Shape Sioux Falls 2035
Comprehensive Plan. However, a common open space site may not be counted twice
toward any site's landscape requirement.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 51-18, passed
6-5-2018)
§ 160.449 DOWNTOWN (DT) PUD DISTRICT.
   (a)   Intent. It shall be the purpose of the DT-PUD district to make the
central business district the focal point of the city, encouraging private and
public investment which will preserve the central business district as a
regional office, retail, hotel, institutional, cultural, residential, and
entertainment center of the city. It is further the purpose of this district to
encourage a strong supportive retail center in the central business district
which will complement other downtown uses and the surrounding neighborhoods. It
is the intent of this district to place a high priority on the quality of
design, integrating new uses with existing structures in a cohesive and
attractive manner. Uses along the riverfront should be oriented towards the
greenway and riverwalk system. Development should facilitate the transportation
needs of individuals and businesses and a well-balanced transportation system
which would recognize the importance of all forms of movements, be it
pedestrian, bicycling, transit, automobile, or truck in nature.
   (b)   Scope of regulations. The regulations set forth in this subchapter or
set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the
district regulations in the DT-PUD district.
   (c)   Forms.
      (1)   Village Mixed-Use (RE6).
      (2)   Basic Utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Tower Utilities (UT2).
      (4)   Conservation Open Space (OPEN1).
      (5)   Recreation Open Space (OPEN2).
   (d)   Special downtown PUD initial development plan requirements. One
overall initial development plan shall be maintained and updated by the city
planning office including all existing and approved buildings and development.
   (e)   Design standards.
      (1)   Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to protect major
public and private investments that exist downtown and to enhance the positive
visual character of the district.
         A.   The primary objective is to ensure buildings, parking, open space
and signage are compatible with the character of the district and fit in with
their surroundings, thereby reinforcing the visual quality of the area,
preserving the property values, and supporting the tourism potential of
downtown.
         B.   Compatibility calls for a building design which fits in with its
surroundings, without requiring uniformity of design, and without dictating
specific architectural styles. The design of a building must consider the
context of the site. The downtown PUD district recognizes that the overall
context of downtown includes variations, and is intended to allow both
flexibility and creativity in devising compatible design solutions. Therefore,
it is the city’s intent to encourage new developments, redevelopments, and the
remodeling of existing building exteriors which are substantially consistent
with the below design standards.
      (2)   Form setbacks. The forms of development shall generally follow the
yard setbacks of all applicable forms allowed except in the following
situations as shown on the initial development plan.
      (3)   Buildings above the first story. Buildings should have residential
units above the first story unless it is found that first story residential
units will enhance and not detract from the mixed-use character of the area as
required as a standard of a conditional use permit.
      (4)   Land use transitions. The initial development plan must show
appropriate transitions of land uses at the edges of the PUD. The transitions
to adjacent district land uses are based upon the Shape Sioux Falls 2040
Comprehensive Plan including the land use compatibility chart and policies
within chapters 3, 4, and 5.
      (5)   Parking. The general parking standards shall be applied, except the
entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regard to parking calculations as
referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative parking plan may be
incorporated into the initial development plan.
      (6)   Signage. The signage standards within §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations) shall be applied except that the
entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regard to signage calculations as
referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative signage plan may be
incorporated into the initial development plan.
      (7)   Landscaping. The general landscape standards of the zoning
ordinance shall be applied, except an alternative landscape plan may be
incorporated as a part of the initial development plan. Common open space may
be counted toward the site’s landscape requirement if the open space is
adjacent to the site as allowed within chapter 5 of the Shape Sioux Falls 2040
Comprehensive Plan. However, a common open space site may not be counted twice
toward any site’s landscape requirement.
      (8)   On-street parking. On-street parking is important to the character
of the downtown area and should be incorporated where possible.
      (9)   Building orientation and setback. The placement of new construction
shall reflect the setback already established by surrounding buildings unless
the new proposed building creates a setback that is more pedestrian-oriented
than the existing building with a setback that is closer to the Village Mixed-
Use form (RE6).
      (10)   Building height. Unless and there is an amendment to the initial
development plan, adjacent buildings shall generally be of the same height or
the same as the existing initial development plan shows, but all should at
least be two stories. An amended initial development plan may be approved with
architectural methods incorporated to mitigate the height differences and
ensure compatibility.
      (11)   Orientation to street. Public and private internal streets should
be defined and oriented to the adjacent buildings. Buildings should be sited
relatively close to the street property line. Off-street parking lots should
not separate the building and its entrances from the adjacent public street.
      (12)   Parking orientation.
         A.   Parking shall be located for convenient access, but subordinated
to the buildings in the project environment. Recommended parking locations for
vertical mixed-use development include the rear or sides of buildings, provided
that the exposure of surface parking to streets is limited. Parking lots or
structures may also be surrounded by mixed-use buildings, hidden from direct
view. Multiple-building complexes should avoid parking lots that separate major
buildings from each other. Also, parking should not separate or surround major
project features such as plazas, parks, water features, and open spaces.
         B.   When parking lots oriented to the street cannot be avoided, the
perimeters of surface parking lots adjacent to a street or sidewalk should be
provided with an edge treatment designed to define the edge and to separate the
lot from the street or sidewalk. Preferred treatments include a landscape
setback, a screen wall, masonry piers, bollards, and ornamental wrought iron-
style fencing. New curb cuts crossing the pedestrian sidewalk are discouraged.
Where curb cuts are necessary for access to parking facilities and drive-
through services, such as banks, the curb cuts should be located on streets
with little pedestrian traffic; good sight lines for both the pedestrian and
the motorist should be provided; and the number of curb cuts should be kept to
a minimum along any given block.
            1.   Ground level parking ramps located along primary streets shall
be behind office or retail uses.
            2.   Parking ramp façades above ground level and on primary streets
shall have horizontal banding to screen angled parking ramps.
      (13)   Façades. Façades should be articulated. A base or street level
that is differentiated from upper levels by materials, window and door
treatments, and features such as awnings and signage. Buildings should not
present long, unarticulated walls to adjacent public or private streets.
         A.   Buildings shall have a front façade with primary entrances facing
the street. Buildings shall be aligned so that dominant lines of a façade to
parallel the line of the street and create a well-defined street edge.
         B.   Ground floor and upper floors shall be differentiated through the
use of color, material changes, reveals, window, or other design conventions.
         C.   Primary façades shall be articulated into smaller increments
through one or more of the following:
            1.   Stepping back or extending forward a portion of the façade.
            2.   Use of different textures or contrasting but compatible
materials.
            3.   Division into storefronts to separate entrances and display
windows.
            4.   Arcades, awnings, window bays, balconies, or similar
ornamental features.
         D.   Rear and side façades shall be designed as an integral part of
the overall building with similar materials and treatment.
         E.   Buildings over four stories shall have a well-defined base,
middle, and top. The ground floor shall appear visually distinct from the upper
stories through the use of a change in building materials, window shape or
size, an intermediate cornice line, and awning, arcade or portico, or similar
techniques.
            1.   Building "tops" shall be articulated with discernable cornice
lines, parapets, and fascias.
      (14)   Open space. Develop connections to at least one new or existing
active and strategically located open space that is within the initial
development plan.
      (15)   Building entrances. Entrances are clearly defined and visible.
Entrances need to be directly accessible without interruption from adjacent
sidewalks or pathways. Each mixed-use building should have more than one
entrance, with entrances defining individual storefronts, business
establishments, and/or uses.
         A.   The primary entrance shall be designed with one or more of the
following:
            1.   Canopy, portico, arcade, or arch above an entrance.
            2.   Recess or projection in the building façade at an entrance.
            3.   Display windows.
            4.   Architectural detailing or ornamental moldings.
         B.   Primary entrances should be set back three (3) feet to emphasize
entries, provide area for plantings, or create areas for seating and/or
gathering.
      (16)   Scale. New buildings shall be designed with a pedestrian scale
aesthetic establishing a layering of rhythmic patterns and architectural
elements such as windows, building materials, and colors. The buildings shall
also provide visually legible building proportions that relate to the human
scale, define the street edge, and provide visual continuity through the
following methods.
         A.   Subdivide large building façades such that no design segment is
more than 100 feet in length.
         B.   Primary façades shall be further articulated into smaller
increments through one or more of the following techniques:
            1.   Stepping back or extending forward a portion of the façade.
            2.   Use of different textures and materials.
            3.   Division into storefronts with separate display windows and
entrances.
            4.   Arcades, awnings, window bays, balconies, or similar
ornamental features.
            5.   Variations in rooflines to reinforce the articulation of the
primary façade.
      (17)   Windows. At upper stories, windows shall be designed as punched
recessed openings in order to create a rhythm of light and shadow.
         A.   Shape, size, and patterns of windows shall be consistent with the
organization of the façade and definition of the building architecture.
         B.   Glass on street-facing doors and windows shall be clear, allowing
views into and out of the interior.
         C.   Mirrored, dark tinted, opaque, or glass block shall not be used
on street-facing façades.
         D.   A minimum of 20 percent of all sides of upper story façades shall
consist of window, balcony, or door openings.
         E.   A minimum of 20 percent of all ground level side and rear façades
not fronting a public street shall consist of window and door openings.
         F.   A minimum of 40 percent of primary (street-facing) façades and 20
percent of other façades for residential shall consist of windows, balconies,
and/or door openings to provide a visual connection to activity on the street.
      (18)   Balconies. Balconies may not extend over property lines or a
public right-of-way.
      (19)   Awnings and canopies. Canvas or fabric awnings are preferred. If
metal is used, it should complement the building character and aesthetic. Side
panels are not allowed so that the greatest degree of openness and visual
access is ensured.
      (20)   Lighting. Quality lighting design and use of fixtures shall
promote the existing character of the downtown. Exterior light fixtures shall
minimize glare and negative effects upon the nighttime character of the
district. Lighting of structures shall be minimized to reduce ambient light
pollution.
         A.   Lighting shall be located at the entrance of a front and rear
façade.
         B.   Parking lot illumination shall provide levels of safety while
minimizing over-lighting and excessive spillover of ambient light onto adjacent
properties as required by §
160.491.
         C.   Appropriate light fixtures:
            1.   Pole mounted.
            2.   Recessed.
            3.   Shielded lighting.
         D.   Inappropriate light fixtures:
            1.   Internally lit awnings.
            2.   Blinking or flashing.
            3.   Exposed conduit and electrical sources.
      (21)   Building color and texture. Color selection shall complement the
color of adjoining buildings, and the use of extremely bright and dark colors
shall be limited to smaller accent features of the building. Use of different
textures or contrasting but compatible materials and color schemes shall be
simple, using the minimum number of colors necessary to accentuate
architectural features.
      (22)   Roof forms. The predominant roof form downtown is a flat roof.
This roof form is appropriate in nearly all areas of the downtown district. The
use of pitched roofs is generally discouraged, except when the building is
historical in nature, geographically isolated from nearby construction, or when
there is a strong visual connection with an existing building with a pitched
roof. The use of a decorative cornice as a building element is a desirable
feature to maintain or to incorporate into new construction.
         A.   Variations in rooflines shall be provided to reinforce the
articulation of the primary façade.
         B.   Pitched roofs shall be clad with highly durable materials such as
slate, composite tiles, or standing seam.
      (23)   Rooftops. Rooftop equipment should be screened from view from
adjacent streets, properties, and public right-of-way or screened by the
building parapet. If necessary, equipment should be grouped with an enclosure.
The enclosure should be set back a distance matching half the distance of the
primary façade. Screens should be compatible with primary building materials.
         A.   Stair and/or elevator enclosures located on a building's rooftop
shall be compatible with the primary building materials and set back a minimum
of 20 feet.
         B.   Rooftop and balcony decorative railings shall be used for decks,
balconies, porticos, porches, and rooftops. The following materials are
acceptable:
            1.   Decorative metal.
            2.   Cable (aluminum and stainless).
            3.    Aluminum.
            4.   Glass.
      (24)   Signage. The size, location, and readability of signs for private
businesses should be orientated toward pedestrian traffic. The design of
buildings should take precedence over the design of business signs.
      (25)   Street furnishings. Café furnishings, bike racks, trash
containers, benches, and sign boards shall be made of durable materials. Molded
plastic tables and chairs are prohibited.
      (26)   Other considerations. Landscaping, planter boxes, hanging flower
baskets, window boxes, and public art are encouraged wherever appropriate.
      (27)   Downtown design review. Any amendment to the DT-PUD initial
development plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission.
      (28)   Plan review best design practices. The planning staff should
encourage design that may help the developer and architect with methods to
enhance the design and appearance of the proposed building and development.
      (29)   Materials. Materials for the building shall be compatible with
those used for adjacent buildings.
         A.   Buildings shall include up to three different exterior materials,
excluding windows, doors, and foundation materials.
         B.   Brick tile may be used, provided tiles do not create continuous
seams at corners.
         C.   Materials encouraged:
            1.   Quartzite.
            2.   Brick.
            3.   Natural stone.
            4.   Architectural precast panels.
         D.   In addition to the materials noted above for primary façades, the
following materials may be used on façades not fronting on a street and as
accents not exceeding 10 percent:
            1.   Stucco or EIFS.
            2.   Split face or burnished CMU (concrete masonry unit).
            3.   Textured patterned or integrally colored cast-in-place
concrete.
            4.   Architectural metal, decorative panels, structural elements,
and decorative support or trim members.
         E.   Building materials shall only terminate or change at inside
building corners.
      (30)   Proportion of openings on historical buildings. Any building
within a historic preservation district in the DT-PUD shall reflect the same
size, spacing, horizontal alignment, and proportions of doors and window
predominating along the block.
      (31)   Historic building remodeling. Projects involving the renovation or
remodeling of downtown historic buildings should reflect the original
architectural character of the building. Introduction of new design elements
should be consistent with the traditional features of the building. All
historic building remodeling projects shall be reviewed by the board of
historic preservation and shall be consistent with the Secretary of Interior’s
Standards.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 106-17, passed 10-3-2017; Ord. 51-18, passed
6-5-2018)
§ 160.450 VILLAGE (V-PUD) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Intent. In urban villages, densities are high and projects frequently
have the scale and character of a downtown or town center district. This street
orientation creates a much tighter streetscape setting, reducing traffic speeds
and increasing walkability. In vertical mixed-use or urban villages, the
building, rather than parking lots, define the street and structures typically
have two or more stories. Urban villages also create populated places rather
than just providing lots for development; consequently, appearance, design, and
function of the development is emphasized along with land use.
   (b)   Scope of regulations. The regulations set forth in this subchapter or
set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the
district regulations in the village V-PUD district.
   (c)   Forms allowed.
      (1)   Village Mixed-Use (RE6).
      (2)   Basic Utilities (UT1).
      (3)   Tower Utilities (UT2).
      (4)   Conservation Open Space (OPEN1).
      (5)   Recreation Open Space (OPEN2).
   (d)   Transitions to adjacent districts. Transition may include some step-
down standards and buffer yard standards to transition to adjacent development
areas. The initial development plan shall include all existing and proposed
development within the area. Adjacent development land uses shall be included
in the initial development plan.
   (e)   Initial development plan standards.
      (1)   Form setbacks. The forms of development shall generally follow the
yard setbacks of all applicable forms allowed except in the following
situations as shown on the initial development plan.
      (2)    The amount of residential and non-residential development within
the V-PUD shall be indicated on the initial development plan by the number of
acres and number of units. The mix of residential, commercial and office land
uses shall be guided by chapter 4 of Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   Land use transitions. The initial development plan must show
appropriate transitions of land uses at the edges of the PUD. The transitions
to adjacent district land uses are based upon the Shape Sioux Falls 2035
Comprehensive Plan including the land use compatibility chart and policies
within chapters 3, 4, and 5.
      (4)   Parking. The general parking standards shall be applied except the
entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regards to parking calculations as
referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative parking plan may be
incorporated into the initial development plan.
      (5)   Signage. The signage standards within §§
160.570 et seq. (On-Premises Sign Regulations) shall be applied except that the
entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regards to signage calculations as
referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative signage plan may be
incorporated into the initial development plan.
      (6)   Landscaping. The general landscape standards of the zoning
ordinance shall be applied except an alternative landscape plan may be
incorporated as a part of the initial development plan. Common open space may
be counted toward the site’s landscape requirement if the open space is
adjacent to the site as allowed within chapter 5 of the Shape Sioux Falls 2035
Comprehensive Plan. However, a common open space site may not be counted twice
toward any site's landscape requirement.
      (7)   On-street parking. On-street parking is important to the character
of a village downtown area and should be incorporated where possible.
      (8)   Building height. All adjacent buildings shall generally be of the
same height, but all should at least be two stories. An amended initial
development plan may be approved with architectural methods incorporated to
mitigate the height differences and ensure compatibility.
      (9)   Orientation to street. Public and private internal streets should
be defined and oriented to the adjacent buildings. Buildings should be sited
relatively close to the street property line. Off-street parking lots should
not separate the building and its entrances from the adjacent public street.
      (10)   Parking orientation.
         A.   Parking shall be located for convenient access, but subordinated
to the buildings in the project environment. Recommended parking locations for
vertical mixed-use development include the rear or sides of buildings, provided
that the exposure of surface parking to streets is limited. Parking lots or
structures may also be surrounded by mixed-use buildings, hidden from direct
view. Multiple-building complexes should avoid parking lots that separate major
buildings from each other. Also, parking should not separate or surround major
project features such as plazas, parks, water features, and open spaces.
         B.   When parking lots oriented to the street cannot be avoided, the
perimeters of surface parking lots adjacent to a street or sidewalk should be
provided with an edge treatment designed to define the edge and to separate the
lot from the street or sidewalk. Preferred treatments include a landscape
setback, a screen wall, masonry piers, bollards, and wrought iron fencing. New
curb cuts crossing the pedestrian sidewalk are discouraged. Where curb cuts are
necessary for access to parking facilities and drive-through services, such as
banks, the curb cuts should be located on streets with little pedestrian
traffic; good sight lines for both the pedestrian and the motorist should be
provided; and the number of curb cuts should be kept to a minimum along any
given block.
      (11)   Façades. Façades should be articulated. A base or street level
that is differentiated from upper levels by materials, window and door
treatments, and features such as awnings and signage. Buildings should not
present long, unarticulated walls to adjacent public or private streets.
      (12)   Open space. Create at least one active and strategically located
open space.
      (13)   Building entrances. Entrances are clearly defined and visible.
Entrances need to be directly accessible without interruption from adjacent
sidewalks or pathways. Each mixed-use building should have more than one
entrance, with entrances defining individual storefronts, business
establishments, and/or uses.
      (14)   Building color and texture. Color selection shall complement the
color of adjoining buildings and the use of extremely bright and dark colors
shall be limited to smaller accent features of the building. Color schemes
shall be simple, using the minimum number of colors necessary to accentuate
architectural features.
      (15)   Roof forms. The predominant roof form downtown is a flat roof.
This roof form is appropriate in nearly all areas of the downtown district. The
use of pitched roofs is generally discouraged, except when the building is
historical in nature; geographically isolated from nearby construction; or when
there is a strong visual connection with an existing building with a pitched
roof. The use of a decorative cornice as a building element is a desirable
feature to maintain or to incorporate into new construction.
      (16)   Signage. The size, location, and readability of signs for private
businesses should be orientated toward pedestrian traffic. The design of
buildings should take precedence over the design of business signs.
      (17)   Other considerations. Landscaping, planter boxes, hanging flower
baskets, window boxes, outdoor furniture, outdoor dining areas, and public art
are encouraged wherever appropriate.
      (18)   Materials. Materials for the building should be compatible with
those used for adjacent buildings.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 51-18, passed 6-5-2018)
§ 160.451 PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED MIXED-USE (PO-PUD) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Intent. The intent of PO-PUD development is to fully integrate more
than one use in a unified and fully pedestrian-connected planned project,
thereby reducing vehicular trips using land efficiently, and tending to create
more active and lively urban environments. A PO-PUD should encourage mixed-use
development by removing regulatory obstacles and providing flexibility in its
ordinances. In return, projects should authentically integrate more than one
use to demonstrate the advantages of mixed-use development.
   (b)   Scope of regulations. The regulations set forth in this subchapter or
set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the
district regulations in the PO-PUD district.
   (c)   Forms.
      (1)    Streetcar Retail Employment (RE2).
      (2)    Parking-Oriented Retail Employment (RE3).
      (3)    Community Retail Employment (RE4).
      (4)   Regional Retail Employment (RE5).
      (5)    Multiple Dwelling—Small (MD1).
      (6)    Multiple Dwellings—Medium (MD2).
      (7)    Multiple Dwellings—Large (MD3).
      (8)    Attached Dwelling—Suburban Four-unit Townhome (AD2).
      (9)    Attached Dwelling—Suburban Eight-unit Townhome (AD3).
      (10)   Attached Dwelling—Traditional Eight-unit Townhome (AD4).
      (11)   Neighborhood Facilities (NF1).
      (12)   Neighborhood Residential Facilities (NF2).
      (13)   Business and Community Facilities— Small (BCF1).
      (14)   Basic Utilities (UT1).
      (15)   Tower Utilities (UT2).
      (16)   Conservation Open Space (OPEN1).
      (17)   Recreation Open Space (OPEN2).
   (d)   Initial development plan standards.
      (1)   Form setbacks. The forms of development shall generally follow the
yard setbacks of all applicable forms allowed except in the following
situations as shown on the initial development plan.
      (2)   The amount of residential and nonresidential development within the
PO-PUD shall be indicated on the initial development plan by the number of
acres and number of units. The mix of residential, commercial and office land
uses shall be guided by chapter 4 of Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   All initial development plans shall include the following
standards:
         A.   Multiple buildings with residential, retail, and office land uses
included.
         B.   Buildings are encouraged to accommodate more than one use.
         C.   Buildings within the PUD area should all be connected by internal
streets and pedestrian connections and pathway as all included within the
initial development plan.
         D.   The buildings may have common features such as parking, utility
areas, signage, loading.
         E.   Common open space features shall be included within the initial
development plan that are large enough to service the entire PUD area.
      (4)   Land use transitions. The initial development plan must show
appropriate transitions of land uses within and on the edges of the PUD. The
transitions to adjacent district land uses are based upon the Shape Sioux Falls
2035 Comprehensive Plan including the land use compatibility chart and policies
within chapters 3, 4, and 5.
      (5)   Parking. The general parking standards shall be applied except the
entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regards to parking calculations as
referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative parking plan may be
incorporated into the initial development plan.
      (6)   Signage. The general signage standards shall be applied except that
the entire PUD may be looked at as a whole in regards to signage calculations
as referenced by the initial development plan. An alternative signage plan may
be incorporated into the initial development plan.
      (7)   Landscaping. The general landscape standards of the zoning
ordinance shall be applied except that an alternative landscape plan may be
incorporated as a part of the initial development plan. Common open space may
be counted toward the site’s landscape requirement if the open space is
adjacent to the site as allowed within chapter 5 of the Shape Sioux Falls 2035
Comprehensive Plan. However, a common open space site may not be counted twice
toward any site's landscape requirement.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 51-18, passed
6-5-2018)
§ 160.452 RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT (RCD) PUD DISTRICT.
   (a)   Intent. The RCD-PUD is established to provide for very high density
detached dwelling housing in new or redeveloping areas of the city. Applicant
should show an initial development plan that incorporates flexible yard
requirements that use examples from the detached dwelling—high density (DD7)
Form. Also, cottage developments and other similar cluster subdivision
developments that create very high density single-family neighborhoods and
offer affordable and sustainable areas for people to live are very much
encouraged. Initial development plans shall incorporate transitions from the
edge of these developments and comply with building and fire code requirements.
   (b)   Scope of regulations. The regulations set forth in this subchapter or
set forth elsewhere in this chapter when referred to in this subchapter are the
district regulations in the RCD-PUD district.
   (c)   Forms.
      (1)   Detached Dwelling—High Density (DD7).
      (2)   Neighborhood Facilities (NF1).
      (3)   Basic Utilities (UT1).
      (4)   Conservation Open Space (OPEN1).
      (5)   Recreation Open Space (OPEN2).
   (d)   Standards for DD7 forms.
      (1)   Front yards. No principal or accessory structure shall be closer
than ten feet to a public street right-of-way and the driveway shall be at
least 20 feet long to accommodate off-street parking.
      (2)   Side yard setback. The side yard shall be subject to §
160.452(d)(8), provided however, that no structure shall be located on more
than one side lot line. Dwellings that are not adjacent to another DD7 form
shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of five feet.
      (3)   Rear yard setback. Rear yard setbacks shall be an average of ten
feet as shown on the initial development plans.
      (4)   Building separations. No portion of any principal structure shall
be located less than ten feet from any other principal structure.
      (5)   Transition area setback. Where a residential cluster development
adjoins or borders another detached dwelling form, the buffer yard requirements
of the forms shall apply. An alternative landscaping plan can be incorporated
as a part of the initial development plan.
      (6)   Common open space. Common open space is encouraged with this type
of planned unit development. Such area shall be perpetually owned and
maintained for the purposes of this section by a homeowners association or, at
the option of the town, dedicated or deeded to the public. The location and
arrangement of any open space(s) shall be subject to planning commission
approval as a part of the initial development plan. The owner shall, pursuant
to the subdivision regulations, cause a final plat to be recorded in the county
register of deeds office which clearly describes the open space(s), required
deed restrictions, and conditions thereof, prior to the issuance of any
building permit(s).
      (7)   Parking. To fulfill the off-street parking requirements, the
development may develop accessory off-site parking areas within common open
space areas. The off-site parking areas must be accessible to all units for
which they are intended. These accessory off-site parking areas shall be
indicated on the initial development plan.
      (8)   A zero side yard setback may be permitted, subject to the following
provisions:
         A.   Any wall constructed on the side or rear lot line shall be a
solid, doorless, and windowless wall. Such wall shall contain no electrical,
mechanical, heating, air conditioning, or other fixtures that project beyond
such wall. Roof eaves may encroach two feet into the adjoining lot.
         B.   A five foot maintenance and access easement with a maximum eave
encroachment easement of two feet within the maintenance easement shall be
established on the adjoining lot and shall assure ready access to the lot line
wall at reasonable periods of the day for normal maintenance.
         C.   Where zero side yard setbacks are proposed, the buildable area
for each lot shall be indicated on the initial development and final
development plans.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 51-18, passed 6-5-2018)
NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
§ 160.460 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming uses, buildings, and structures and to specify those
circumstances under which they shall be permitted to continue.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.461 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the lawful use of a premises
existing immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter may be
continued although the use does not conform to the provisions hereof.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.462 USE BECOMING NONCONFORMING BY CHANGE IN LAW OR BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever the use of a premises becomes a nonconforming use through a change
in the zoning ordinance or district boundaries, the use may be continued
although the use does not conform to the provisions hereof.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.463 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (a)   If no structural alterations or additions are made, a nonconforming
use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more
restrictive classification that:
      (1)   If the proposed use is a permitted special use, all conditions must
be met or a conditional use permit obtained; and
      (2)   If the proposed use is a conditional use, a conditional use permit
must be obtained.
   (b)   (1)   For the purposes of this subchapter, each of the following
classifications shall be considered to be “more restrictive” than those it
precedes:
CN conservation
REC recreation
AG agriculture
RR rural residential
RS single-family residential—suburban
RT-1 single-family residential—traditional
RCD residential cluster development (PUD)
MH manufactured housing
RD-1 twin home/duplex residential—suburban
RD-2 townhome residential—suburban
RT-2 townhome residential—traditional
RA-1 apartment residential—low density
O office
C-1 pedestrian-oriented commercial
RA-2 apartment residential—moderate density
LW—live/work
S-1 general institutional
C-2 general commercial district
RA-3 apartment residential—high density
S-2 institutional campus PUD
C-3 community commercial
C-4 regional commercial
I-1 light industrial
AP airport
I-2 heavy industrial
 
      (2)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restrictive
use or to a permitted use, the use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restrictive use.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 55-91, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 58-06, passed 5-1-2006;
Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.464 EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT.
   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, converted,
reconstructed or structurally altered, unless the use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which the premises is located or unless authorized
under the provisions of §
160.614 and §
160.616 (conditional uses) or required to do so by law or order.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.465 RESTORATION AFTER DAMAGE.
   (a)   When the use of a building is nonconforming as defined by this chapter
and that building is damaged by a fire, explosion, act of God or the public
enemy to the extent of more than 60% of its fair market value, it shall not be
restored except in conformity with the provisions of the district in which the
building is located or in conformance with the provisions of §
160.672. (Exception through the board of adjustment here.)
   (b)   Exception: Single-family dwellings may be restored if damaged less
than 100%.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 93-90, passed 10-1-1990; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.466 DISCONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   In the event that a nonconforming use is discontinued for more than one
year, the city council may adopt, after notice by certified mail to the
property owners, an amortization schedule to bring about the gradual
elimination of the nonconforming use.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.467 EFFECT ON USE WHICH IS ILLEGAL UNDER PRIOR LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as authorization for, or
approval of, the continuance of the use of a premises in violation of zoning
regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.468 CONTINUATION OF NONSTANDARD USES.
   (a)   Nonstandard uses existing immediately prior to the effective date of
this chapter may be continued, although the uses do not conform to the
provisions hereof.
   (b)   Nonstandard buildings or structures may be enlarged or extended,
converted, reconstructed or structurally altered as follows:
      (1)   Enlargements, extensions, conversions or structural alterations may
be made as allowed by §§
160.609 through
160.616 (conditional uses).
      (2)   Structural alterations of buildings or structures may otherwise be
made if the changes do not encroach into an existing front yard, side yard or
rear yard which is less than the minimum required yard for the district in
which they are located except as allowed by §
160.508 (setback averaging).
      (3)   Enlargement, extension, conversion of buildings or structures may
otherwise be made if the changes comply with the minimum required yards, lot
area, height, landscaping, parking and density for the district in which they
are located.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.47.090) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 70-89,
passed 7-31-1989; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FENCES
§ 160.480 FENCES.
   Regulations regarding fences shall be as follows.
   (a)   Purpose. The regulation of fences is intended to protect the public
safety and welfare while maintaining the integrity of the community; providing
privacy; buffering noise; and allowing adequate air, light and vision.
   (b)   Permit required. Fence permits shall be required to construct fences.
   (c)   Front yard. Fences not more than four feet in height may be located on
any part of the lot except that a fence may not be more than 30% solid where it
is located within 30 feet of a street intersection, measuring along the
property lines and connecting these two points by a straight line.
   (d)   Side and rear yards. Fences not more than six feet in height may be
erected within any side or rear yard.
   (e)   Double frontage and corner lots. On double frontage and corner lots
for DD and AD forms, fences not more than six feet in height may be placed in a
required front yard abutting an arterial or collector street where:
      (1)   The required front yard abutting an arterial or collector street is
not used as the front yard and it does not have direct access onto the street.
      (2)   The six-foot fence is set back a minimum of ten feet from the
property line abutting the arterial or collector street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6680.jpg]
 
      (3)   The five-foot fence is set back a minimum of five feet from the
property line abutting the arterial or collector street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6682.jpg]
 
      (4)   Segments of the six-foot fence in the front yard adjacent to the
arterial or collector street meet one of the following conditions:
         A.   Staggered: Fence sections shall be varied along the alignment by
at least one-third of the length of the fence or fence section (as applicable)
by a minimum of ten feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6684.jpg]
 
         B.   Columned: Masonry columns with a minimum cross section of 16
inches by 16 inches placed at a maximum interval of 24 feet on-center along the
length of the fence. Additional columns shall also be required at all fence
corners and turning points and at all fence termination points.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6686.jpg]
 
         C.   Capped: Upgraded wood fences, including exposed wood posts, top
caps, and trim boards, are allowed as long as they meet all design standards as
specified within Figure 160.480(e)(4)(C).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6688.jpg]
 
         D.   Decorative metal: Wrought iron material may be used.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6690.jpg]
 
      (5)   Intersection vision clearance area is maintained.
   (f)   The maximum fence height for chain-link or any other fence around golf
courses, public swimming pools, school track and field areas, parks and ball
parks shall be ten feet excluding backstops which may be higher. Fences
associated with these uses shall not be more than 30% solid.
   (g)   The maximum fence height for chain-link or any other fence around
tennis courts shall be 12 feet and shall not be more than 30% solid, excluding
wind fabric screens.
   (h)   In any NF, BCF, RE, MU1, MU2, MU3, WM, UT, and OPEN zoning forms, the
fences shall not be more than eight feet in height and may be located on any
part of a lot other than the required front yard setback, except when the lot
is adjacent to a residential use.
   (i)   The Director of Planning and Development Services or designee may
allow fences not more than six feet in height to be erected on any part of a
lot for properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or within
a designated historic district, subject to the following criteria:
      (1)   Written request to the director which includes a site plan and
fence diagram depicting the fence location, design, and materials.
      (2)   The fence shall be of a traditional design which is typical of the
historic property's or district's period of significance and compatible with
the property.
      (3)   The fence shall be not more than 30% solid.
   (j)   Decorative features. In all districts, decorative features such as
individual posts, brick or stone columns, and similar features constructed as
part of a fence or wall shall be allowed to exceed the maximum fence height by
no more than six inches. Decorative features shall not be counted towards the
open space percentage of the fence. Pedestrian entry features which only
include arbors, arched entries, trellises, architectural green screens,
arcades, or finials may exceed the maximum allowable fence height in any yard
subject to design review and approval of the director of planning and building
services.
   (k)   Permits for barbed/razor wire are prohibited when the parcel is
abutting a residentially used or zoned property.
   (l)   A fence post must be secured below ground level in all residential
zoning districts.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.49.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 79-91,
passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 58-93, passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 20-94, passed 3-7-1994;
Ord. 96-97, passed 12-15-1997; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 114-22, passed
10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023; Ord. 92- 24, passed 10-16-2024)
LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER YARD STANDARDS
§ 160.485 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.
   It is the desire of the city to encourage horticulture infrastructure and
encourage development which is environmentally sensitive, socially responsive,
as well as aesthetically pleasing. To assist in these objectives, a minimum
standard for a landscaped setback is prescribed, and landscape features are
implemented to minimize the adverse effects commonly incidental to higher
density residential, commercial and industrial property improvements. Under no
circumstances is the use of artificial plantings acceptable to meet the
requirements of this section.
   (a)   Required landscaping of front yard setbacks. At least 90% of the
required front yard setback in any zoning district shall be landscaped and
maintained with living ground cover. The required setback may include necessary
hard surfacing of driveways to reach allowable parking, loading or stacking
areas. Poured or laid asphalt, concrete or similar hard surfacing shall not be
used as allowable landscape material. Landscape rock, stone, or pebbles shall
not be allowed for placement within the right-of-way. Front yard setback
landscape areas must be capable of providing a substantially full expanse of
foliage within three years after planting.
   (b)   Trees. Valuing the benefits provided from the use of trees in reducing
heat, pollution and the loss of habitat resulting from the use of expansive
areas of hard surfacing for parking purposes, the following standards regarding
trees shall be met and maintained for all forms.
      (1)   Total number of trees required.
         A.   Trees shall be required at the rate of one tree per 50 feet of
frontage including all platted public streets, private streets, and highways,
not including the width of perpendicular driveways, or one tree per six
required parking, loading, and stacking spaces provided on the site, whichever
is greater. Frontages with less than 50 feet require at least one tree no less
than 1.5 inch caliper. Where fractional trees result, the number of required
trees shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. If a buffer yard is also
required (see §
160.488) within a front yard and trees are provided as the required buffer yard
landscaping units, the required number of trees required by this section may be
eliminated but for only the frontage that shares the buffer yard.
         B.   Exception: If parking facilities or building can utilize zero
setbacks, one tree per 50 feet of frontage shall be provided within the right-
of-way subject to approval by the city engineer.
      (2)   Placement according to size, type, and percentage allowed.
         A.   Trees shall be located within the front yard (yard, front).
         B.   Deciduous shade tree. May be utilized for 100% of the total tree
requirement. Only deciduous shade trees may be utilized for required interior
trees or optional right-of-way planting, and no more than 20% of the total tree
requirement may be planted in the right-of-way area. Street trees planted in
the right-of-way boulevard may count towards the deciduous shade tree
requirement. Trees planted in the right-of-way require a permit from the parks
and recreation department. Deciduous shade trees must be a minimum caliper of 2
inches.
         C.   Deciduous ornamental trees. Up to 25% of the required trees may
be deciduous ornamental trees. Deciduous ornamental trees may be utilized for
100% of the total tree requirement when the front yard setback is located
beneath overhead power lines. Deciduous ornamental trees must be a minimum
caliper of 1.5 inches.
         D.   Evergreen or coniferous trees. Up to 25% of the required trees
may be evergreen or coniferous trees; however, they shall not be planted in a
driveway or intersection vision clearance area nor utilized for parking lot
interior trees or right-of-way plantings. Evergreen or coniferous trees must be
a minimum of 6 feet in height.
         E.   Required species mix. The city of Sioux Falls encourages a
diverse and vibrant urban forest. In order to avoid overplanting of one
specific type of species minimum requirements have been established for the
number of species based upon the total number of trees required on a site.
 
Required Number of Trees Minimum Number of Species
<4                       1
5-10                     2
11-20                    3
21-30                    4
31+                      5
 
         F.   Exception: On sites with limited capacity due to existing
conditions or redevelopment  restrictions, alternatives to placement standards
are allowed through the provisions of §
160.599 (Landscape and Buffer Yard Alternative Plans).
      (3)   Interior parking space tree requirements. 
         A.   When unenclosed interior parking spaces are provided on the site,
one tree shall be required for every 18 interior parking spaces after a minimum
of 36 interior parking spaces are provided. Every interior tree shall be
located in a planting island entirely within the hard-surfaced area utilized
for parking and maneuvering purposes. The islands shall have dimensions of at
least five feet wide and contain a minimum of 36 square feet per tree. Planting
islands shall utilize raised curbs or wheelstops necessary to prevent damage
from vehicles. Interior trees shall be allowed to be grouped into a larger
island. Each tree, if grouped, shall have a minimum of 36 square feet per tree.
         B.   Exception: On sites with limited capacity due to existing
conditions or redevelopment restrictions, alternatives to placement standards
are allowed through the provisions of §
160.599 (Landscape and Buffer Yard Alternative Plans).
      (4)   Existing tree bonus. The city encourages preservation of any
existing trees on a site which are in good condition and at least one and
three- quarter inch caliper in size. The trees may be counted as part of the
required number of trees on a site. A credit of two trees toward the number of
required trees shall be given for each existing tree on a site that is of an
acceptable species which is over ten-inch caliper in size. This credit,
however, may not be applied in reducing the number of required interior trees.
      (5)   Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs. The topping or severe
trimming, destroying, or removal of any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation is
prohibited in any area where the trees or shrubs are required to be placed
under this Code. Target pruning of trees shall not exceed 25% of the canopy
height.
      (6)   Tree and shrubbery replacement. Any required trees or shrubs that
are removed shall be replaced with similar plant material size and type in
accordance with the standards of this Code or permits issued under this Code.
Any required mature deciduous tree which has been removed shall be replaced
with a similar plant type with a two and one-half inch minimum caliper size.
Any required mature evergreen or coniferous tree shall be replaced with a
similar type tree with a minimum height of six feet. Any required mature
shrubbery which is removed shall be replaced with a similar plant type that has
a three-gallon minimum pot size.
   (c)   Screening of dumpsters and outdoor storage. All outside garbage or
recycling dumpsters or any outdoor storage which requires screening on the site
shall be screened from view of the street right-of-way by an opaque durable
fence or wall with a minimum height of 6 feet in height.
   (d)   Screening of drive-through windows.
      (1)   All drive-through windows should be oriented away from DD, AD, and
MD forms. When abutting DD, AD, or MD forms, the drive-through shall be
screened by a fence or wall.
      (2)   Parking lot screening from residential. When a fence, wall, or
hedge is required, it must be of a character necessary for adequate screening
of a parking lot from adjacent residentially used property.
   (e)   Maintenance. The use of in-ground sprinkler systems is encouraged for
blue grass, fescue, and other similar sod grass areas, and at a minimum, water
services shall be conveniently located to provide a permanent and easily
accessible means of watering. Native landscaping may be approved with an
alternative landscape plan. Property owners shall be ultimately responsible for
the proper maintenance of all required landscape materials, and any dead or
substantially damaged landscape materials shall be replaced.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.49.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 41-89,
passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 4-91, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 20-91, passed 3-4-1991; Ord.
51-94, passed 6-6-1994; Ord. 100-94, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 76-97, passed 11-3-
1997; Ord. 3-99, passed 1-4-1999; Ord. 115-99, passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 39-01,
passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 37-03, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 187-07, passed 12-3-2007;
Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-
5-2016; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 114-22,
passed 10-4-2022)
§ 160.486 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.487 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.488 BUFFER YARDS.
   (a)   (1)    A setback area, landscaping, and barrier shall be provided when
designated nonresidential and multifamily planned property and DD, AD, and MD
residentially used property are adjacent to each other or may be stipulated as
a condition for any conditional use permit.
      (2)   Exception: Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures
which do not increase floor area, impervious coverage or increase in number of
dwelling units by more than 20% of the building established on the site on the
effective date of this ordinance. Where such cumulative additions,
enlargements, or additional dwelling units are 20% or greater, these provisions
shall apply only to that portion where the new development occurs.
   (b)   A fence, wall, berm, or shrubbery four feet in height and of a
character necessary for adequate screening of a parking lot from adjacent
residentially used property shall be provided.
   (c)   The buffer yard amount is based on the compatibility of the adjacent
development and the Shape Sioux Falls compatibility chart in chapter 4 of the
plan. Buffer yards for certain nonresidential and multifamily planned
development are required when adjacent to all DD and AD forms. Buffer yards are
also required when adjacent to greenways (GW) and highways (HW).
   (d)   Buffer yards are here organized into four levels—A, B, C, and D. A
buffer yard may be required within any front, rear, or side yard.
   (e)   Also, any buffer yard includes the amount of the front, rear, or side
yard setback depending on which are adjacent to DD, AD, or MD forms. However,
the buffer yard does not include any additional setback for height over 55 feet
required with some forms. The landscaping that is required within each of the
buffer yards is based on a plant unit basis. Existing trees above ten-inch
caliper may count towards double the plant units if the existing tree can be
used as part of the buffer yard. Below is the criteria for various plants and
their plant units.
 
Type                                            Size              Plant Units
Deciduous                                       2" min. caliper   7.5
Ornamental                                      1.5" min. caliper 5.0
Conifer/Evergreen                               6' min. height    7.5
Upright Evergreen (i.e., juniper or arborvitae) 4' min. height    2.5
Shrub                                           18" to 24" spread 1.0
Perennial/Ornamental                            1 gallon          1.0
 
   (f)   Below are the criteria for each type of buffer yard.
      (1)   Level A: 10-foot total setback with either a 2-foot berm or a 4-
foot fence required within the buffer yard, but not on the property line, and
with 20 units of landscaping for each 100 lineal feet or fraction thereof.
      (2)   Level B: 15-foot total setback with a 2-foot-high berm or a 4-foot
fence required within the buffer yard and 30 units of landscaping for each 100
lineal feet or fraction thereof of buffer yard. As an option, a parking lot may
encroach into the buffer yard by 5 feet that requires instead a 4-foot fence
within the buffer yard, but not on the property line, but the same number of
landscape units.
      (3)   Level C: 30-foot total setback with a 4-foot-high berm or a 6-foot
fence required within the buffer yard and 40 units of landscaping for each 100
lineal feet or fraction thereof of buffer yard. As an option, a parking lot may
encroach into the buffer yard up to 10 feet that requires instead a 4-foot
fence and 2-foot-high berm or a 6-foot fence within the buffer yard, but not on
the property line, but the same number of landscape units.
      (4)   Level D: 45-foot total setback with a 6-foot-high berm and 50 units
of landscaping for each 100 lineal feet or fraction thereof of buffer yard. As
an option, a parking lot may encroach into the buffer yard up to 10 feet that
requires instead a 4-foot fence, wall, or hedge and 4 foot-high berm within the
buffer yard, but not on the property line, but the same number of landscape
units.
      (5)   A local or collector street ROW may count as 50% of the buffer
yard; however, there must still be enough of a buffer yard to provide the
required units of landscaping and a fence or hedge at the same height as
required by each level of buffer yard. An arterial ROW satisfies the entire
buffer yard requirement.
      (6)   Berms shall have a maximum grade of 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot
vertical and shall be sodded or planted with other acceptable living ground
cover.
      (7)   Buffer yard §
160.599 landscaping units are in addition to any other landscaping requirements
in this chapter except as allowed in §
160.485.
   (g)   If a developer or landowner has an alternative method to provide an
adequate buffer yard, application can be made for an administrative approval.
   (h)   Buffer yard by form. Buffer yards are listed in the chart below. The
developing form is responsible for constructing and maintaining the buffer yard
area. Each buffer yard is also listed within the form regulations of this
zoning chapter, §§
160.050—
160.405.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7770.png]
 
   (i)   When an application for a building permit is received and the buffer
yard is adjacent to undeveloped land that is zoned, the buffer yard shall be
based on the primary form within the adjacent zoning district.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 22-15, passed
3-3-2015; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 16-21,
passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.489 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.490 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.491 STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (a)   Intent.
      (1)   Encourage community outdoor lighting practices that will promote
personal safety and crime prevention.
      (2)   Eliminate glare onto neighboring property or street rights-of-way.
      (3)   Limit light trespass over a property line onto residential
property.
   (b)   Lighting standards required for forms.
      (1)   The following lighting standards apply to all MD, NF, BCF, UT, RE,
and WM forms.
         A.   Methods to achieve intent.
            1.   Outdoor lighting fixture height. The height of all outdoor
lighting fixtures when located within 150 feet of residentially used or zoned
property shall not exceed 28 feet above the grade immediately below the
lighting fixture. The height of all outdoor lighting fixtures located more than
150 feet off all DD and AD forms shall not exceed 38 feet above the grade
immediately below the lighting fixture.
            2.   Light trespass.
               a.   The maximum light level shall be no greater than three foot
candles measured three feet zero inches above grade at the property line for
all MD, NF, BCF, RE, WM, OPEN, and UT forms adjacent to all DD and AD forms.
               b.   Fully shielded (cutoff) light fixtures shall be required
when luminaires are greater than 2,220 lumens and located within 150 feet of
all DD and AD forms, or when luminaires are greater than 2,220 lumens and
located within 150 feet of a street right-of-way.
            3.   Canopy glare. Canopy lights shall contain fully shielded
(cutoff) light fixtures to prevent glare onto adjacent property or street
rights-of-way, except for focus lighting.
            4.   Light color. Low-pressure sodium light sources have low color
rendition and are not permitted light sources.
   (c)   Exemptions, amendments, and nonconforming lighting.
      (1)   Exemptions. The following outdoor lighting fixtures are exempt from
these lighting standards:
         A.   Outdoor recreation facilities.
         B.   Illuminated flags or statues.
         C.   Airport runways.
         D.   Telecommunication towers.
         E.   Broadcast towers.
         F.   Historic period lighting in historic districts.
      (2)   Amending approved lighting plans: lamp or fixture substitution.
Should any outdoor lighting fixture or the type of light source therein be
changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to
the zoning officer for his or her approval, together with adequate information
to assure compliance with this Code, which must be received prior to
substitution.
      (3)   Nonconforming lighting. All outdoor lighting fixtures lawfully
installed prior to September 28, 2006, are exempt from all requirements of this
Code.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.49.130) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 115-99,
passed 11-1-1999; Ord. 23-02, passed 4-1-2002; Ord. 106-06, passed 9-5-2006;
Ord. 129-07, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS
§ 160.505 BASICS OF MEASURING.
   (a)   Separation distance measurements shall have the following start and
stop locations. All distances in the Zoning Ordinance that include a standard
for separation distances of forms or uses shall be measured from the closest
point of the outside wall of the proposed use to the closest point of the
property line for the land uses requiring separation.
   (b)   Distances are measured horizontally. When determining distances for
setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a
horizontal plane from the appropriate property line, edge of building,
structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. These distances are not
measured by following the topography of the land.
   (c)   All numbers shall be rounded to the nearest whole number except for
bulk regulations which should be rounded to the nearest one-tenth of an inch.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.506 TRACTS WITH MORE THAN ONE MAIN BUILDING WITH BCF, RE, WM, UT, AND MD
FORMS.
   Where a lot or tract includes a BCF, RE, WM, UT, or MD form, more than one
main building all with the same form may be located upon the lot or tract but
only when the buildings provide reasonable access to each of the buildings and
conform to all open space and setback requirements around the lot and between
each of the buildings for the form.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 160.507 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (a)   Any detached accessory building located closer than ten feet to the
main building shall provide the same setbacks as the main building.
   (b)   Detached accessory buildings located ten feet or more from the main
building and setback 60 feet from all front property lines may be erected
within two feet or more from the side and rear property lines.
   (c)   On corner lots where the 60 feet can only be maintained from one front
property line, detached accessory buildings may be located two feet or more
from a side property line and five feet or more from a rear property line. For
purposes of determining the placement of detached accessory buildings on corner
lots, the side property line shall be the property line running perpendicular
to the street from which the 60 feet requirement is obtained. Detached
accessory buildings less than 15 feet from the rear property line shall provide
a front yard as exists for the lot adjacent thereto, provided, however, the
depth of the detached accessory building need not be reduced to less than 22
feet.
   (d)   In all cases, detached accessory buildings shall not occupy more than
30% of the rear yard.
   (e)   A garage which is entered directly from an alley shall not be closer
than ten feet to the alley.
   (f)   A residential accessory building may not be located in a buffer yard.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 44-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 49-09, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.508 FRONT YARD SETBACK AVERAGING.
   In DD1, DD2, DD3, DD4, and all AD forms, front yard setbacks may be averaged
when adjacent existing structures have a front yard setback that is the same or
less than the minimum required setback. In these situations, the required
setback may be the average of the existing lot setbacks that are on both sides
of the site. (See figure below.) The following rules apply in calculating the
average:
   (a)   The front yard setbacks used for the calculations must be for the same
type of structure that is being averaged.
   (b)   Only the front yard setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the
site and are on the same side of the street may be used. Front yard setbacks
across the street or along a different street may not be used.
   (c)   When one abutting lot is vacant or if the lot is a corner lot, then
the average is of the front yard setback of the nonvacant lot and the minimum
required front yard setback of the forms within the designated zoning district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6698.jpg]
 
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.509 ADJUSTMENT TO SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   Any existing buildings with side yard setbacks less than required by this
subchapter may have additions erected in line with the existing building and
provided further that the addition will be erected no closer to the lot line
than the existing building.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.510 ADJUSTMENT OF YARDS WHEN LOCATED ON AN ALLEY.
   Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, half of the alley width may be
considered as a portion of the required yard.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.511 PROJECTIONS FROM BUILDINGS.
   Every part of any required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed
except:
   (a)   Eaves may project into a front or rear yard 36 inches, exclusive of
gutters.
   (b)   Eaves may project into a side yard 24 inches, or two-fifths of the
required side yard, whichever projection is greater, exclusive of gutters.
   (c)   Ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical solar
screen, and ornamental features which may project 12 inches.
   (d)   Air conditioners may project into a required side or rear yard
setback.
   (e)   Solar collectors which are a part of the main building may extend into
a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet.
   (f)   As otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.090) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 89-04,
passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.512 CHIMNEY PROJECTION INTO YARDS.
   Chimneys, flues, and fireplaces may project into any required yard for a
distance of not more than 2 feet where the same or are so placed as not to
obstruct light and ventilation.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.100) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection and prevention, see
ch. 91
§ 160.513 PORCHES AND TERRACES IN FRONT YARDS.
   An open, unenclosed deck may project into a required front yard for a
distance not exceeding 10 feet unless the front yard setback is 10 feet.
Balconies, pergolas, and paved terraces may project into a required front yard
for a distance not exceeding 6 feet. An enclosed vestibule containing not more
than 40 square feet may project into a required front yard for a distance not
to exceed 4 feet.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.110) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.514 PROJECTION OF TERRACES, UNCOVERED PORCHES, PLATFORMS, DECKS AND
ORNAMENTAL FEATURES.
   Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, pergolas, decks, and ornamental
features which do not extend above the level of ground (first) floor may
project into a required yard, provided these projections be distances at least
2 feet from the adjacent side or rear lot line.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.120) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 39-96,
passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 135-96, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013;
Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.515 FRONT YARD; DRIVEWAYS.
   Required driveways may be permitted to pass through a front yard at a
perpendicular angle to the street to reach parking, loading and stacking spaces
in the side or rear yards.
   (a)   Where residential driveway access is onto a principal arterial or
minor arterial street, as designated on the city's functional classification
street map, a turnaround with a maximum area of 240 square feet for a one-stall
garage; 205 square feet for a two-stall garage; and 168 square feet for a
three-stall garage may be located adjacent to the driveway. However, it shall
not be used as a parking space.
   (b)   Where residential driveway access is onto a public or private street,
a circular driveway may be permitted subject to:
      (1)   The lot's minimum street frontage is 74 feet.
      (2)   One of the entrances is utilized as a common driveway to the
garage, except where the garage access is from another street.
      (3)   The inside curve radius of the driveway meets the required front
yard setback.
      (4)   The maximum driveway width is 15 feet.
      (5)   The minimum driveway width is 12 feet.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.140) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 60-94,
passed 7-5-1994; Ord. 82-94, passed 9-6-1994; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.516 FUTURE STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Where an official line has been established for the future widening or
opening of the street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, then no
building shall be erected with a street wall nearer the street right-of-way
than the official line.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.160) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.517 INTERSECTION VISION CLEARANCE AREA.
   (a)   No monument style sign or other sign with its face less than eight
feet above grade in all DD forms and 12 feet above grade in all other forms or
any fence, wall, shrub, evergreen or coniferous tree, or other obstruction to
vision exceeding three feet in height above the established street grade shall
be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is
included between the lines of the intersection streets and a straight line
connecting them at points 30 feet distant from the intersection of the right-
of-way lines.
   (b)   Exception: In the DTPUD, POPUD, or S-2 zoning districts, where the
traffic engineer deems that the potential for a traffic hazard is minimal, the
requirement for the intersection vision clearance area may be waived.
   (c)   This section does not authorize or prohibit parking strip plantings or
landscaping or require the City Engineer to issue any parking strip permits
inconsistent with §
96.010.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.170) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 100-94,
passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 45-00, passed 5-1-2000; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013;
Ord. 22-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 61-16, passed 6-
7-2016; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 160.518 DRIVEWAY VISION CLEARANCE AREA.
   (a)   No monument style sign or other sign with its face less eight feet
above grade in all DD forms and than ten feet above grade for all other forms
or any fence, wall, shrub, evergreen or coniferous tree or other obstruction to
vision exceeding three feet in height above the established street grade shall
be erected, planted or maintained within the area from the curb line to ten
feet behind the curb line.
   (b)   Exception: In the DTPUD zoning district, where the traffic engineer
deems that the potential for a traffic hazard is minimal, the requirement for
the intersection vision clearance area may be waived.
   (c)   This section does not authorize or prohibit any parking strip
plantings or landscaping or require the City Engineer to issue any parking
strip permits inconsistent with §
96.010.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.51.171) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 29-87,
passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 100-94, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 45-00, passed 5-1-2000;
Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord. 61-16, passed 6-
7-2016; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022)
PARKING, LOADING, AND STACKING REGULATIONS
§ 160.550 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. Parking should be convenient but not dominate the
cityscape. To the greatest degree possible, parking facilities should be part
of the designed environment, function safely and smoothly for uses, and
minimize negative impacts and provide for the best stormwater management
practices. Due to the unique characteristics of residential districts, a
separate section for general conditions for residential parking is found in §
160.553 of this chapter.
   (b)   Permits required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or add parking
spaces or parking lots, unless a permit is obtained by the department of
planning and building services in accordance with §
160.705.
      (2)   All work conducted on nonstandard parking lots constructed prior to
2014 requires a permit.
   (c)   Permits not required. Seal coating, restriping, overlay, and other
minor surface work does not require a permit unless the parking lot is
nonstandard.
   (d)   Location. Parking spaces shall be located according to the following
standards. All required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the
use for which they are required, except as otherwise provided in the list
below:
      (1)   Required off-street parking spaces may be located within 250 feet
of the lot for which it is required if an accessory permitted special use
permit has been obtained in conformance with the standards set in all forms
except DD1, DD2, DD3, DD4, DD5, and DD6 forms.
      (2)   Required off-street parking spaces may be located further than 300
feet of the lot for which it is required in any PUD based upon an approved
initial development plan.
      (3)   No parking spaces are allowed to be located in the required front
yard setback except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (4)   No parking spaces are allowed to be located in any required side
yard except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (5)   Parking spaces may be located in any required rear yard except as
otherwise provided by this chapter.
   (e)   Access to parking spaces. Each parking space shall be directly
accessible via a driveway providing necessary vehicular maneuvering to provide
ingress or egress to and from the parking space. Driveways are not considered
parking spaces.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 53-87,
passed 7-7-1987; Ord. 72-88, passed 8-1-1988; Ord. 46-90, passed 5-21-1990;
Ord. 02-08, passed 1-7-2008; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-
2-2018; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Traffic code, see title VII
§ 160.551 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Rules for computing required parking spaces. Established/existing
forms, buildings, or uses which require a higher number of spaces due to the
2013 Shape Sioux Falls zoning ordinance shall be considered nonstandard uses
(see §
160.468).
      (1)   A change in form shall require the minimum number of parking spaces
of the form as described in this chapter.
      (2)   A change in use within the same established form shall require an
increase in required parking if the use is identified in Table 1 below.
      (3)   Unless otherwise indicated, parking calculations are based upon
gross floor areas. Gross floor area does not include porches, garages, or
enclosed areas devoted to off-street parking or loading and space in a basement
when the space is used for storage or incidental uses. Required parking is
considered as a minimum number of parking spaces.
      (4)   The total number of parking spaces shall be provided as set forth
in the parking calculation tables. When the use is not identified in Table 1,
the minimum parking is calculated based on the form found in Table 2.
      (5)   Within the MU1, MU2, and MU3 Midtown Mixed-Use zoning forms, shared
parking can be used to reduce the overall number of required parking spaces.
The shared parking reduction is based on a rotating use utilization percentage
applied to individual uses within the same building. The shared parking
reduction can be found in Table 3.
      (6)   Table 1: Parking calculations table (uses).
Use Calculation
Use                                    Calculation
                                       One parking space for every ten (10)
Assisted living center facility,       beds; where facilities are licensed by
community residential home, congregate the state of South Dakota, parking is
housing, and nursing facilities.       based on the number of beds on the face
                                       of the license.
Auditoriums, theaters, and public      One parking space for every four seats.
assembly.
                                       1/2 space per guest room in addition to
Bed and breakfast.                     the requirements of the single-family
                                       home.
Bowling alley.                         Three spaces per alley.
Campgrounds, community gardens.        No parking is required.
Car wash.                              One parking space for each 1,500 square
                                       feet.
                                       Ten parking spaces plus one additional
Cultural facilities.                   space for each additional 300 square
                                       feet in excess of 2,000 square feet.
                                       Five parking spaces plus one parking
Day care centers.                      space for every 10 persons for which the
                                       facility is licensed.
Elderly or handicapped.                0.75 spaces for each dwelling unit.
Elementary schools.                    Ten parking spaces plus one parking
                                       space for each teacher and staff member.
High school, college, or university.   One space for every 475 square feet on
                                       the first floor.
                                       One space for each sleeping room or
Hotel or motel.                        suite and one space for each 1,500 feet
                                       of common space, areas, meeting rooms,
                                       or other accessory uses.
Indoor private recreation facilities.  One parking space for each 900 square
                                       feet.
Licensed manufactured home park.       In addition to the minimum parking of
                                       the form, one space for every 40 homes.
                                       Buildings in which 20% or more of the
                                       gross floor area is occupied by members
Medical office buildings.              of the healing profession.
                                       One parking space for each 200 square
                                       feet used for medical purposes.
                                       One space for every 300 square feet of
Middle school.                         all gymnasium, cafeteria, or general
                                       assembly areas.
                                       One space for every 300 square feet
Motor vehicle sales, display, and      except as provided below:
rental.                                Indoor display: One parking space for
                                       each 600 square feet.
Places of worship, funeral             One parking space for each four persons
establishment, mortuary.               in the main auditorium or sanctuary.
Private recreation facilities.         One parking space for each 900 square
                                       feet.
On-sale alcoholic beverage             One parking space for each 75 square
establishment and full-service         feet or one parking space for each three
restaurant.                            seats, whichever is greater.
                                       One parking space for each 400 square
Outdoor private recreation facilities. feet of outdoor activity areas
                                       (volleyball courts, basketball courts,
                                       etc.).
Retail and services - furniture,       One parking space for each 600 square
appliance, or home improvement         feet.
business.
Retail and services with more than one One parking space for each 200 square
tenant.                                feet.
Self-storage facility including        No parking required, except two parking
residential compatible self-storage.   spaces are required where there is an
                                       office located on site.
 
      (7)   Table 2: Parking calculations table, forms.
Form Calculation
Form                                 Calculation
                                     Minimum of one parking space per dwelling
DD1, DD2*, DD3*, DD4, DD5, DD6, DD7, unit. Two spaces for each dwelling unit
AD1*, AD2*                           with three or more bedrooms unless the
                                     home was constructed before 1983.
                                     One (1) space for each dwelling unit of
                                     one bedroom or studio.
AD3, AD4, MD1, MD2, MD3              1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit of two
                                     bedrooms.
                                     Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit of
                                     three bedrooms or more.
NF1                                  Five (5) spaces plus one space for every
                                     600 square feet.
NF2                                  Five (5) parking spaces.
BCF1                                 One space for every 300 square feet .
BCF2                                 One space for each bedroom or one space
                                     for every 10 beds.
BCF3                                 One space for every 500 square feet.
BCF4                                 One space for every 500 square feet.
RE1                                  One parking space for every 200 square
                                     feet.
RE2, RE3, RE4                        One space for every 300 square feet.
RE5                                  One parking space for every 400 square
                                     feet.
                                     Based upon a PUD Initial Development Plan
RE6                                  and Standards. Public parking areas may be
                                     counted toward standards.
                                     (1) A minimum of two spaces shall be
                                     provided.
                                     (2) For structures 50,000 square feet or
                                     less, one space for every 1,500 square
WM1, WM2                             feet.
                                     (3) For structures greater than 50,000
                                     square feet, one space for every 1,500
                                     square feet up to 50,000 square feet and
                                     then one space for every 4,000 square feet
                                     above 50,000 square feet.
Open1, Open2, Open3                  Five spaces plus one space for every 300
                                     square feet.
UT1, UT2                             One space for every 1,500 square feet of
                                     utility area.
 
      (8)   Table 3: Mixed-Use Parking Table (MU1, MU2, and MU3 Forms).
 
                                           Shared Parking Utilization Ratio
Land Use             Calculation           8:00 a.m. to 5:00 5:00 p.m. to 8:00
                                           p.m.              a.m.
General retail and   One space for every   90%               30%
services             300 square feet.
Office               One space for every   90%               10%
                     300 square feet.
On-sale alcohol or   One space for every
full-service         75 square feet or one 60%               90%
restaurant           for every three
                     seats.
Multi-Family Housing 1.5 spaces for every  30%               90%
                     dwelling unit.
 
*If the home was built before 1983, the existing driveway may be widened up to
20 feet to accommodate vehicular parking as long as it is constructed from and
maintains a 3 feet distance from the property line (or adjacent property). This
does not impact properties that already have adequate space to accommodate a
legal parking pad.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 72-88,
passed 8-1-1988; Ord. 70-92, passed 8-3-1992; Ord. 72-94, passed 8-1-1994; Ord.
78-01, passed 9-4-2001; Ord. 121-05, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 128-05, passed 12-
19-2005; Ord. 130-07, passed 8-6-2007; Ord. 8-10, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 91-12,
passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 48-16, passed 5-3-2016;
Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 114-22, passed
10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023; Ord. 106-23, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 160.552 REDUCTIONS.
   Purpose and intent. With certain forms and uses, their intended purpose is
to reduce the need for the single occupancy vehicle trips, utilize existing on-
street parking opportunities, as well as to increase the viability of accessing
their form by traveling by an alternative mode of transportation; either would
therefore allow for a reduction in the need to require a minimum amount of off-
street parking.
   (a)   Mixed-use floor area reduction for residence above the first floor.
When a use is categorized as residence above the first floor and when a
structure provides for separate and distinct floor areas for various business
operations, parking may be reduced by providing for calculations by separate
floor area rather than gross floor area. The floor area reduction may not
reduce off-street parking provided by more than 35%.
   (b)   Transit reduction. The public transit system, if properly utilized,
will decrease the need for off- street parking. A long-run commitment to
encourage employees or residents to ride the transit system, from an
established fixed route, can be accompanied by a reduction in the number of
off-street parking spaces required. A transit fixed route should be located
within a reasonable distance of the use it is intended to serve. Natural or
human-made barriers and travel safety between sites should be considered. The
off- street parking requirement may be reduced up to 20% of the required off-
street parking requirement according to the following procedure:
      (1)    The applicant may submit to the city, upon request for a zoning
permit, an agreement with the city transit system to purchase one or more bus
passes to provide bus transportation for one or more employees or residents.
The agreement must be a written instrument and must be in a form acceptable to
the director of planning and building services. The instrument must contain the
number of passes to be purchased, a statement assuring purchase, and subsequent
use of these passes for a period specified by the Director of Planning and
Developments Services or designee, however, not less than one year. At such
time as the agreement expires, the parking reduction also expires. The bus pass
shall be sufficient to provide bus trips on a regularly scheduled fixed route.
Monthly passes shall be purchased for the period specified in the agreement
prior to the issuance of the zoning permit, and no refund shall be given for
the pass for any reason.
      (2)   The off-street parking requirement may be reduced by one parking
space for each employee or resident for which a bus pass has been purchased.
The maximum off-street parking reduction shall equal 20% of the calculated
total off-street parking requirement.
   (c)   Bicycle parking reduction.
      (1)   Any nonresidential building project in any zoning district except
the MMU1, MMU2, MMU3, and DT-PUD zoning district which is required to have 20
or more off-street parking spaces may reduce the number of required automobile
parking spaces up to 5% according to the following procedure:
         A.   Two bicycle parking spaces may be provided in lieu of each
automobile parking space; and
         B.   Each parking space shall include a metal anchor which will secure
the frame and both wheels in conjunction with a user-supplied lock.
      (2)   Bicycle parking spaces shall be as close to the main building
entrance as the most convenient nonhandicapped auto space, without interfering
with pedestrian movement. Bicycle spaces shall be located and designed to
prevent damage to bicycles from motor vehicles.
   (d)   Parking reduction alternative plans. In the case that an applicant can
show that the required parking amounts are in excess of what is needed for the
proposed use, the applicant may submit a request with justification based on §
160.600.
   (e)   Change in use reduction. When an existing structure changes use
requiring only interior remodeling or minor construction and the site has an
accessory parking lot of at least 50 off-street parking spaces, additional
parking will not be required.
   (f)   For MD forms, off-site parking may be located within 250 feet of the
lot for which it is intended to serve if a conditional use permit has been
obtained in conformance with the standards set forth in §
160.616 (accessory parking). Said parking must be in addition to the required
onsite parking. Exception: MD1 parking for multiple dwellings with multiple
buildings on a lot abutting a private street is allowed.
   (g)   For the MMU1, MMU2, and MMU3 Zoning Districts, projects that are
required to have 50 or more off-street parking spaces may reduce the required
automobile parking spaces according to the following procedure:
      (1)   Up to 20% reduction when providing indoor or outdoor bicycle
storage spaces according to the following procedure:
         A.   Two bicycle spaces may be provided in lieu of each automobile
parking spaces; and
         B.   Each parking space shall include a metal anchor which will secure
the frame and both wheels in conjunction with a user-supplied lock.
         C.   Bicycle parking spaces shall be as close to the main building
entrance as the most convenient nonhandicapped auto space, without interfering
with pedestrian movement. Bicycle spaces shall be located and designed to
prevent damage to bicycles from motor vehicles.
      (2)   Up to a 5% reduction when providing a designated rideshare drop-
off/pick up location according the following procedure:
         A.   The drop-off/pick up space needs to be a minimum size of 9' x 18'
and located on private property.
      (3)   Transit reduction. The public transit system, if properly utilized,
will decrease the need for off-street parking. A long-run commitment to
encourage employees or residents to ride the transit system, from an
established fixed route, can be accompanied by a reduction in the number of
off-street parking spaces required. A transit fixed route should be located
within a reasonable distance of the use it is intended to serve. Natural or
human-made barriers and travel safety between sites should be considered. The
off-street parking requirement may be reduced up to 5% of the required off-
street parking requirement according to the following procedure:
         A.   The applicant may submit to the city, upon request for a zoning
permit, an agreement with the city transit system to purchase one or more bus
passes to provide bus transportation for one or more employees or residents.
The agreement must be a written instrument and must be in a form acceptable to
the Director of Planning and Building Services. The instrument must contain the
number of passes to be purchased, a statement assuring purchase, and subsequent
use of these passes for a period specified by the Director of Planning and
Developments Services or designee; however, not less than one year. At such
time as the agreement expires, the parking reduction also expires. The bus pass
shall be sufficient to provide bus trips on a regularly scheduled fixed route.
Monthly passes shall be purchased for the period specified in the agreement
prior to the issuance of the zoning permit, and no refund shall be given for
the pass for any reason.
         B.   The off-street parking requirement may be reduced by one parking
space for each employee or resident for which a bus pass has been purchased.
The maximum off-street parking reduction shall equal 20% of the calculated
total off-street parking requirement.
      (4)   On-Street Parking Reduction. To encourage more dense, mixed-use
projects along some of our corridors within the central portion of Sioux Falls,
the utilization of on-street parking is encouraged to reduce the overall
parking required. Any project that requires more than 50 parking spaces may
utilize on-street parking for a one-for-one parking reduction according to the
following procedure:
         A.   The on-street parking spaces need to meet the design and size as
indicated in the commercial parking requirements and Engineering Design
Standards.
         B.   The on-street parking spaces need to be located on either the
primary or secondary frontage of the mixed-use development.
         C.   The on-street parking spaces located on any public right-of-way
needs to be approved by resolution by the City Council.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 108-08,
passed 9-2-2008; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016; Ord.
34-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.553 RESIDENTIAL PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to parking outside or inside an
enclosed structure for all DD, AD, and MD forms.
   (a)   Commercial and service vehicle parking.
      (1)   Commercial vehicles. Except in conjunction with a legal
nonconforming business, it is unlawful for any person to park, store, leave or
permit the parking, storing or leaving of any commercial vehicle in the above-
stated zoning districts, unless the vehicle is temporarily parked in connection
with the performance of a service at that same location, or unless the vehicle
is a tow truck owned or operated by a tow company under contract with the city
and/or the county that is assigned as the duty tow. The transferring of refuse
from a smaller satellite vehicle to a larger packer garbage truck is
prohibited.
      (2)   Service vehicles. It is lawful for the vehicle to be temporarily
parked in connection with the performance of a service at that same location or
operated by a resident of the dwelling.
   (b)   Parking shall be accessory to the permitted primary use of the
property, and vehicles must be owned by the resident of the property on which
the vehicles are parked, except as otherwise provided. Exception: It is
permissible for visitors to park at a residence.
   (c)   Parking is prohibited in the required front yard setback, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. Exceptions:
      (1)   A resident may park an unlimited number of licensed and operable
automobiles or one recreational motor vehicle temporarily for a period of less
than 48 hours for customary cleaning and loading, owned by the resident on an
existing concrete driveway or its equivalent if the required on-site parking is
provided.
      (2)   A resident may park one licensed and operable personal passenger
motor vehicle owned by the resident outside a structure in the front yard on a
concrete driveway or its equivalent under the following conditions:
         A.   Space is unavailable to provide the required number of off-street
parking spaces and there is not reasonable access to the rear yard or other
allowable parking areas. A corner lot is always deemed to have reasonable
access, and fences, trees, or bushes are not deemed to prevent reasonable
access.
         B.   The availability of space or reasonable access to an existing or
an allowable parking area is not eliminated with a proposed addition, change in
use/occupancy or accessory structure.
         C.   The vehicle shall be parked a minimum of three feet from all
property lines.
      (3)   For MD forms, parking for multiple dwellings with multiple
buildings on a lot abutting a private street (place) is allowed.
   (d)   Parking is prohibited in the required side yard setback, except where
located in a rear yard.
   (e)   The parking of personal passenger motor vehicles, as well as trailers
and recreational motor vehicles, is permitted anywhere in the rear yard area a
minimum of two feet from all property lines; however, recreational motor
vehicles shall not be occupied nor be provided with separate utility hookups.
All unlicensed motor vehicles utilized for racing events shall be parked inside
a completely enclosed garage.
   (f)   All parking spaces and access drives thereto shall be hard-surfaced
with asphalt, concrete or equivalent.
   (g)   For MD forms, offsite parking may be located within 250 feet of the
lot for which it is intended to serve if a special use permit has been obtained
in conformance with the standards set forth in §
160.173, §
160.183, and §
160.193. Said parking must be in addition to the required onsite parking.
Exception: MD1 parking for multiple dwellings with multiple buildings on a lot
abutting a private street is allowed.
   (h)   Based upon the quantity required; for all DD and AD forms, the
requirement that the location of each parking space needs to be indicated by
painting upon the surface is eliminated.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 72-88,
passed 8-1-1988; Ord. 46-90, passed 5-21-1990; Ord. 39-96, passed 4-1-1996;
Ord. 70-99, passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 24-02, passed 4-1-2002; Ord. 59-03, passed 7-
7-2003; Ord. 55-04, passed 5-3-2004; Ord. 02-08, passed 1-7-2008; Ord. 9-11,
passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 10-11, passed 3-7-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord.
34-18, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 160.554 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   There shall be provided at the time any building is erected or
structurally altered, off-street loading spaces in accordance with the
following requirements:
 
WM Forms
5,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area   One 14'×35' loading space
20,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area Two 14'× 35' loading spaces
Add one additional space for each 75,000 square feet of gross floor area above
100,000 square feet.
 
   (b)   Loading spaces are to be provided on each lot in compliance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The loading space shall be completely contained on the lot it is
intended to serve.
      (2)   The loading space shall be arranged on the lot in a way as to allow
normal movement of traffic in and around the loading area.
      (3)   No loading space shall be permitted to extend over any pedestrian
sidewalk or bicycle path.
      (4)   Maneuvering as well as ingress and egress to loading space shall be
provided on site. Use of right-of-way for loading shall be only allowed with
the approval of the city traffic engineer.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 12-95,
passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.555 STACKING AND QUEUING.
   (a)   Uses which have drive-up service windows or devices shall provide on-
site queuing spaces to stack vehicles waiting to reach the drive-up service
window or device as follows:
      (1)   Three queuing spaces for each service window or device including
menu board with remote audio or video capability.
      (2)   Each space shall measure 9 feet wide x 20 feet long. The queuing of
vehicles may not interfere with required off-street parking.
      (3)   Access driveways to public right-of-way may not be used for queuing
spaces.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.556 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   The director of planning and building services may, through written waiver,
waive minimum improvements and maintenance standards if he or she finds that
due to the nature of the work the minimum improvement and maintenance standards
are not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter.
   (a)   Parking space, loading and maneuvering, and drive areas thereto shall
be hard surfaced with concrete or asphalt and striped. Exception(s):
      (1)   Truck terminals, heavy equipment display, service and rental,
concrete and paving plants, construction yards and similar heavy equipment
establishments need not hard-surface areas maintained as maneuvering or
parking/storage areas for heavy equipment when the areas are not adjacent to a
front yard setback or otherwise screened for in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Campgrounds need not hard-surface areas for parking, loading and
maneuvering, or drive areas.
      (3)   Motor vehicle sales, display, and rental parking areas with more
than 250 vehicles do not need to be striped. Motor vehicle storage areas with
more than 250 vehicles do not need to be striped.
   (b)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm water from
the lot and the city engineer shall ensure that the water shall not flow onto
adjoining property or adjacent sidewalks in a quantity or manner that would be
detrimental thereto, or inconvenient to persons using the sidewalk.
   (c)   A structurally sound abutment, including, but not limited to, bumper
blocks, continuous curb, or a retaining wall, shall be installed around each
side of the parking lot. An adequate retaining wall shall be required wherever
necessary to prevent the washing of soil to and from adjoining property.
   (d)   Cross-easements allowing abutting sites to share parking are strongly
recommended.
   (e)   The locations and widths of entrances and exits to and from any
parking lot or parking ramp shall be approved by the traffic engineer based
upon Engineering Design Standards.
   (f)   The location of each required parking space and the location and
direction of movement along the driveways providing access thereto shall be
indicated by painting upon the surface, by raised directional signs, or by
markers or other similar measures placed in the surfacing of the lot.
   (g)   Any parking lot or ramp shall be maintained in an orderly manner,
keeping it as free as possible from snow and ice. All signs, markers or
painting, or any other methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement
and location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible
condition. Likewise, any walls, trees and shrubbery, as well as surfacing of
the parking lot or ramp, shall be maintained in a good condition throughout its
use for parking purposes.
   (h)   The estimated amount of parking spaces for motor vehicle sales,
display and rental, and motor vehicle storage is calculated by taking the total
area of hard surface dedicated for motor vehicle sales/motor vehicle storage as
indicated on the site plan, divided by 300 square feet (per parking space).
   (i)   Parking lots or hard-surfaced areas providing over 200 required spaces
or more than 32,300 square feet of hard-surfaced area shall be divided into
smaller parking fields not exceeding 100 spaces or 16,150 square feet of area
to reduce the visual impact of large parking expanses. Divisions should be made
with landscape strips, peninsulas, or grade changes. (See illustration below
for example.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6700.jpg]
 
   (j)   NF, BCF, and RE parking lots shall be designed to separate pedestrians
from vehicles to the maximum degree possible and to provide a direct and
clearly defined pedestrian pathway from adjacent public sidewalk to building
entrance with a private dedicated sidewalk and/or dedicated private pedestrian
crosswalk through parking areas. WM forms are encouraged to provide pedestrian
connections to public sidewalks if a sidewalk is required.
   (k)   Sidewalks and walkways in commercial developments shall link to the
city’s sidewalk and trail system where available.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.55.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 5-88, passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 72-88, passed 8-1-1988;
Ord. 41-89, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 8-10, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-
19-2013; Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018)
ORIGINAL ART MURALS
§ 160.560 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   These regulations relating to original art murals in the City of Sioux
Falls further the following purposes:
      (1)   Encouraging artistic expression and the creation of more murals;
      (2)   Protect adjacent property owners;
      (3)   Maintain existing murals that are a valued part of the history of
the City of Sioux Falls;
      (4)   Keep a directory of murals including pictures and a historical
account; and
      (5)   Contribute to the cultural identity of a neighborhood and foster a
sense of pride.
   (b)   The city wishes to encourage the installation of murals and at the
same time prevent the proliferation of off-premise signs. This mural subchapter
is intended to work in tandem with and help preserve the intent of the off-
premise sign code set forth in §§
160.587 et seq. of this Code. Adequacy of message opportunity will be available
to sign users without dominating the visual appearance of the area.
   (c)   These mural regulations also promote public safety and welfare by
regulating such displays in keeping with the following objectives:
      (1)   That the design, construction, installation, repair, and
maintenance of such displays will not interfere with traffic safety or
otherwise endanger public safety.
      (2)   That the regulations will provide reasonable protection to the
visual environment by controlling the minimum improvement and maintenance of
the displays.
      (3)   That the public will enjoy the aesthetic benefits of being able to
view such displays that are reasonably and appropriately regulated without
having to endure visual blight and traffic safety impacts that would be caused
by such displays that are not reasonably and appropriately regulated.
      (4)   That consideration will be given to equalizing the opportunity for
messages and artistic expression to be displayed.
      (5)   That the regulations will conform to judicial decisions, thereby
limiting further costly litigation and facilitating enforcement of these
regulations.
      (6)   To provide registration requirements for murals as defined by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 38-21, passed 4-6-2021)
§ 160.561 ORIGINAL ART MURAL MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   An original art mural that meets all of the following requirements will be
allowed upon satisfaction of the applicable registration procedures:
   (a)   To preserve public order and protect human dignity, a mural artwork
may not include displays that incite violence or prejudicial actions against
groups or individuals on the basis of their membership in the group, or which
disparage or intimidate a group of individuals on the basis of their membership
in the group.
   (b)   No part of a mural shall exceed the height of the structure to which
it is tiled, painted, or affixed.
   (c)   No part of a mural shall extend from the plane of the wall upon which
it is tiled, painted, or affixed.
   (d)   No mural, except for murals consisting completely of paint, shall be
placed over the exterior surface of any building opening including, but not
limited to, windows, doors, and vents.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a mural consisting of paint or any other
material permitted under this section may be placed on roll-down security doors
on a commercial or industrial building.
   (e)   Surfaces should be prepared to allow the mural to withstand the
outdoor climate of Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Mural materials may not create
environmental pollution due to flaking or chipping over time. Surface sealant
is recommended.
   (f)   The property owner is responsible for the mural maintenance and shall
coordinate repairs to the mural as necessary including, but not limited to,
removal of graffiti per §
132.003 of this Code.
(Ord. 38-21, passed 4-6-2021)
§ 160.562 ORIGINAL ART MURAL REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Administrative rules. The director, pursuant to §
160.690, is authorized and directed to administer the registration of original
art murals and may adopt mural administrative rules to implement this section.
The administrative rules shall include an application to identify and describe
proposed original art mural and its location on the structure. The applicant
for the original art mural registration shall be the property owner.
   (b)   Neighbor involvement. The administrative rules to be adopted by the
director may include a neighbor involvement rule. Specifically, the rules shall
include a requirement that an applicant for original art mural approval send
notice of the application to the adjacent property owners including those
across the street, prior to the registration of the original art mural. No
original art mural may be installed until the application has been approved by
the director. This is a procedural requirement only and the director shall at
all times retain sole authority to approve or deny an application for an
original art mural based on the criteria in §
160.561 and §
160.562 of this subchapter and any administrative rules promulgated by the
director. Further, in no event will a registration of an original art mural be
granted or denied based upon the content of the mural.
   (c)   Change of ownership. Upon a change of ownership of the property to
which an original art mural is affixed, a new owner may, at the owner's
election and without the need for permission from the City of Sioux Falls,
deregister the mural with the department.
   (d)   Vintage original art murals. Any vintage original art mural shall have
legal nonconforming status and, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary,
not require registration under this section. But a vintage original art mural
which has not gained legal nonconforming status through law other than this
section cannot qualify for legal nonconforming status under this section if it
consists or contains any of the following: electrical, mechanical, or kinetic
components, or changing images (moving structural elements, flashing or
sequential lights, lighting elements, or other automated methods that result in
movement, the appearance of movement, or change of mural image or message, not
including static illumination turned off and back on not more than once every
24 hours).
   (e)   Severability. If any part, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of
§§
160.560-
160.562 is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a valid court judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the constitutionality or
lawfulness of the remainder of the Sioux Falls Code of Ordinances, or any other
city regulation regulating signage, or original art murals.
(Ord. 38-21, passed 4-6-2021)
ON-PREMISES SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 160.570 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   Signs use private land and the sight lines created by public rights-
of-way to inform and persuade the general public by a message. The purpose of
this subchapter is to prevent the uncontrolled use of signs.
   (b)   These regulations provide standards for the erection and maintenance
of on-premises signs. The principal feature of this section is the restriction
on the total sign area permissible per site. All signs shall be erected and
maintained in accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   Substitution of noncommercial message.
         A.   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this sign
ordinance may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or
noncommercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any
additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent
any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech or
favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial
message. This provision prevails over any more specific provisions to the
contrary.
         B.   All noncommercial messages are considered on-premises signs and
are entitled to the privileges that on-premise signs receive under this Code.
            1.   Noncommercial message: Messages not classified as commercial
messages, which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political,
religious, social, ideological, public service, and informational topics.
            2.   Commercial message: Speech or graphics advertising a business,
provision, commodity, service, or entertainment.
      (2)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this sign ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this sign
ordinance. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the sign
ordinance in each section, subsection, sentence, or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.
   (c)   The general objectives of these standards are to promote safety,
welfare, communication, and quality and to achieve the following:
      (1)   Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing
that signs:
         A.   Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay,
or abandonment.
         B.   Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting
motorists; or by impairing the driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles,
or other vehicles; or to see and interpret any official traffic sign, signal,
or device.
         C.   Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-
way.
         D.   Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and
contiguous property by their brightness, size, height, or movement.
      (2)   Communications efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of
information, consistently and predictably, by providing that:
         A.   Businesses and services may identify themselves.
         B.   Customers and other persons may locate a business or service.
         C.   No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight
line from public rights-of-way for communication purposes.
         D.    Signs are sized based upon the adjacent streets’ class and
speed; roadways with higher speeds need to provide information to people in a
shorter amount of time, generally warranting more sign allowance.
   (d)   Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare and
to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing
that:
      (1)   Similar development "forms" retain the same sign standards.
      (2)   Sign standards represent how the land is developed, consisting of
structure form, corridor form, and zoning districts.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
§ 160.571 SIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   The sign standards shall apply to every zoning district for the city
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Sign terminology shall be defined within
§
160.005.
   (b)   Measurement standards.
      (1)   Sign height shall be measured from the grade (as defined)
immediately below the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6848.jpg]
 
      (2)   Sign area shall be measured by the area of the largest single face
of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape, including any
frame which forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary
supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of
more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6850.jpg]
 
   (c)   Sign faces. Sign faces that are erected back to back and do not exceed
a forty-five-degree (45°) angle are considered one sign. Sign faces which
exceed a forty-five-degree (45°) angle are considered two signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7a864b6982698414b4d28d7595598b9a23d208fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6852.jpg]
 
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 160.572 ALLOWED AND UNAUTHORIZED SIGN TYPES IN EACH DISTRICT.
   (a)   Only signs described as allowed herein shall be issued a permit in the
following districts [§
155.030 Permits required]. Except as otherwise provided within the title, it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, or maintain any
sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the department of planning and
building services.
   (b)   The sign area and height set forth shall apply to all signs on the
premises except as provided in §
160.576 [Exemptions]. The signs shall also comply with the requirements of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs] and §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]. Prohibited
signs as described herein, §
160.578 [Prohibited signs], will not be granted sign permits.
      (1)   Open Space, UT [1-2], BCF [4], WM [3] Forms.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   Building sign area of one square foot for each two lineal feet
of building frontage.
            2.   Freestanding signs in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 40 square feet and
eight feet in height per street frontage for lots with street frontage of 100
feet or less and 60 square feet and eight feet in height per street frontage
for lots with street frontage exceeding 101 feet.
               b.   One sign shall be allowed per street frontage.
                  i.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or
side yard.
                  ii.    Freestanding signs shall not be located within the
vision clearance area, [§
160.517] or Driveway vision clearance area [§
160.518] and Signs upon, over public ways [§
155.001].
                  iii.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
            3.   Allowed temporary and nonpermanent signs are as follows when
in conformance with the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs] and §
160.574 [Regulations and limitations of changeable signs]:
               a.    Banners.
               b.   Portable signs.
            4.   Identification signage when in conformance with the provisions
of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]: Public
institution.
         B.   The following signs are unauthorized within the district:
            1.   Roof signs.
            2.   Projecting signs.
            3.   Window signs.
      (2)   AD [1-4] and DD [1-7] Forms.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   a.   Each dwelling unit: A one-square-foot wall sign.
               b.   Bed and breakfast establishment: Signage shall be no more
than four square feet in area (either wall or freestanding signage), not to
exceed six feet in height, and shall not be illuminated.
            2.   Identification signage when in conformance with the provisions
of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
               a.   Public institution.
               b.   Residential tract.
         B.   The following signs are unauthorized within the district:
            1.   Roof signs.
            2.   Projecting signs.
            3.   Nonresidential identification signs.
            4.   Portable signs.
            5.   Window signs.
            6.   Banners.
      (3)   NF [1-2] and MD [1-3] Forms.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   Wall sign area not to exceed total sign area of 50 square feet
per frontage.
            2.   Freestanding sign area not to exceed total sign area of 50
square feet, six feet in height, and in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   One sign shall be allowed per street frontage. A second
freestanding sign will be allowed for a lot with two or more frontages.
               b.   Freestanding signs are spaced no less than 100 feet apart.
               c.   When a premises has two 88-foot frontages and elects to
erect only one freestanding sign, the sign area may be increased by 20%.
               d.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or side
yard.
               e.    Freestanding signs shall not be located within §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] or §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area].
               f.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
            3.   Allowed temporary and nonpermanent signs are as follows when
in conformance with the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs] and §
160.574 [Regulations and limitations of changeable signs]:
               a.   Portable signs.
               b.   Banners.
            4.   Identification signage when in conformance with the provisions
of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
               a.   Residential tract.
               b.   Nonresidential tract.
               c.   Public institution.
         B.   The following signs are unauthorized within the district:
            1.   Roof signs.
            2.   Projecting signs.
            3.   Window signs.
            4.   Joint tenant.
      (4)   BCF [1-2] and RE1 Forms.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   Building signs in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   Wall, roof, and projecting. Building sign area of one
square foot for each two lineal feet of street frontage or one square foot for
each lineal foot of building frontage shall be allowed. When a building has
multiple frontages, an additional sign area of one square foot for each three
lineal feet of street frontage or one square foot for each two lineal feet of
building frontage shall be allowed for other street frontages. Allowable sign
area is not transferable from one frontage to another.
               b.   Additional building sign standards:
                  i.   Projecting sign.
                     (A)   May project no more than five feet from the building
face.
                     (B)   Shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade level above any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road, alley, or
drive.
                     (C)   May project no more than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (D)   Shall not project over public rights-of-way.
                  ii.   Roof sign.
                     (A)   Shall rise no higher than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (B)   Shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in
sign area.
               c.   Freestanding signs in conformance with the provisions
below:
                  i.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed a total sign area of
40 square feet and eight feet in height for lots with street frontage of 100
feet or less and 60 square feet and eight feet in height for lots with street
frontage exceeding 101 feet.
                  ii.   In addition to the allowable signage, one additional
freestanding sign will be allowed for each additional 300 linear feet of the
street frontage.
                  iii.   Monument signs will be permitted a 15% increase in the
allowed sign area.
                  iv.   Freestanding signs shall be spaced no less than 100
feet apart.
                  v.   When a premises has two 88-foot frontages and elects to
erect only one freestanding sign, the sign area may be increased by 20%.
                  vi.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or
side yard.
                  vii.   Freestanding signs shall not be located within §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] or §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area].
                  viii.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
               d.   Allowed temporary and nonpermanent signs are as follows
when in conformance with the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs] and §
160.574 [Regulations and limitations of changeable signs]:
                  i.   Portable signs.
                  ii.   Window signs.
                  iii.   Banner.
               E.   Allowed identification signs are as follows when in
conformance with the provisions of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
                  i.   Public institution.
                  ii.   Nonresidential tract.
                  iii.   Joint tenant.
                  iv.   Residential tract.
      (5)   RE [2-5] & MU [1-3] Forms.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   Building signs in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   Wall, roof, and projecting. A building sign area of one
square foot for each one lineal foot of street frontage or two square feet for
each one lineal foot of building frontage shall be allowed. Allowable sign area
is not transferable from one frontage to another.
               b.   On any RE2, RE3, RE4, MU1, MU2, or MU3 form where multiple
tenant strip malls have a building depth over two and a half times the building
frontage (width), and the lot has only one street frontage, the building
signage will be based on the depth rather than the width, of the building.
               c.   Additional building sign standards:
                  i.   Projecting sign.
                     (A)   May project no more than five feet from the building
face.
                     (B)   Shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade level above any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road, alley, or
drive.
                     (C)   May project no more than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (D)   Shall not project over public rights-of-way.
                  ii.   Roof sign.
                     (A)   Shall rise no higher than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (B)   Shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in
sign area.
         B.   Freestanding signs in conformance with the provisions below with
a maximum permitted sign area and height as set forth below:
 
Street Frontage 1-50' 51-100' 101-150' 151-200' 201-250' 251-299' 300'
Sign area       32    64      96       128      160      192      200
Sign height     20    25      25       25       30       30       30
 
            1.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per street
frontage, except that businesses on frontages of 264 feet or more may erect two
freestanding signs. However, the total sign area of both signs may not exceed
that allowed for the street frontage.
            2.   In addition to the allowable signage, one additional
freestanding sign will be allowed for each additional 300 linear feet of the
street frontage.
            3.   Freestanding signs shall be spaced no less than 100 feet
apart.
            4.   When a premises has two 88- foot frontages and elects to erect
only one freestanding sign, the sign area may be increased by 20%.
            5.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or side
yard.
            6.   Freestanding signs shall not be located within §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] or §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area], herein.
            7.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
         C.   Allowed temporary signs are as follows when in conformance with
the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs]:
            1.   Window signs.
            2.   Banners.
            3.   Portable signs.
         D.   Allowed identification signs are as follows when in conformance
with the provisions of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
            1.   Nonresidential tract.
            2.   Joint tenant.
            3.   Public institution.
            4.   Residential tract.
      (6)   RE6 Form.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   Building signs in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   Wall, roof, and projecting. Building sign area of three
square feet for each one lineal foot of street frontage shall be allowed. When
a parcel has multiple frontage, an additional sign area of one square foot for
each additional one lineal foot of street frontage shall be allowed for other
street frontages. No more than three square feet of sign area for each one
lineal foot of street frontage shall face any one frontage.
               b.   Additional building sign standards:
                  i.   Projecting sign.
                     (A)   May project no more than five feet from the building
face.
                     (B)   Shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade level above any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road, alley, or
drive.
                     (C)   May project no more than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (D)   Shall not project over public rights-of-way except
in the downtown RE6 Form.
                  ii.   Roof sign.
                     (A)   Shall rise no higher than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (B)   Shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in
sign area.
               c.   Freestanding signs. With a maximum permitted sign area and
height as set forth below:
 
Street Frontage 1-100' 101-150' 151-200' 201-300' 300'
Sign area       32     48       64       80       100
Sign height     18     18       18       18       18
 
                  i.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per street
frontage, except that businesses on frontages of 264 feet or more may erect two
freestanding signs. However, the total sign area of both signs may not exceed
that allowed for the street frontage.
                  ii.   Freestanding signs shall be spaced no less than 100
feet apart.
                  iii.   When a premises has two 88-foot frontages and elects
to erect only one freestanding sign, the sign area may be increased by 20%.
                  iv.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or
side yard.
                  v.   Freestanding signs shall not be located within §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] or §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area], herein.
                  vi.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
                  vii.   In addition to the allowable signage, one additional
freestanding sign will be allowed for each additional 300 linear feet of the
street frontage.
         B.   Allowed temporary signs are as follows when in conformance with
the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs]:
            1.   Portable signs (including sandwich signs) [§
117.066 Objects allowed in the right-of-way upon notice].
            2.   Banners.
            3.   Window.
         C.   Allowed identification signs are as follows when in conformance
with provisions of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
            1.   Nonresidential.
            2.   Public institutional.
      (7)   WM [1-2] Form.
         A.   The following signs are allowed within the district:
            1.   Building signs in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   Wall, roof, and projecting. Building sign area of one
square foot for each three lineal feet of street frontage shall be allowed.
When a parcel has multiple frontage, an additional sign area of one square foot
for each additional four lineal feet of street frontage shall be allowed for
other street frontages. No more than one square foot of sign area for each
three lineal feet of street frontage shall face any one frontage.
               b.   Additional building sign standards:
                  i.   Projecting sign.
                     (A)   May project no more than five feet from the building
face.
                     (B)   Shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet above
grade level above any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road, alley, or
drive.
                     (C)   May project no more than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (D)   Shall not project over public rights-of-way.
                  ii.   Roof sign.
                     (A)   Shall rise no higher than five feet above the top of
a parapet or roof.
                     (B)   Shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in
sign area.
            2.   Freestanding signs. With a maximum permitted sign area and
height as set forth below:
 
Street Frontage 1-100' 101-150' 151-200' 201-300' 300'+
Sign area       37     55       92       107      115
Sign height     18     18       18       18       18
 
               a.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per street
frontage except that businesses on frontages of 264 feet or more may erect two
freestanding signs. However, the total sign area of both signs may not exceed
that allowed for the street frontage.
               b.   Freestanding signs shall be spaced no less than 100 feet
apart.
               c.   When a premises has two 88-foot frontages and elects to
erect only one freestanding sign, the sign area may be increased by 20%.
               d.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or side
yard.
               e.   Freestanding signs shall not be located within the §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] or §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area], herein.
               f.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
            3.   Allowed temporary signs are as follows when in conformance
with the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs]:
               a.   Portable signs.
               b.   Banners.
            4.   Allowed identification signs are as follows when in
conformance with the provisions of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
               a.   Nonresidential tract.
               b.   Public institution.
         B.   The following signs are unauthorized within the district:
            1.   Window.
            2.   Joint tenant.
      (8)   BCF3 Form.
         A.   The following signs are allowed and authorized within the
district:
            1.   Building signs in conformance with the provisions below:
               a.   Wall, roof, and projecting. Building sign area 1 square
foot for each 2 lineal feet of street frontage or 1 square foot for each lineal
foot of building frontage shall be allowed. BCF3 forms where multiple tenants
have a building depth over two and a half times the building frontage (width),
and the lot has only one street frontage, the building signage will be based on
the depth rather than the width of the building. When a building has multiple
frontages, an additional sign area of 1 square foot for each 3 lineal feet of
street frontage or 1 square foot for each 2 lineal feet of building frontage
shall be allowed for other street frontages. Allowable sign area is not
transferable from one frontage to another.
               b.   Projecting sign.
                  i.   May project no more than 5 feet from the building face.
                  ii.   Shall have a minimum clearance of 10 feet above grade
level above any yard or sidewalk and 16 feet above any road, alley, or drive.
                  iii.   May project no more than 5 feet above the top of a
parapet or roof.
                  iv.   Shall not project over public rights-of-way.
               c.   Roof sign.
                  i.   Shall rise no higher than 5 feet above the top of a
parapet or roof.
                  ii.   Shall be limited to a maximum of 32 square feet in sign
area.
            2.   Freestanding signs in conformance with the provisions with a
maximum permitted sign area and height as set forth below:
 
Street Frontage 1-100' 101-150' 151-200' 201-300' 300'+
Sign area       48     64       80       100      120
Sign height     20     20       25       25       25
 
               a.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per street
frontage except that businesses on frontages of 264 feet or more may erect two
freestanding signs. However, the total sign area of both signs may not exceed
that allowed for the street frontage.
               b.   In addition to the allowable signage, one additional
freestanding sign will be allowed for each additional 300 linear feet of the
street frontage.
               c.   Freestanding signs shall be spaced no less than 100 feet
apart.
               d.   When a premises has two 88-foot frontages and elects to
erect only one freestanding sign, the sign area may be increased by 20%.
               e.   Freestanding signs shall be located only in a front or side
yard.
               f.   Freestanding signs shall not be located within §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] or §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area].
               g.   Freestanding signs shall not rotate.
            3.   Allowed temporary and nonpermanent signs are as follows when
in conformance with the provisions of §
160.573 [Regulations and limitations of temporary signs] and §
160.574 [Regulations and limitations of changeable signs]:
               a.   Portable signs.
               b.   Window signs.
               c.   Banner.
            4.   Allowed identification signs are as follows when in
conformance with the provisions of §
160.575 [Regulations and limitations for identification signs]:
               a.   Public institution.
               b.   Nonresidential tract.
               c.   Joint tenant.
               d.   Residential tract.
         B.   The following signs are unauthorized with this form: Signs
prohibited by this code as noted in §
160.578.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 29-87,
passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 37-87, passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 72-88, passed 8-1-1988; Ord.
94-90, passed 10-1-1990; Ord. 5-91, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 83-91, passed 11-4-
1991; Ord. 39-94, passed 5-2-1994; Ord. 81-94, passed 9-6-1994; Ord. 28-94,
passed 4-4-1994; Ord. 94-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 68-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord.
45-98, passed 5-4-1998; Ord. 119-98, passed 11-9-1998; Ord. 14-00, passed 3-6-
2000; Ord. 88-01, passed 10-1-2001; Ord. 21-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 33-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019;
Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed
5-2-2023)
§ 160.573 REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (a)   The regulations and limitations of temporary signs shall be as
follows.
      (1)   Permits are required for the following temporary signs. Permit fees
will cover inspection costs necessary to administer the temporary nature of
these signs, on-site inspections and confirming their condition, and that they
have been removed within the permitted time frames. Additional inspections will
result in citations and fines.
      (2)   Temporary signs shall be maintained in a legible condition and
secured on each end and shall be in compliance with §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] and §
155.001 [Signs upon, over public ways].
      (3)   Temporary signs presently in use that do not comply with these
ordinance provisions shall be removed within 30 days of the effective date of
this ordinance.
   (b)   Portable signs.
      (1)   Generally.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, portable signs may
only be allowed in the UT [1-2], BCF [1-4], NF [1-2], MD [1-3], RE [1-6], MU
[1-3], and WM [1-3] Forms. Based upon the lot sizes, setbacks, and impacts to
adjacent properties, portable signs are not authorized within the single-family
district/form and neighborhood commercial.
            1.   Portable signs shall be limited to no more than 32 square
feet.
            2.   Portable sign permits are allowed up to 60 permit days per
calendar year at any one business location. Separate permits shall be required
for each sign. Permits may be issued for terms of either 15 or 30 days, and
permit holders will be charged with the full term of which the permit is
issued. Subsequent permits shall not be issued until 30 days have elapsed
following the expiration of 15-day permits and 60 days following a 30-day
permit. Permits for two or more portable signs may be issued at a particular
business location if the permits are of equal duration and run concurrently.
            3.   [Portable] inflatable signs. High-flying, helium, ground, and
roof inflatable signs may be displayed under the following conditions.
               a.   Sign area exception: The maximum size of a ground-mounted
inflatable will be 15 feet by 30 feet. The maximum size of a roof- mounted
inflatable will be 25 feet wide by 30 feet high. The maximum volume of a high-
flying inflatable will be 500 cubic feet.
               b.   Inflatable permits are allowed up to 60 permit days per
calendar year at any one business location. Separate permits shall be required
for each sign. Permits may be issued for terms of seven days, and permit
holders will be charged with the full term of which the permit is issued.
Subsequent permits shall not be issued until 30 days have elapsed following the
expiration of seven-day permits. Permits for two inflatable signs may be issued
at a particular business location if the permits are of equal duration and run
concurrently.
               c.   Cabling, tie-downs, or tether lines will not be located on
or across public property.
               d.   High-flying inflatables will not be located in any airport
approach zone and will not interfere with utility lines, antennas, or towers.
            4.   [Portable] noninflatable signs. Noninflatable signs (including
but not limited to windfeathers and nongovernmental flags) may only be
displayed under the following conditions:
               a.   Shall not exceed 32 square feet in total area per sign.
               b.   Noninflatable permits are allowed up to 60 permit days per
calendar year at any one business location. Separate permits shall be required
for each sign. Permits may be issued for terms of either 15 or 30 days, and
permit holders will be charged with the full term of which the permit is
issued. Subsequent permits shall not be issued until 30 days have elapsed
following the expiration of 15-day permits and 60 days following a 30-day
permit. Permits for two noninflatable signs may be issued at a particular
business location if the permits are of equal duration and run concurrently.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 29-87,
passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 16-88, passed 3-7-1988; Ord. 81-94, passed 9-6-1994; Ord.
68-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 71-97, passed 10-6-1997; Ord. 45-98, passed 5-4-
1998; Ord. 15-02, passed 3-4-2002; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 33-18,
passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.574 REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF CHANGEABLE SIGNS.
   The regulations and limitations of permitted signs shall be as follows:
   (a)   Permits are required for the following changeable signs: banners
exceeding 100 square feet per business location whether on building or
freestanding sign, and window signs exceeding the 25 square feet exempt by
ordinance.
   (b)   Permit fees will cover inspection costs necessary to administer the
nature of these signs, on-site inspections, and confirming their condition,
location, and size. Additional inspections will result in fines.
   (c)   Permits are for the sign area and sign location, not for the sign
content. Therefore, sign content may change within the same permit based upon
approved area and location.
   (d)   Changeable signs shall be maintained in a “legible condition” and
secured on each end and shall be in compliance with §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area], §
155.001 [Signs upon, over public ways], and §
160.518 [Driveway vision clearance area].
   (e)   Changeable signs presently in use that do not comply with these
ordinance provisions shall be removed within 30 days of the effective date of
this ordinance.
      (1)   Changeable signs: Banner.
         A.    Banners shall be permitted under the following conditions in the
Open Space, UT [1, 2], MD [1-3], NF [1-2], BCF [1, 2, 3, 4], WM [1-3], MU [1-3]
and RE [1-6] Forms:
            1.   Permits are not required for banners on a building or
freestanding sign, as long as the total square footage area of all the banners
at the business location do not exceed 100 square feet.
            2.   Banners shall only be attached to freestanding signs, building
walls, parking lot lights, or streetlights in the RE 6 form [downtown central
business zoning district].
            3.    Banners exceeding a total square footage of 100 square feet
will be counted towards the allotted sign area allowed. Freestanding banners
will be counted towards freestanding signage and building banners will be
counted towards building signage. A sign permit is required for each banner.
            4.   If a banner is attached to a light pole, it is restricted to
13 square feet per banner; two banners per pole.
            5.   Banners which exceed the total square footage of 100 square
feet per business location and up without obtaining a sign permit will result
in citations and fines.
      (2)   Changeable signs: Window.
         A.   Window signs shall be permitted under the following conditions in
the BCF [1-2], MU [1-3], and RE [1-6] Forms:
            1.   Permits are not required for window signage up to 25 square
feet of area per business location. A sign permit shall be required for window
signage exceeding the 25 square feet maximum area.
            2.   Window signage exceeding a total square footage of 25 square
feet will be counted towards the allotted building signage allowed and require
sign permits.
            3.   Window signage which exceeds the total 25 square footage and
without obtaining a sign permit will result in citations and fines.
      (3)   Changeable signs: Drive-through signs.
         A.   Drive-through signs shall be permitted under the following
conditions in the MU [1-3] and RE [1-6] Forms:
            1.   Permits are not required for drive-through signage up to 48
square feet of area per order station. A sign permit shall be required for
drive-through signage exceeding the 48 square feet area.
            2.   Drive-through signage exceeding a total square footage of 48
square feet per order station will be counted toward the allotted freestanding
signage allowed and require sign permits.
            3.   Drive-through signage which exceeds the total square footage
of 48 square feet per order station and without obtaining a sign permit will
result in citations and fines.
      (4)   Changeable signs: Motor vehicle service stations.
         A.   Motor vehicle service station signs shall be permitted under the
following conditions in the MU [1-3] and RE [2-5] Forms:
            1.   Permits are not required for motor vehicle service station
signage up to 12 square feet of area per frontage. A sign permit shall be
required for motor vehicle services station signage exceeding the 12 square
feet area.
            2.   Motor vehicle service station signage exceeding a total square
footage of 12 square feet per frontage will be counted toward the allotted
freestanding signage allowed and require sign permits.
            3.   Motor vehicle service station signage which exceeds the total
square footage of 12 square feet per order station and without obtaining a sign
permit will result in citations and fines.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 33-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 114-22, passed
10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.575 REGULATIONS AND LIMITATIONS FOR IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   (a)   Permits are required for the following: Residential tract
identification sign. [in the AD, DD, MD forms]
      (1)   Shall be limited to 48 square feet in area and 8 feet in height.
      (2)   A residential tract sign will be allowed only along arterial street
frontages at the intersection of the arterial street and collector street and
must be in compliance with §
160.517 [Intersection vision clearance area] and §
155.001 [Signs upon, over public ways].
   (b)   Permits are required for the following: Nonresidential tract
identification signs. [in the RE, BCF1, BCF3, WM & MU forms]
      (1)   Shall be limited to 100 square feet in area and 10 feet in height.
      (2)   Signs will not be allowed on lots less than ten acres in size.
   (c)   Permits are required for the following: Public institution
identification sign. [BCF1, BCF2, BCF3 forms] Places of worship, schools, day
care centers, institutional, and public uses.
      (1)   Shall be limited to 48 square feet in area and 8 feet in height.
      (2)   Subject to:
         A.   Two signs per institution.
         B.   Hours of sign illumination shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
         C.   Conformance with §
160.577 [Illumination].
         D.   Use of this subsection prohibits other freestanding signs
permitted under §
160.575(b) above.
   (d)   Permits are required for the following: Joint tenant tract
identification sign. Joint tenant identification signs shall be permitted under
the following conditions in the MMU1, MMU2, MMU3, C-4, S-2, PO-PUD, DT-PUD, and
V-PUD districts (with the RE5, RE4, RE3, BCF 3 forms).
      (1)   Additional joint tenant identification signs are limited to
alternative sign plans per §
160.602.
      (2)   Joint tenant shall not exceed 200 square feet and 30 feet in
height.
      (3)   An additional sign will be allowed for each ten acres of
subdivision up to a total of four joint signs. Acres calculated within
commercial subdivision or subarea.
      (4)   Allowed on common property.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 33-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 114-22, passed
10-4-2022; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.576 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs may be allowed in addition to the signs permitted in §
160.572 [Allowed and unauthorized sign types in each district]. Exempt signs do
not require the issuance of a sign permit, but must be in conformance with all
other state laws and local ordinances.
   (a)   Integral signs. Integral to the building structure, the sign shall be
allowed up to 3 square feet in area.
   (b)   Pennants. Pennants shall be limited to a maximum sign area of 1 square
foot per pennant. Pennants are allowed up to 60 days per calendar year at any
one business location.
   (c)   Private traffic direction signs.
      (1)   Signs directing traffic movement onto and out of a commercial,
industrial, institutional, office, recreational, apartment, town houses [in the
AD 3-5 forms], and manufactured home park uses may have one 9-square-foot sign,
6 feet in height at each vehicular entrance onto a public way (street or
alley). These uses may have two interior traffic directional signs of 6 square
feet and 4 feet in height. One additional interior traffic directional sign may
be added for each 43,560 square feet of lot area up to a maximum of six
interior traffic directional signs.
      (2)   Fifty percent of the sign area of each sign shall be used for
traffic information.
   (d)   Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of
his or her duties shall be allowed through public works based upon the adopted
edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest erected by the
property owner and on the owners property, shall be limited to 6 square feet.
      Where a federal, state, or local law requires a property owner to post a
sign on the owner's property to warn of a danger or to prohibit access to the
property either generally or specifically, the owner must comply with the
federal, state, or local law to exercise that authority by posting a sign on
the property.
   (e)   Public utility signs. Public utility equipment including, but not
limited to, utility boxes and utility service equipment, may have attached to
them signs not exceeding a total area of 6 square feet, provided the signs do
not materially obstruct the vision at any street intersection.
   (f)   Home occupations. A one-square-foot wall sign.
   (g)   Signs in parks. Signs may be located on parks property [Open 1, Open
2]. Signs shall not exceed a total of 100 square feet.
   (h)   Noncommercial yard signs. Noncommercial signs shall not exceed 9
square feet per sign in any residential parcel [DD1-7; AD1-4; MD1-3]. Signs
shall not exceed 32 square feet and 8 feet in height in any nonresidential
parcel [NF1-2; BCF1-4; RE1-6; MU1-3, WM1-4]. Signs shall be outside of the
public right-of-way (see §
155.001 "Signs upon, over public ways"). Each sign may be displayed for up to
90 days per calendar year per property.
   (i)   Commercial yard signs. Commercial signs shall not exceed 100 square
feet and 8 feet in height per nonresidential parcel [NF1-2; BCF1-4; RE1-6; MU1-
3, WM1-4]. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and 8 feet in height in any
multifamily parcel [MD1-4]. Signs shall not exceed a total of 9 square feet in
any residential parcel [DD1-7; AD1-4]. Signs shall be mounted as adhesive wall,
freestanding or portable, and maintained in a legible manner as well as secured
against overturning and shall be removed upon the completion of the project.
The signs may be displayed 60 days prior to and 7 days after the event for
which they are intended.
   (j)   Construction fencing screening. For new construction, remodeling or
other modifications during which there is no occupancy of the building and for
which fencing of the construction site is provided, screening attached to the
fence may bear images of the proposed project along with commercial messages
related to the sale, rental leasing or construction of the project, provided
that text and numbers shall occupy no more than the larger of the following
area:
      (1)    Forty percent of the area of the screening on the construction
fence along each street frontage.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 66-85,
passed 7-29-1985; Ord. 29-87, passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 74-92, passed 8-3-1992;
Ord. 40-94, passed 5-2-1994; Ord. 81-94, passed 9-6-1994; Ord. 138-95, passed
11-6-1995; Ord. 94-96, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 10-97, passed 2-3-1997; Ord. 22-
97, passed 4-7-1997; Ord. 56-97, passed 8-4-1997; Ord. 71-97, passed 10-6-1997;
Ord. 45-98, passed 5-4-1998; Ord. 35-99, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 82-99, passed
8-2-1999; Ord. 87-01, passed 10-1-2001; Ord. 21-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 141-
06, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 33-18, passed 5-2-
2018; Ord. 7-20, passed 1-21-2020; Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021; Ord. 30-23,
passed 5-2-2023)
§ 160.577 ILLUMINATION.
   Regulations regarding the illumination of signs shall be as follows.
   (a)   Shading. The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shielded,
shaded, or directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely affect
surrounding or facing premises or safe vision of operators of vehicles on
public or private roads.
   (b)   Electronic message sign.
      (1)   Electronic message sign displays shall be limited to displays which
are gradual movements, including, but not limited to, dissolve, fade,
scrolling, or traveling. However, sudden movement is prohibited, including, but
not limited to, blinking and flashing.
      (2)   All electronic message center signs in a NF1 Form shall require
additional standards as indicated below.
         A.   Electronic message center portion of the sign shall be shut off
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.;
         B.   The electronic message center portion of the sign shall be no
more than 30 percent of the total allowable square footage of the wall or
freestanding sign;
         C.   All freestanding signs shall be monument in style;
         D.   Freestanding sign faces that include an electronic message center
shall be located perpendicular to an arterial or collector street;
      (3)   Any permitted signs may be, or may include as an individual
component of the total sign area, electronic message signs.
      (4)   Electronic messages or graphic displays may be changed at periodic
intervals by gradual entry and exit display modes, provided that messages and
animation shall be displayed at periodic intervals by various modes, such as
fade, dissolve, scrolling or traveling.
      (5)   All electronic message signs shall come equipped with automatic
dimming controls that automatically adjust the sign's brightness in direct
correlation with ambient light conditions.
      (6)   No electronic message sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3
foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter at
a preset distance depending on sign area, measured as follows:
Area of Sign Measurement
(sq. ft.)    Distance (ft.)
Area of Sign Measurement
(sq. ft.)    Distance (ft.)
10           32
15           39
20           45
25           50
30           55
35           59
40           63
45           67
50           71
55           74
60           77
65           81
70           84
75           87
80           89
85           92
90           95
95           97
100          100
 
For signs with an area in square feet other than those specifically listed in
the table (e.g., 12 sq. ft., 400 sq. ft., etc.), the measurement distance may
be calculated with the following formula:
Measurement Distance = (Area of Sign Sq. Ft. x 100).
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 118-89,
passed 11-20-1989; Ord. 5-91, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 02-07, passed 1-2-2007;
Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 33-18, passed 5-2-2018)
§ 160.578 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited and shall be removed within the time
periods specified:
   (a)   Miscellaneous signs and posters. The tacking, pasting, or otherwise
affixing of signs of a miscellaneous character, visible from a public way,
located on walls of buildings, barns, sheds, trees, poles, posts, fences, or
other structures is prohibited, and the sign shall be removed upon notice.
   (b)   Painted wall signs. Painted wall signs shall be prohibited except that
existing signs may remain, provided the signs are maintained. Signs that are
not maintained shall be removed or renovated within 60 days upon notice.
   (c)   Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited. No person shall park any
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way, or public property, or on private
property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached
thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose
of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or
activity located on the same premises or any other premises. This is not
intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage such as a sign attached to a
bus or lettering on a motor vehicle.
   (d)   Nuisance signs. Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal
or that are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of
illumination that may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device
or that hide from view any traffic, street sign, or signal shall be removed
upon notice. Signs that cause a safety or health issue to the public, including
creating unsafe traffic conditions by confusing or distracting motorists; or by
impairing the driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other
vehicles; or health concerns to occupants of adjacent and contiguous property
by their brightness, size, height, or movement.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 1-00,
passed 1-3-2000; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 38-21, passed 4-6-2021)
§ 160.579 NONCONFORMING SIGNAGE.
   Any sign existing on the date of adoption of this chapter that does not
conform with the provisions of this Code is eligible for characterization as a
"legal nonconforming sign" and is permitted to remain except as specified
below.
   (a)   The sign has been altered in a fashion exceeding the allowed
maintenance standards in subsection (d) below or relocated.
   (b)   The sign has been brought into compliance with this subchapter.
   (c)   The sign is abandoned.
   (d)   Nonconforming signs may be maintained, altered, modified, or
reconstructed provided that such changes do not increase the overall sign area
or height. Nonconforming signs or portions thereof may be removed for
maintenance, modifications, or reconstruction so long as they are replaced in
their original positions and orientations upon completion of the work. The
alteration of a sign via the addition of changeable copy or the addition of an
electronic message center shall not constitute a change to the sign structure
so long as the overall sign area is not enlarged; a new sign permit will be
required for inspection purposes.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.090) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 37-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.580 SIGN MAINTENANCE.
   Signs shall be maintained in a safe and legible condition at all times,
including the replacement of defective or damaged parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning, and other services required for maintenance of the signs. Unsafe
signs shall be removed or brought into compliance immediately upon written
notice.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.100) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 37-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.581 ABANDONED SIGNS.
   Abandoned signs shall be removed or brought into compliance within 90 days
of written notice from the director of planning and building services.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.57.110) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 37-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.582 PERMITTING PROCESS.
   (a)   Right to approval of permits for conforming signage. If a sign that is
the subject of a sign permit complies with all applicable regulations of this
Code, the city must issue a permit for the sign.
   (b)   Appeal from denial. Denial of any request for a sign permit is an
administrative decision and is appealable in accordance with the provisions of
§
160.583 [Appeals] of this Code.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.583 APPEALS.
   Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by
any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, and with the board of adjustment a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 160.587 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)    Like on-premises signs, off-premises signs use private land and the
sight lines created by public rights-of-way to inform and persuade the public.
In an effort to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public,
the purpose of this chapter is to prevent the uncontrolled use of off-premises
signs.
   (b)   To fulfill this purpose, the objectives of these regulations are to
preserve the overall landscape quality as well as protect sensitive land uses,
protect the value of adjacent lands, and promote the safety of those using the
public rights-of-way. To these ends, this subchapter provides for Billboard/
Off-Premises Sign Opportunity Overlay District in which off- premises signs
shall be located.
   (c)   General standards for maintenance, size, illumination, and separation
are provided to promote communication efficiency balanced with safety on public
ways. Off-premises signs are along roadways with higher volumes of traffic and
need to provide information to people in a shorter amount of time. Signs cannot
create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing
the driver’s ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.58.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 37-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 88-15, passed 9-1-2015; Ord.
32-24, passed 4-2-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Signs and outdoor advertising, see
ch. 155
§ 160.588 ESTABLISHMENT OF BILLBOARD/OFF-PREMISES SIGN OPPORTUNITY OVERLAY
DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The following section establishes ten (10) Billboard/Off-Premises Sign
Opportunity Overlay Districts:
      (1)   Interstate Opportunity Overlay District: Interstate 29 (I-29) bound
by Interstate 90 (I-90) and Interstate 229 (I-229); Interstate 90 (I-90) bound
by Marion Road and Interstate 229 (I-229); Interstate 229 (I-229) bound by
Interstate 90 (I-90) and Interstate 29 (I-29).
      (2)   West 12th Street/East 10th Street/Arrowhead Parkway Opportunity
Overlay District: The West 12th Street/East and West 10th Street/Arrowhead
Parkway Billboard/Off-Premises Sign Opportunity Overlay District shall comprise
the area bound by Skunk Creek on the west and Six Mile Road on the east. This
opportunity district also includes portions of West 11th Street bound by South
Menlo Avenue and South Phillips Avenue; East 11th Street bound by South
Phillips Avenue and South Franklin Avenue.
      (3)   Minnesota Avenue Opportunity Overlay District: Minnesota Avenue
bound by West 60th Street North on the north and Interstate 229 on the south.
      (4)   West 41st Street Opportunity Overlay District: West 41st Street
bound by South Marion Road on the west to South Minnesota Avenue on the east.
      (5)   North Cliff Avenue Opportunity Overlay District: North Cliff Avenue
bound by Interstate 90 on the north and East Rice Street on the south.
      (6)   South Cliff Avenue Opportunity Overlay District: South Cliff Avenue
bound by East 10th Street on the north and East 26th Street on the south.
      (7)   South Western Avenue Opportunity Overlay District: South Western
Avenue bound by West 41st Street on the north and Interstate 229 (I-229) on the
south.
      (8)   West 26th Street/South Louise Avenue Opportunity Overlay District:
West 26th Street bound by the east side of South Marion Road to South Louise
Avenue; South Louise Avenue bound by West 26th Street and Interstate 229 (I-
229) on the south.
      (9)   Russell Street Opportunity Overlay District: Russell Street from
Interstate 29 on the west to Minnesota Avenue on the east.
      (10)   60th Street North Opportunity Overlay District: 60th Street North
bound by Interstate 29 on the west to North Cliff Avenue on the east.
   (b)   Billboard/Off-Premises Sign Opportunity Overlay District Standards: In
addition to the general standards, the following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Billboard/Off-Premises Sign Opportunity Overlay District changes,
expansions, or contractions shall be considered a zoning district change and
shall follow the process of a change in zone. Notwithstanding the public notice
requirements in §§
160.653 and
160.654, the city shall not require the applicant to post signs, and the
measurement for letters to provide written notice to surrounding property
owners shall be from the right-of-way line of the proposed opportunity
district.
      (2)   A lot contiguous with the right-of-way described as the opportunity
district shall be considered in the opportunity district.
(Ord. 88-15, passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 5-24, passed 1-9-2024; Ord. 32-24, passed 4-
2-2024)
§ 160.591 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   Off-premises signs are allowed with RE2, RE3, RE4, RE5, WM1, WM2, WM3 and
OPEN2 forms subject to the following regulations.
   (a)   (1)   Off-premises signs will be allowed a maximum size of 288 square
feet except as permitted in §
160.592.
      (2)   Exception: In addition to the allowable signage, temporary
extensions are allowed; however, they shall not exceed 5% of the overall sign
area.
   (b)    No more than one sign face per direction of facing; no more than two
parallel sign faces on any one sign structure except as permitted in §
160.592.
   (c)    Signs will be allowed a maximum height of 40 feet and a minimum
height of 12 feet.
   (d)   (1)   There will be a minimum setback of 10 feet from any part of the
sign.
   (e)    No part of the off-premises sign face or structure will be allowed to
exist in or overlap into the required side or rear yard setbacks. The signs
shall not be located in or overlap into any required buffer yard.
   (f)    Similar to basics of measuring of this code, all distances will be
measured from the closest point of any part of the sign. The sign shall not be
within a 600-foot radius of any other off-premises sign intended to be read
from the same right-of-way; the sign shall not be within a 600-foot radius of
any other off-premises sign intended to be read from a different right-of-way;
the sign shall be no closer than 600 feet from any existing off-premises sign
on an interstate highway.
   (g)    Off-premises signs shall be maintained in a safe and legible
condition at all times, including the replacement of defective or damaged
parts, painting, repainting, cleaning, and other services required for
maintenance of the signs. Unsafe signs shall be removed immediately or brought
into compliance upon written notice.
   (h)    Abandoned signs shall be removed or brought into compliance within 90
days of written notice from the director of planning and building services.
   (i)    The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shielded, shaded, or
directed so that the light intensity shall not adversely affect surrounding or
facing premises or safe vision of operators of vehicles on public or private
roads.
   (j)    Blinking or flashing lights are prohibited. Electronic message signs
are permitted. The message shall be static; animation is prohibited. The
frequency of message change shall be not less than six- (6-) second intervals.
   (k)    The Interstate 229 corridor includes a variety of residential,
commercial, and industrial land uses. In addition, several parks included in
the Big Sioux River greenway are adjacent to Interstate 229. The rolling
topography provides a unique visual image and character to the city. Therefore,
this standard is intended to protect the aesthetic qualities of the Interstate
229 corridor. The total number of off-premises sign structures erected to be
read primarily from the Interstate 229 right-of-way shall not exceed 21.
   (l)   Billboard identification tag to be no larger than 3% in size of the
billboard's size allowance.
   (m)   When the off-premises sign is located on a property with the OPEN2
form, the principal use must be a cultural facility and the off-premises sign
must be located adjacent to an interstate.
   (n)   Off-premises signs shall not be within 500 feet of a sensitive use,
cemetery, or any historic district, measured from the off-premises sign pole to
the property line of the sensitive use, cemetery, or historic district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.58.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 37-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 53-87, passed 7-7-1987; Ord. 121-88, passed 12-19-1988;
Ord. 39-92, passed 4-6-1992; Ord. 4-03, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 58-06, passed 5-
1-2006; Ord. 04-07, passed 1-2-2007; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 88-15,
passed 9-1-2015; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022; Ord. 71-23, passed 8-2-2023;
Ord. 5-24, passed 1-2-2024)
§ 160.592 CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use permit in conformance with §§
160.605 through
160.616 must be obtained for off-premises signs over 288 square feet to a
maximum of 672 square feet and signs with more than one sign face per direction
of facing with RE2, RE3, RE4, RE5, WM1, WM2, WM3, and OPEN2 forms.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.58.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 37-87,
passed 6-1-1987; Ord. 4-03, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord.
71-23, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 160.593 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any sign existing on the date of adoption of this chapter that does not
conform with the provisions of this Code is eligible for characterization as a
"legal nonconforming sign" and is permitted to remain except as specified
below.
   (a)   The sign has been altered in a fashion exceeding the allowed
maintenance standards in subsection (d) below or relocated.
   (b)   The sign has been brought into compliance with this subchapter.
   (c)   The sign is abandoned.
   (d)   Nonconforming signs may be maintained, altered, modified, or
reconstructed provided that such changes do not increase the overall sign area
or height. Nonconforming signs or portions thereof may be removed for
maintenance, modifications, or reconstruction so long as they are replaced in
positions that are no closer to another off-premises sign within a 600-foot
radius and in their original orientations upon completion of the work. The
alteration of a sign via the addition of changeable copy or the addition of an
electronic message center shall not constitute a change to the sign structure
so long as the overall sign area is not enlarged. Signs larger than 288 square
feet, up to a maximum of 672 square feet, must obtain a conditional use permit
in conformance with §§ 160.605 through 160.616. A new sign permit will be
required for inspection purposes.
(Ord. 5-24, passed 1-2-2024)
ALTERNATIVE SITE PLANS
§ 160.594 PROCEDURE.
   The city planning commission, after a public hearing, may approve
alternatives for common open
space, parking reductions, landscaping buffer yards, signage master plans, and
streetcar forms upon finding that an applicant has demonstrated that the intent
of the appropriate zoning ordinance section can be more effectively met, in
whole or in part, through an Alternative Site Plan. The planning commission
encourages alternative site plans that enhance the aesthetics and improves the
livability of the community through the Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive
Plan land use and development policies. Acceptable types of situations where
alternative site plans will be approved are included with the following
standards. Alternative site plans cannot allow variance from bulk regulations
unless specifically delineated in the alternative site plan standards in §§
160.598—
160.603.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 23-16, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 160.595 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   An alternative site plan application must have all elements that are
included before a staff review is completed. If the application does not
contain all the elements of an alternative site plan application, then the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific deficiencies and the
application shall not be scheduled for a public hearing until all elements of
the application are submitted.
   (b)   Elements of a complete application include the following:
      (1)   Site plan. In addition to the following information, plans shall be
drawn to scale upon substantial paper or provided electronically and shall be
of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work
proposed and all work must conform to the provisions of this chapter and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. Alternative site plans
require a complete plan check by planning, zoning, and building services prior
to obtaining a building permit.
         A.   The name of the project and/or business.
         B.   The scale and north arrow.
         C.   All existing and proposed buildings or additions and uses.
         D.   Dimensions and total square footage of all buildings. Include
height and number of stories.
         E.   Distance from all building lines to the property lines at the
closest points.
         F.   Dimensions of all property lines including platted property
lines.
         G.   Name and location of all adjacent streets, alleys, waterways, and
other public facilities.
         H.   Name and dimensions of the parking lots; designate each space,
stall, and aisle.
         I.   Include access to public right-of- way in accordance with
subdivision ordinance §
157.113 [Streets system].
      (2)   Additional elements of an application. Each type of alternative
site plan requires a different set of information to adequately review the
application. Below is additional information by each type of alternative site
plan application that is required to be included with an application.
         A.   Common open space alternative plan.
            1.   Amount of reduction in front yard.
            2.   Common open space area plan and description.
         B.   Landscaping and buffer yard alternative plan.
            1.   Illustrate and show dimensions of the landscaping alternative
options included in §
160.599.
         C.   Parking reduction alternative plans.
            1.   Parking study based upon §
160.600(b).
               a.   Site survey.
               b.   Information requested by planning and building services
director.
            2.   Parking demand to be generated by the proposed use.
            3.   Demonstrate how storm water runoff change or other LEED
certification efforts will be enhanced with parking reduction.
            4.   Show on plan how pedestrian access will be enhanced to the
site with parking reduction.
         D.   Signage alternative plans.
            1.   Show all eligible sign types and the size and design for each
of those signs.
            2.   Show on the site plan the location of all sign types.
         E.    Streetcar forms alternative plan.
            1.   Show the sidewalk width that is parallel to the front yard(s).
            2.   Show the location of any street furniture on the site plan.
            3.   Show if front doors are recessed when the buildings are
adjacent to a front yard sidewalk.
            4.   Include a scale drawing with the size and location of the
proposed structure including the proposed façade's color scheme, window size
and placement, and articulation design treatments.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.596 ALTERNATIVE SITE PLAN — PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING.
   Upon the filing of an application for an alternative site plan, the
department of planning and building services shall set a date for public
hearing on the request. The date for the public hearing shall be a day when the
planning commission is regularly scheduled to meet as determined by the rules,
policies and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the
planning commission for holding public hearings on those requests, or the
planning commission may designate a special meeting at which to hear a
requested alternative site plan application.
   (a)   Public notice.
      (1)   Signs. Signs shall be posted on the property for a continuous
period of ten days immediately prior to the public hearing held by the planning
commission or city council to consider the conditional use permit. The signs
shall be furnished by the department of planning and building services; state
the date, time and location of the public hearing and be posted by the
applicant in the numbers, design and locations prescribed by the director.
Before any action shall be taken by the planning commission, the applicant
shall first file with the department of planning and building services a
certificate verifying that the signs have been posted at the property location
before the time specified by this section.
      (2)   Written notice. Written notice shall be sent by the city to
adjacent property owners within 300 feet, measured from lot line to lot line.
The letters shall be postmarked at least ten business days prior to the hearing
and state the date, time, and location of the public hearing.
      (3)   Publication. The public hearing date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper in
the community.
      (4)    Approval of plan as presented. The alternative site plan approved
by the planning commission shall be the plan presented during the public
hearing. Planning staff will then only approve a zoning permit if the plan for
construction provided is substantially the same.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.597 AMENDMENTS TO ALTERNATIVE SITE PLANS.
   (a)   A major amendment to an approved alternative site plan may be amended
the same as a new alternative site plan permit as provided in this section, or
entirely withdrawn by the applicant. A major amendment includes any amendment
that is not categorized as a minor amendment.
   (b)   A minor amendment to an alternative site plan may be approved by the
director of planning and building and services. Standards for minor amendments
will include slight changes of element locations such as trees, landscaping,
and signs. Also, a parking layout may be slightly different as long as the
number of parking spots and orientation to the buildings is the same as the
approved plan.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.598 COMMON OPEN SPACE ALTERNATIVE PLANS—MD1, MD2, MD3, NF2, BCF3 FORMS.
   The city planning commission may approve an alternative common open space
plan to reduce setbacks when adequate and appropriate common open space is
planned and accommodated in the site plan for the following situations (also
see MD1, MD2, MD3, NF2, BCF3 form regulations).
   (a)   For MD2 and MD3 forms. There may be up to a 10-foot reduction in front
yard, 5-foot reduction in side yard, and 5-foot reduction in rear yard when the
same overall square footage as is required by the minimum yards is reserved and
approved by the planning commission as a common open space area.
   (b)   For MD1, NF2, and BCF3 forms. There may be up to a 10-foot reduction
in the front yard setback when the same overall square footage as is required
by the minimum yards is reserved and approved by the planning commission as a
common open space area.
   (c)   Common open space area standards. The planning commission shall
determine a common open space when it includes open space that is aesthetically
planned and designed with active or passive recreational amenities including,
but not limited to, walking paths, plazas, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming
pools, lakes, seating areas, gardens, basketball courts, and other similar
recreational amenities. All common open space areas must be designed in a way
that is very accessible to residents or employees of the development area.
Common open space alternative plans shall not reduce open space on the site to
a level under the total minimum square feet of required yards (front, side, and
rear yards). Common open space alternative plans shall not reduce any required
buffer yards. The intent of common open space alternative plans is to allow a
redistribution from one required yard to another required yard. A common open
space alternative plan must not impede on the intersection of driveway vision
clearance area (see §
160.517).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 22-15, passed 3-3-2015; Ord. 41-19, passed
4-2-2019; Ord. 114-22, passed 10-4-2022)
§ 160.599 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER YARD ALTERNATIVE PLANS.
   Intent: The substitution of the general landscape standards (§ 160.485) for
the alternative landscape plan should perform at the same or higher level in
regard to land use transitions that are required by ordinance through methods
such as orientation, parking lot islands, topography, higher level of
aesthetics, or barriers that are used to create comparable performance.
Reduction of landscape units is not allowed except by a variance granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
   The city planning commission may approve an alternative landscaping or
buffer yard plan in the following situations:
   (a)   Street trees are included in the boulevard except along an arterial
street.
   (b)   Pedestrian and bike paths connecting adjacent development areas,
public parks, and other pedestrian and bike paths.
   (c)   Outdoor seating areas and/or plazas are designed in such a way to
include additional landscaping and incorporate natural drainage areas, rain
gardens, or permeable pavement to mitigate the drainage issues.
   (d)   Buffer yard alternatives may include, but are not limited to, one or
more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   Native brick, natural stone, or manufactured stone are included.
      (2)   Building scale is designed to reflect the surrounding neighborhood
context.
      (3)   Architectural techniques are added as details and benefits to
contextual elements within neighborhood context.
      (4)   Walls and berms or combination of the two with high quality
building materials that create a barrier 6 feet in height.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 23-16, passed
4-5-2016; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.600 PARKING REDUCTION ALTERNATIVE PLANS.
   A parking reduction alternative plan is eligible for BCF, RE, MU, and WM
forms only. Any other parking reductions must be granted a variance by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. When an applicant can show that the required
parking amounts are in excess of what is needed for the proposed use, the
applicant may submit a request with justification based on the standards below
to the planning commission for off-street parking space reductions. The
planning commission will consider and act on this request as a part of the full
development application process (see application requirement in §
160.595).
   (a)   Application standards. One of the below standards is required along
with a standard that any adjacent or nearby properties will not have
significant parking overflow created due to the application.
      (1)   The requirements for parking found in §§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking Regulations) do not accurately
depict the parking needs of the proposed use and the requested reduction will
accommodate the parking demand to be generated by the proposed use. Surplus
nonresidential on-street or public spaces in the area may be taken into
consideration.
      (2)   The reduction in parking will provide a benefit for reduced storm
drainage runoff with open drainage areas.
      (3)   The reduction in parking will provide a benefit for pedestrian
access to the site.
      (4)   The reduction in parking will provide a benefit to the overall
environment through a certified LEED designed building
   (b)    Parking study.
      (1)   Content. A parking study submitted to satisfy the requirements of
§§
160.550 et seq. (Parking, Loading, and Stacking) shall include the following
information based upon the reason the parking study is required. The planning
director, upon consultation with the director of public works and the agency
responsible for approval of off-street parking facilities, may waive any of
these required contents or require additional information depending upon the
specifics of the application. The parking study shall be reviewed by, and must
be acceptable to, the planning director and director of public works.
      (2)   A site survey that includes an analysis of the peak demand for two
similar or like facilities in terms of use and size. The analysis should
include the facilities' peak parking days of the week and hours of the day, as
depicted by a study of the existing parking spaces hourly during the peak hours
of usage and hourly four hours before and after the time for each facility. It
should also include the number of spaces each facility contains. The study will
include the expected number of people, type of land uses, and times of
occupancy of each building in the plan.
      (3)   Any other information requested by the planning director or the
agency responsible for approval of off-street parking facilities.
      (4)   A site plan showing the location of on-street and off-street
parking spaces used in the parking study. The map shall clearly delineate the
location and number of spaces used in the study.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 30-23, passed
5-2-2023)
§ 160.601 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.602 SIGNAGE ALTERNATIVE PLANS.
   (a)   Purpose. Sign alternative plans allow limited modifications from the
on-premise sign regulations subchapter of §§
160.570 et seq. for MMU1, MMU2, MMU3, C-4, S-2 PUD, PO-PUD, and V-PUD
districts.
   (b)   Standards.
      (1)   The proposed sign(s) are architecturally and aesthetically
compatible with the major structures on the subject site and adjacent sites and
is compatible with the major character of the established neighborhood and
general environment.
      (2)   The proposed sign(s) are consistent with the standards within the
Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan while also meeting the below
standards.
         A.   Larger signs may be warranted when a street or highway is
designed with speeds and sight distances that require larger sizes to be
readable.
         B.   The proposed sign should only be as large as what is required to
adequately communicate intended messages without distracting motorists,
inhibiting visibility, or presenting other visual conflicts or safety hazards.
Periodic review of the engineering office's adopted MUTCD standards should be
considered.
         C.   The proposed sign should be spaced far enough from other signs so
as to avoid visual clutter and provide adequate visibility at driveways and
intersections and from one sign to another along a street corridor.
         D.   The proposed sign shall be oriented away, when possible, from
adjacent residential neighborhoods.
         E.   In pedestrian-oriented business districts, limit signs to
appropriately-scaled signs, including wall or attached projecting signs; or
monument signs when buildings are setback from the street property line.
      (3)   Sign is allowed within the applicant's area that is otherwise
allowed by the on-premise sign regulations subchapter §§
160.570 et seq.
      (4)   A master sign plan may be provided for all current and future signs
within a campus identified by size, color, shape, height, and common theme.
This master plan can allow additional flexibility for size, height, and
location of signage if it can be demonstrated that the master sign plan is
superior and more innovative than general standards and promotes a more
attractive environment.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ; Ord. 30-23, passed 5-2-2023 )
§ 160.603 ALTERNATIVE SITE PLANS FOR STREETCAR (RE2) FORMS.
   (a)   Purpose. The alternative site plan is to allow, in appropriate
circumstances, for up to zero foot front yards for RE2 forms. The purpose is to
maintain or improve the streetcar development style along appropriate street
corridors.
   (b)   Standards. The following standards must be included within the
alternative site plan.
      (1)   When the sidewalk is attached to the street and the building is
adjacent to the sidewalk, the sidewalk must be at least 12 feet in width.
      (2)   Include appropriate street furniture to help develop a pedestrian-
oriented entrance.
      (3)   When the building is adjacent to the sidewalk, but not adjacent to
a street, the sidewalk must be at least eight feet in width.
      (4)   Front doors adjacent to attached sidewalks must be recessed.
      (5)   Thirty percent square footage of the façade must be windows or 20%
windows and 10% articulated façade.
      (6)   No parking is allowed in the areas designated on the plan for
pedestrians.
      (7)   Streetcar alternative plans shall provide the same level of
landscaping as generally required by each form regulations, but allowed to do
so in different locations on the parcel.
      (8)   Street car alternative plans shall also adhere to all standards of
alterative landscape and buffer yard plans (§
160.599).
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
§ 160.605 PROCEDURE.
   The planning commission may authorize by conditional use permit the uses
designated in this subchapter when located in a zoning district allowing that
use. The planning commission shall impose those conditions as are appropriate
and necessary to ensure compliance with the comprehensive plan and protect the
health, safety, and general welfare in the issuance of the conditional use
permit. Unless expressly modified by the board of adjustment, all regulations
of the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. No primary on-
sale alcoholic beverage license shall be issued unless the owner or lessee of
the premises on which the on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment is to be
operated first shall have obtained a conditional use permit for that
establishment on the premises.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 56-05,
passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 13-07, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.606 APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a conditional use permit, the applicant shall file an
application therefor, in writing, on a form furnished by the department of
planning and building services.
   (b)   Every application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Legal description of the land on which the conditional use is
requested, together with local street address.
      (2)   Name and address of each owner of the property.
      (3)   Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant.
      (4)   Zoning district classification under which the property is
regulated at the time of the application.
      (5)   Be accompanied with a conditional use plan, unless waived by the
planning director.
      (6)   Any other information concerning the property as may be requested
by the director or planning commission.
      (7)   If the property is located within the water source protection
overlay district, the following information shall accompany the application:
         A.   Description of the proposed activity, use, or development,
including information and technical data and complete blueprints.
         B.   Inventory, including amounts of contaminants and/or hazardous
materials to be stored or used on the property or premises.
         C.   Provide complete descriptions, plans, and specifications of
primary and secondary containment facilities, including provisions for leak/
spill detection and monitoring.
         D.   Submit a completed contingency plan.
         E.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
environmental impact committee or screening committee.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 31-90,
passed 4-20-1990; Ord. 124-06, passed 10-2-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.607 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a conditional use permit with the
department of planning and building services, the applicant shall pay to the
city the appropriate fee as designated in §§
160.745 through
160.760.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.608 INFORMATION ON CONDITIONAL USE PLANS.
   (a)   The property for which the conditional use is being requested must be
described through the use of a conditional use plan. The entire property which
is described legally on the application must be shown within the conditional
use plan.
   (b)   (1)   In addition to the following information, plans shall be drawn
to scale upon substantial paper or provided electronically and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work
proposed and all work must conform to the provisions of this chapter and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Conditional use plans require
a complete plan check, by zoning and building services, prior to obtaining a
building permit.
         A.   The name of the project and/or business.
         B.   The scale and north arrow.
         C.   All existing and proposed buildings or additions and uses.
         D.   Dimensions and total square footage of all buildings: Include
height and number of stories.
         E.   Distance from all building lines to the property lines at the
closest points.
         F.   Dimensions of all property lines including platted property
lines.
         G.   Name and location of all adjacent streets, alleys, waterways and
other public facilities.
         H.   Location and dimensions of the parking lots; designate each
space, stall, and aisle. Include access to public right-of-way in accordance
with §
157.113 [Streets system] of this Code.
      (2)   Supplemental information: The planning commission or the city
council may approve additional conditions to be shown on a conditional use plan
addendum to detail the following:
         A.   Proposed parking lot and dumpster screening; show height,
location and type of materials to be used.
         B.   The proposed landscaped setback areas and trees and vegetation;
indicate species of trees and vegetation materials to be used for landscaping
including a plant materials schedule. Indicate landscape site areas to be
irrigated with underground systems in accordance with §
160.485.
         C.   Proposed on-premises signage types, number, locations and design
in accordance with §§
160.570 et seq.
         D.   Proposed project lighting type, location and design in accordance
with §
160.491.
         E.   Project phasing.
         F.   Architectural building plan elevations depicting height, roof
pitch, and exterior building materials.
         G.   Hours of operation.
         H.   Sound levels at stationary sources (
Chapter 93: Nuisances, §§
93.001 through
93.011 of this Code).
         I.   Any other information as deemed necessary by the planning
commission or the city council.
      (3)   Exception: The director may waive the submission of plans if they
find that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is
not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter, such as interior
improvements and tenant finishes or single- family/attached dwellings.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 56-05,
passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 124-06, passed 10-2-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.609 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING.
   Upon the filing of an application for a conditional use permit, the
department of planning and building services shall set a date for public
hearing on the request. The date for the public hearing shall be a day when the
planning commission is regularly scheduled to meet as determined by the rules,
policies and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the
planning commission for holding public hearings on those requests, or the
planning commission may designate a special meeting at which to hear a
requested conditional use application.
   (a)   Public notice.
      (1)   Signs. Signs shall be posted on the property for a continuous
period of ten days immediately prior to the public hearing held by the planning
commission or city council to consider the conditional use permit. The signs
shall be furnished by the department of planning and building services; state
the date, time and location of the public hearing and be posted by the
applicant in the numbers, design and locations prescribed by the director.
Before any action shall be taken by the planning commission, the applicant
shall first file with the department of planning and building services a
certificate verifying that the signs have been posted at the property location
before the time specified by this section.
      (2)   Written notice. Written notice shall be sent by the city to
adjacent property owners within 300 feet, measured from lot line to lot line.
The letters shall be postmarked at least ten business days prior to the hearing
and state the date, time, and location of the public hearing.
      (3)   Publication. The public hearing date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper in
the community.
      (4)   Failure to provide notice. Failure to provide actual notice to each
person so entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid, provided
that the applicant or the city substantially complies with the requisite
published legal newspaper notice, public notice and hearing requirements of
this subchapter.
   (b)   Hearing.
      (1)   Upon the day of the public hearing, the planning commission shall
review the decisions and recommendations of planning staff of all applications
coming before the planning commission as provided in this subchapter.
      (2)   Any decision to grant a conditional use shall be based upon and
accompanied by a statement regarding:
         A.   The objectives of the comprehensive plan.
         B.   The purpose of the zoning ordinance and its relevant zoning
districts when making a decision to approve or disapprove a conditional use
permit.
         C.   The stated conditional use standards within §
160.616.
      (3)   The planning commission, in making its determination of the
applications, may make changes in accordance with or in rejection or
modification of recommendation of the planning staff.
   (c)   Action and protest. Approval or denial of any application for a
conditional use permit shall be by a majority of members present. The decision
rendered by the planning commission on a conditional use permit may be appealed
to the city council. To appeal the decision of the planning commission, the
applicant or any other person aggrieved by the decision shall file a written
appeal with the department of planning and building services within five
working days of the planning commission’s decision.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 45-95,
passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 18-96, passed 2-5-1996; Ord. 56-05, passed 6-6-2005; Ord.
18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.610 CITY COUNCIL HEARING.
   When an appeal regarding a conditional use permit has been filed in
accordance with §
160.609(c), the city council shall conduct a public hearing to act on all
applications which have been processed and forwarded to them for public hearing
as provided in this section.
   (a)   Public notice. Signs shall be posted on the property for a continuous
period of ten days immediately prior to the public hearing held by the city
council to consider any conditional use permit appeal. The signs shall be
furnished by the department of planning and building services; state the date,
time and location of the public hearing and be posted by the applicant in the
numbers, design and locations prescribed by the director. Before any action
shall be taken by the council, the applicant shall first file with the
department of planning and building services a certificate verifying that the
signs have been posted at the proper location before the time specified by this
section.
   (b)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the city council shall
review the decisions and recommendations of the planning commission of all
applications coming before the city council as provided in this subchapter. The
city council, in making its determination of the applications, may make changes
in accordance with or in rejection or modification of the recommendation of the
planning commission.
   (c)   Action and protest. Approval or denial of any application for a
conditional use plan shall be by a majority of members present. Any person or
persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the city council,
or any taxpayer, or any officer, department or board of the city, may make
application with the circuit court for appropriate writ not later than 30 days
after the filing of the decision.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.055) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 45-95,
passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 55-97, passed 8-4-1997; Ord. 67-98, passed 7-6-1998; Ord.
56-05, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 58-06, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-
2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.611 APPROVAL AND AMENDMENTS TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (a)   Approval. The city council or planning commission gives final
approval, and all work shall be completed and enforced in accordance with the
approved conditions. Approved conditions shall not be amended without approved
authorization as noted below.
   (b)   Conditional use amendments. Any approved conditional use plan may be
amended the same as a new conditional use permit as provided in this section,
or entirely withdrawn by the applicant.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 124-06,
passed 10-2-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.612 EXPIRATION.
   (a)   A conditional use permit shall expire one year from the date upon
which it becomes effective if no work has commenced. Upon written request to
the planning director and prior to the conditional use permit expiration date,
a one-year time extension for the conditional use permit may be granted by the
planning director, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   There was no public objection presented during the public hearing
process for the original conditional use permit.
      (2)   The land uses for the surrounding properties have not significantly
been altered since the original approval date for the conditional use permit.
      (3)   Due to other ongoing permitting processes or necessary engineering/
planning studies relating to the specific project for the conditional use
permit that may impact the one-year schedule for project completion.
   (b)   A conditional use permit approved in accordance with §§
160.605 through
160.616 shall expire one year after the use discontinues on the premises, or
the use is changed to another permitted use in the underlying district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 25-93,
passed 4-5-1993; Ord. 98-01, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.613 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   If the director finds at any time that the terms, conditions and
requirements of the conditional use permit have not been complied with, or that
any phase thereof has not been completed within the time required under the
conditional use permit or any amendment thereto, the director shall report this
fact to the applicant and the planning commission. The planning commission may,
after conducting a public hearing, of which the applicant shall be notified,
submit a recommendation to the city council for their consideration and action.
The city council may, after a public hearing of which the applicant shall be
notified, revoke the conditional use permit for failure to comply with those
terms, conditions and requirements, or take other action as it may deem
necessary to obtain compliance.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.075) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 29-91,
passed 4-1-1991; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.614 PREEXISTING USES.
   An existing use eligible for a conditional use permit which was lawfully
established on the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to have
received a conditional use permit as herein required and shall be provided with
the permit by the city upon request, and it shall not be a nonconforming use,
provided, however, for any enlargement, extension or relocation of the existing
use, an application in conformance with this subchapter shall be required.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.615 REAPPLICATION.
   No applicant requesting a conditional use permit whose application includes
the same or substantially the same requirements for the same or substantially
the same property as that which has been denied by the planning commission or
city council shall be again considered by the planning commission before the
expiration date of six months from the date of the final action on the
petition.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.090) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.616 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS.
   Any conditional use approved by the planning commission or city council
shall conform to the standards set forth for the uses below. These standards
shall be construed to be the minimum requirements for any of the specified
conditional uses, and the planning commission or city council can require
additional conditions at their discretion. In all cases, the impact of the
proposed use on the adjacent properties will be a major consideration.
   Accessory alcohol. See Full-service restaurant.
   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings larger than the primary building
should be approved only if there is a legitimate residential purpose for the
accessory buildings. Special care should be taken to ensure that the applicant
is not using the structure for the operation of any business and that the
applicant understands that any commercial or industrial use would not be
permitted in the accessory building.
   Accessory dwelling units. The substitution of the permitted special use
standards should perform at the same or higher level and shall ensure that the
accessory dwelling will still be compatible with the single-family character of
the neighborhood by ensuring that the size, parking, and setbacks will all be
consistent with the scale of the single-family site.
   Accessory parking, off-site. The off-site parking should be located within a
reasonable distance of the use it is intended to serve. Natural or human-made
barriers and travel safety between sites should be considered. The parking must
be restricted by a written instrument of record. The instrument must be in a
form acceptable to the director and contain the number of spaces under lease
and a statement assuring retention of these spaces for a period specified by
the planning commission; however, not less than one year.
   Adult use. The 1,000-foot restriction may be waived if the city council
finds:
      (1)   The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a
blighted area.
      (2)   The establishment of the use will not be contrary to any program of
neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any program of urban
renewal.
      (3)   The concentration of these uses will not have an adverse effect
upon adjacent uses.
      (4)   Mitigation of issues related to hours of operation, orientation,
and design of the building and parking, and safety management.
   Antenna support structure. See Tele-communications tower.
   Archery range.
   Assisted-living center facility. The users shall be located in areas where
their impact on adjacent properties would not be detrimental due to their large
traffic flow or parking area.
   Bed and breakfast establishment. Such establishments should be located where
there will be minimal impact on surrounding residential properties and should
comply with the following conditions:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast establishments shall be an accessory use within
an owner-occupied principal dwelling.
      (2)   The dwelling shall provide a minimum 1,800 square feet of floor
area.
      (3)   Shall be in compliance with applicable state laws including South
Dakota department of health lodging licensing and provide a smoke detector in
each sleeping room.
      (4)   Off-street parking requirements shall be one-half space per guest
room and shall be in addition to the total number of parking spaces required.
Off-site parking may be acceptable if permitted parking facilities are within
500 feet.
   Broadcast tower. Location of the tower shall be done with consideration for
public safety in the event that the tower would fall and to minimize adverse
visual impact of broadcast towers through careful design, siting, and
screening. Care should be taken to avoid interference with any similar
broadcast use and in no event shall the tower be located in any airport flight
path. The tower shall be constructed in a manner that will make it inaccessible
for unauthorized persons to climb.
   Campground. Campgrounds should be designed to incorporate as many of the
requirements of a permitted special use. The conditional use should allow for
only the minimum reduction of the permitted special use standards while still
keeping to the intent of the campground.
   Car wash. See Retail and service, motor vehicle.
   College, university, or post high school. Such uses must be sited and
designed in a way as to minimize their impact on adjacent residential uses.
Special attention must be given to parking, lighting, the height of the
structure, the traffic generated and similar problems. Parking should generally
be screened from any adjacent residential areas.
   Crematory. Crematories shall be located a sufficient distance away from
residential areas to limit the sounds or odors coming from the crematorium.
Parking and building sight lines should be mitigated through berming and
landscaping, including coniferous vegetation for year around shelter. Buildings
should be constructed to be compatible with the surroundings.
   Cultural facility. The substitution of the permitted special use standards
should perform at the same or higher level than for brick or wood siding,
pitched roof, or parking in the front yard when adjacent to DD and AD forms
that are required by the special permitted standards through methods such as
orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are used
to create comparable performance.
   Day care center. A safe, healthy environment for the person is of primary
importance. Applicants shall remit their authorization from the city health
department prior to conditional use permit approval. Day care centers and
family day cares shall be located in areas where an adequate and safe
playground with sufficient green areas can be provided, where safe access to
the use is available, and in areas where the uses will be convenient for their
clients.
   Detention facility. See Human service facility.
   Dwellings for members of religious orders. Dwellings for members of
religious orders shall generally be located adjacent to the places of worship,
school, or hospital with which they are affiliated. The uses shall operate as a
single housekeeping unit and shall be of a small enough scale to have no
negative impact on adjacent properties. Parking should be limited to those
autos parked or stored on the premises by individuals residing on the premises.
   Dwelling for multifamily on the street level story. The approved initial
development plan (V-PUD or DT-PUD) must demonstrate that first-story
residential units will enhance and not detract from the mixed-use character of
the area.
   Dwelling, single-family detached (within a DD4 form—Historic Preservation).
      (1)   The Sioux Falls Board of Historic Preservation (BOHP) shall review
the construction rehabilitation, restoration or reconstruction of any principal
building to determine whether the proposed design will have an adverse effect
on the historic character of the zoning district. The BOHP shall review to
ensure the historical integrity of the following building elements is
maintained.
         A.   Massing—per district style(s).
         B.   Form—orientation, style.
         C.   Details—materials, methods, and colors per district style(s).
         D.   Roofs—pitch, details.
         E.    Windows—proportions, details.
         F.   Porches and decks—form, details.
         G.   Doors and entrance ways—details.
         H.   Trim—details.
         I.   Above grade foundations—details.
      (2)   The demolition of any principal building shall be approved only if
another principal building is approved that is consistent with the building
styles of the historic district if it does not significantly affect the
historical integrity and character of the historical district or if the
demolition is necessary because the building is structurally deficient.
   Family day care. See Day care center.
   Full-service restaurant. Upon application for a conditional use permit, the
following supplemental information shall be provided:
      (1)   A menu depicting food items available.
      (2)   Hours of operation.
      (3)   A security management plan shall be provided to the Police
Department to address operational issues including employee training and
supervision of customers, enforcement of age-restrictive product sales, and
smoking policy. If the conditions of the management plan are violated the
conditional use permit may be revoked.
      (4)   A floor plan depicting the dining area, kitchen facilities and
separate incidental area for alcohol service and consumption.
   Funeral establishment. Funeral establishments shall be located in areas
where the traffic they generate can be adequately channeled. Design of these
sites should try to minimize the impact of the parking areas. The proximity of
the funeral establishment to residential areas and hours of operation shall be
limited.
   Halfway house. See Human service facility.
   Heliport. Heliports shall be regulated with regard for the routes that they
would take and the hours of operation. No facility shall be allowed without
prior approval of the FAA. The site should be required to be hard surfaced to
reduce blowing dust. The landing pad should be required to be constructed in a
manner to avoid spillage entering the sewer system and/or to prevent it from
overflowing the roof of a building. Heliports may be constructed on the roof of
a building or on the ground; however, in either event, the facility should be
constructed so that access at-will by the public would not be permitted.
Heliport plans should be reviewed by the building inspection and fire
departments prior to construction, and any requirements made by those
departments shall be required of the applicant. The uses should be required to
conform to §§
93.001 through
93.011 (
Chapter 93: Nuisances) of this Code of Ordinances.
   Human service facility. A human service facility may be permitted provided
it is found that:
      (1)   The location is compatible with characteristics of surrounding
uses, and not injurious to surrounding properties.
      (2)   The facility being fully enclosed within a building, except for a
designated outdoor enclosed area.
      (3)   Submittal of a site plan in accordance with § 160.608.
      (4)   Submittal of a written management and security plan which outlines
management and security provisions, and includes a neighborhood issues
management strategy.
      (5)   A neighborhood meeting shall be conducted prior to a city public
hearing which addresses site improvements, building design, and “good neighbor”
components, and addresses the means for any future problems as may arise,
including crime prevention, alcohol and drug use policies and the like.
      (6)   Additional neighborhood meetings shall be organized and held by the
applicant to ensure conditional use permit compliance. One neighborhood meeting
shall be held within 90 days after business operations begin, and another
neighborhood meeting shall be held prior to the one-year anniversary date of
business operation.
   Kennel. If a kennel includes outdoor kennels, it should be located in areas
where the noise generated by the use would not be a nuisance or detrimental to
adjacent properties. Other buffers such as walls, berms, and landscaping may be
required in separating the kennel operation from adjacent property owners.
   Live-work facility. The substitution of the permitted special use standards
should perform at the same or higher level than for brick or wood siding,
pitched roof, or parking in the front yard when adjacent to DD and AD forms
that are required by the special permitted standards through methods such as
orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are used
to create comparable performance.
   Manufactured home park. The substitution of the permitted special use
standards should perform at the same or higher level in regards to land use
transitions that are required by ordinance through methods such as orientation,
topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are used to create
comparable performance.
   Manufacturing, process, and assembly, heavy.
      (1)   If adjacent to residential, a neighborhood meeting shall be
conducted to gain input about methods to transition the business from the
adjacent residential homes through building design, screening, landscaping,
buffer yards, and considering the below standards.
      (2)   Screening. The business may be operated within a permanent building
which complies with this code, or in a yard enclosed by a solid fence, which
must totally screen the manufacturing business from view from outside the
property. The fence must extend from grade level to a height equaling the
maximum height to which fences may be built under §
160.480 of this Code for the district where the property is located.
      (3)   Minimize odor impacts. Such uses shall be located in a manner which
will minimize the impact of odors from the plant on the residential and
recreation districts in the city.
      (4)   Prevent groundwater leakage. Petitioners should present a building
design which would utilize measures to prevent infiltration of the groundwater
in the event of leakage, and petitioners should consult with and present a
report from the city water and water reclamation departments to determine the
impact of the development on city utilities.
      (5)   Traffic mitigation. Traffic can only travel on residential streets
when it is only a secondary access point and it can be shown that heavy traffic
including truck traffic will typically not use the secondary access point or
will not pass any residential homes.
      (6)   Minimize heat, glare, and noise. These uses shall be constructed in
such a way as to minimize any heat, glare, or noise that would be generated by
them.
      (7)   Fire/explosion mitigation. These uses shall be located in areas
where they would not present a hazard to adjacent properties in the event of a
fire or explosion. The petitioners should secure a report from the fire
department regarding any building standards that must be met or other concerns
the fire department has regarding the use.
      (8)   Medical waste. The operations of any medical waste facility or
treated medical storage must be fully enclosed within a building.
      (9)   Litter, odor and product control. These facilities must submit,
along with the conditional use permit application, a site management plan
outlining litter, odor, and product control measures to be approved by the
planning and health departments.
      (10)   Accessory uses. Any accessory use of the heavy manufacturing
business shall be considered when measuring impacts.
   Manufacturing, process, and assembly, light.
      (1)   Traffic mitigation. Traffic can only travel on residential streets
when it is only a secondary access point and it can be shown that heavy traffic
including truck traffic will typically not use the secondary access point or
will not pass any residential homes.
      (2)   Unscreened outdoor storage only allowed if public view of the
outdoor storage is limited from view because of the terrain and/or the
orientation of the storage is in such a way that it is obscured from view by
buildings and other natural features such as trees.
   Medical cannabis dispensary. The permitted special standards may be reduced
to no less than 500 feet from sensitive land uses if the planning commission
finds that the plan performs at the same or higher level with reduced
separation distances. The applicant must then include mitigation measures that
for example utilize topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that
are used to provide the same or higher levels of land use transitions. For no
reason shall a reduction in the separation distance between two medical
cannabis dispensaries be allowed as provided by the standards of the permitted
special use.
   Medical cannabis testing facility. The permitted special standards may be
reduced to no less than 500 feet from sensitive land uses if the planning
commission finds that the plan performs at the same or higher level with
reduced separation distances. The applicant must then include mitigation
measures that for example utilize topography, higher level of aesthetics, or
barriers that are used to provide the same or higher levels of land use
transitions. For no reason shall a reduction in the separation distance between
two medical cannabis testing facilities be allowed as provided by the standards
of the permitted special use.
   Mining of minerals. See Quarry, mining, and exploration of minerals.
   Motor vehicle sales, display, and rental. When a lot has hard surfacing
greater than an area and when closer than 250 feet of DD and AD forms, hard-
surfaced areas shall be required to meet the smaller parking fields
requirements of §
160.556 (i). When in the RE2 or RE3 forms, a level D buffer yard or an
equivalent or better landscaping plan shall also be required.
   Mortuary. Mortuary establishments shall be located in areas where the
traffic they generate can be adequately channeled. Design of these sites should
try to minimize the impact of the parking areas proximity to residential and
hours of operation shall be limited.
   Motor vehicle display and sales within an existing commercial parking lot/
facility. The use shall maintain adequate parking and fire access for the
primary use.
   Nonconforming uses. A conditional use permit may be granted to authorize the
issuance of a permit to allow the enlargement, extension, conversion,
reconstruction, or structural alteration of any building, structure, or outdoor
use. In consideration for a permit, the following criteria shall be given
specific consideration:
      (1)   Effect on surrounding property values.
      (2)   Impact on traffic and city utility services.
      (3)   The density of land use zoning for the subject and adjacent
properties.
      (4)   The degree of hardship upon the applicant which would be caused by
failure to grant the permit.
      (5)   It can be demonstrated that it was the owner’s intent to use the
entire premises for the use prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of
this chapter.
   Nursing homes. See Assisted-living center facility.
   Office. The substitution of the permitted special use standards should
perform at the same or higher level than for brick or wood siding, pitched
roof, or parking in the front yard when adjacent to DD and AD forms that are
required by the special permitted standards through methods such as
orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are used
to create comparable performance.
   Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs shall be located on the site in a
manner that will minimize the negative effects of the sign. Off-premises signs
shall be encouraged to be of a height that allows them to be seen but not so
high as to permit visual pollution in the area. These signs should be required
to be spaced a sufficient distance from each other to avoid the negative impact
of several large signs concentrated in one area. Signs shall be reviewed and
special consideration given for the following aesthetic quality categories:
structure (number and design of support poles, size, shape, and color), maximum
height, maximum area, lighting, electronics, extensions, and eye catchers. The
proximity of off-premises signs to sensitive uses, cemeteries, and historic
districts with frontage along the same right-of-way as the roadway in which the
off-premises sign is intended to be read and/or direct sight lines from a
sensitive use, cemetery, or historic district to the off-premises sign shall be
a primary consideration.
   Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment. An off-sale alcoholic beverage
establishment may be permitted provided it is found that: A security management
plan shall be provided to the police department to address operational issues
including employee training and supervision of customers, enforcement of age-
restrictive product sales, and smoking policy. If the conditions of the
management plan are violated the conditional use permit may be revoked.
   Off-site parking. Parking lots and ramps shall be constructed in a manner
that will cause a minimum amount of impact on adjacent residential uses.
Particular care should be taken with the height of the ramp so that adjacent
properties are not deprived of sunlight. Access to or from the ramp should be
on nonresidential streets. Screening of the lot or ramp from the residential
structure should be done. Care should be taken so that any lighting of the
facility should be of a type which would not reflect on to the adjacent
residential area.
   On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment. An on-sale alcoholic beverage
establishment may be permitted provided it is found that the location:
      (1)   The on-sale alcohol establishment must have all parking spaces
within the on-site parking lot in close proximity and facing the entrance.
      (2)   Lighting may be considered to provide illumination for security and
safety of parking access areas. On-site lighting plans shall be submitted for
review and approval.
      (3)    Soundproofing may be considered to prevent noise and vibrations
from penetrating into surrounding properties or lease space.
      (4)   A security management plan shall be provided to the police
department to address operational issues including employee training and
supervision of customers, enforcement of age-restrictive product sales, and
smoking policy. If the conditions of the management plan are violated the
conditional use permit may be revoked.
   Parking ramps. See Off-site parking.
   Pet cemetery. Pet cemeteries shall generally be located in areas with
adequate public access; and further, all animals shall be required to be buried
in containers to a depth of at least six feet.
   Places of worship. These uses shall be located in areas where their impact
on adjacent properties would not be detrimental due to their large size traffic
situation or parking lots. They shall be designed to minimize their impact on
properties of a residential nature through landscaping, setbacks, screening and
other appropriate measures.
   Public service facility. These facilities and uses shall be sited and
designed to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood character, so that
they will not have a significant negative impact on adjacent properties.
Special attention shall be given to site design including parking and the
traffic generated, landscape screening, lighting, signage and building design
including orientation, setbacks, structure height, exterior materials, and
color schemes.
   Quarry, mining, and mineral exploration. Typically the use shall be within
1,000 feet of any DD, AD, or MD forms unless it can be shown that appropriate
transitions to these forms can be maintained through other methods such as
significant buffer yards and other buffering land uses. This use shall be
located where the blasting, airborne dust, and heavy truck traffic will not
have a negative effect on adjacent properties. In addition, consideration
should be given to the height and position of any storage or processing
equipment needed on the site. All quarry, mining and mineral exploration
businesses shall be required to meet the standards of §
160.342.
   Retail and service, motor vehicle. Such uses shall be compatible with the
neighborhood character and be sited and designed in such a way as to minimize
their impact on adjacent residential uses. Special attention should be given to
the height of the structure, parking and loading areas, traffic generated,
noise, lighting, and landscaping. In addition, RE2 and RE3 forms shall increase
their landscaping requirements to a level D buffer yard or an equivalent or
better landscaping plan.
   Retail and service, limited. Such uses shall be compatible with the
neighborhood character and be sited and designed in such a way as to minimize
their impact on adjacent residential uses. Special attention should be given to
the height of the structure, parking and loading areas, traffic generated,
noise, lighting and landscaping.
   Recreation facility, private. The substitution of the permitted special use
standards should perform at the same or higher level than for brick or wood
siding, pitched roof, or parking in the front yard when adjacent to DD and AD
forms that are required by the special permitted standards through methods such
as orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are
used to create comparable performance.
   Recreation facility, subdivision. The subdivision recreation facility may be
owned by someone other than the subdivision only if they can demonstrate that
the facility will only serve the subdivision in the area and not the general
public.
   Residential-compatible self-storage. The substitution of the permitted
special use standards should perform at the same or higher level in regards to
land use transitions that are required by ordinance through methods such as
orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are used
to create comparable performance.
   Residence above the first story. The substitution of the permitted special
use standards should perform at the same or higher level than for brick or wood
siding, pitched roof, or parking in the front yard when adjacent to DD and AD
forms that are required by the special permitted standards through methods such
as orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are
used to create comparable performance.
   Sanitary landfill and wastewater plant. Typically the use shall be within
1,000 feet of any DD, AD, orMD forms unless it can be shown that appropriate
transitions to these forms can be maintained through other methods such as
significant buffer yards and other buffering land uses. This use shall be
located where any smell, noise, and truck traffic will not have a negative
effect on adjacent properties. In addition, consideration should be given to
the height and position of any storage or processing equipment needed on the
site. Same standards as Manufacturing, process, and assembly, heavy.
   Schools, elementary. The main vehicle access may only be off of a local
street if the traffic impacts can be minimized to adjacent residential
neighborhoods.
   Schools, middle and high. The substitution of the permitted special use
standards should perform at the same or higher level than for brick or wood
siding, pitched roof, or parking in the front yard when adjacent to DD and AD
forms that are required by the special permitted standards through methods such
as orientation, topography, higher level of aesthetics, or barriers that are
used to create comparable performance.
   Self-storage facility. A self-storage facility with the storage of toxic or
explosive material shall be required to be inspected by the fire marshal’s
office and a report issued by them prior to the meeting regarding any
particular hazards from such a use.
   Stable, accessory. Stables should be for the use of members of the immediate
family residing on the premises; there should be a minimum of two acres in the
lot, but in all cases at least one acre per horse should be provided; a pasture
of at least 10,000 square feet should be provided, however a pasture would not
be allowed to be located within the required front yard setback, nor should the
fence surrounding a pasture be barbed wire or electric.
   Storage, Motor Vehicle. When the storage yard has hard surfacing greater
than an area and when closer than 250 feet of DD and AD forms, (the storage
yard) hard-surfaced areas shall be required to meet the smaller parking fields
requirements of §
160.556(i).
   Telecommunications towers and antenna support structures. Where a
conditional use permit is required, for approval of telecommunications towers
and antenna support structures, the following will be considered:
      (1)   Design character.
         A.   Telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and
equipment buildings shall be compatible with the architectural style of the
surrounding built environment, considering exterior materials, roof form,
scale, mass, color, texture and character. Equipment buildings may be located
underground where feasible. To prevent undue concentration of
telecommunications towers, consideration should be given to co-location as a
first alternative.
         B.   Wireless communications facilities on new telecommunications
tower structures, antenna support structures or co-located on existing
telecommunications towers shall minimize visual impact on the city skyline.
      (2)   Screening.
         A.   A telecommunications tower site and tower base adjacent to
residential property shall be provided with a fence, wall, berm, or shrubbery
of sufficient height and of a character necessary to provide adequate visual
screening. Where the adjacent property is across public right-of-way from a
telecommunications tower site, screening shall be provided in all cases except
when the right-of-way is an arterial street.
         B.   Existing vegetation and grades on the site shall be preserved as
much as possible. Natural growth around the property perimeter on large, wooded
lots may be considered a sufficient buffer to telecommunications towers. In
locations where the visual impact of the telecommunications tower would be
minimal, the screening requirement may be reduced or waived.
      (3)   Fencing. Adjacent to a residentially used or zoned property natural
materials shall be used for fence screening. If chain-link fencing is needed
for safety and security, additional landscape screening shall be required
outside the chain-link fence to screen public view of the telecommunications
tower site.
   Temporary or emergency shelter. Temporary or emergency shelter may be
permitted provided it is found that:
      (1)   The location is compatible with characteristics of surrounding
uses, and not injurious to surrounding properties, including residential
neighborhoods.
      (2)   The facility is being fully enclosed within a building, except for
a designated outdoor enclosed area.
      (3)   The distance between the proposed use and any elementary or
secondary school measured from lot line to lot line is not less than 1,000
feet.
      (4)   Submittal of a site plan in accordance with §
160.608.
      (5)   Submittal of a written management and security plan which outlines
management and security provisions, and includes a neighborhood issues
management strategy.
      (6)   A neighborhood meeting, which shall include, but is not limited to,
a city staff representative and a city council representative, shall be
conducted prior to a city public hearing which addresses site improvements,
building design, and “good neighbor” components, and addresses the means for
dealing with any future problems as may arise, including crime prevention,
alcohol and drug use policies and the like.
      (7)   Additional neighborhood meetings shall be organized and held by the
applicant to ensure conditional use permit compliance. One neighborhood meeting
shall be held within 90 days after business operations begin, and another
neighborhood meeting shall be held prior to the one-year anniversary date of
business operation.
   Trap shoot, rifle range, pistol range, or archery range. The uses should be
located in those areas where the noise from an operation would not have a
detrimental effect on adjacent properties. In addition, careful consideration
must be given to the safety aspects of the use, including limited public
access, adjacent land uses, and the operation of the use. Consideration should
be given to any danger to stock that might occur from that use.
   Warehouse and freight, light.
      (1)   Traffic mitigation. Traffic can only travel on residential streets
when it is only a secondary access point and it can be shown that heavy traffic
including truck traffic will typically not use the secondary access point or
will not pass any residential homes.
      (2)   Unscreened outdoor storage is only allowed if public view of the
outdoor storage is limited from view because of the terrain and/or the
orientation of the storage is in such a way that it is obscured from view by
buildings and other natural features such as trees.
   Warehouse and freight, heavy.
      (1)   If adjacent to residential, a neighborhood meeting shall be
conducted to gain input about methods to transition the business from the
adjacent residential homes through building design, screening, landscaping,
buffer yards, and considering the below standards.
      (2)   Screening. The business may be operated within a permanent building
which complies with this Code, or in a yard enclosed by a solid fence, which
must totally screen the manufacturing business from view from outside the
property. The fence must extend from grade level to a height equaling the
maximum height to which fences may be built under § 160.480 of this Code for
the district where the property is located.
      (3)   Street access and pedestrians. Any freight business, bus terminal,
or other business with a lot of truck or bus traffic shall be located in an
area where there is good access to major streets, and it shall be constructed
in such a way as to minimize its effects on pedestrian traffic in the area.
      (4)   Noise mitigation. Freight and bus terminals shall be located or
designed in such a way to minimize the noise inherent to such an operation and
to minimize the impact of any diesel fumes on adjacent properties.
      (5)   Stored vehicles. Any vehicles used by the business that are stored
on the premises shall be kept in an orderly fashion which would not detract
from adjacent properties.
      (6)   Lighting mitigation. Any lighting of the storage yard should be
done in a way that will not cause a reflection into or glare onto adjacent
residential properties.
      (7)   Traffic mitigation. Traffic can only travel on residential streets
when it is only a secondary access point and it can be shown that heavy traffic
including truck traffic will typically not use the secondary access point or
will not pass any residential homes.
      (8)   Accessory uses. Any accessory use of the industrial business shall
be considered when measuring impacts.
      (9)   Litter, odor, and product control. These facilities must submit,
along with the conditional use permit application, a site management plan
outlining litter, odor, and product control measures to be approved by the
planning and health departments.
   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). WECS should be sited in a manner that
will prevent a damaged structure from causing any harm to adjacent properties;
further, it shall be designed to limit access to the structure and to limit to
the extent possible any noise from the structure. A WECS shall also be in
conformance with §
160.402.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.59.100) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 29-87,
passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 99-88, passed 11-7-1988; Ord. 72-89, passed 7-31-1989;
Ord. 31-90, passed 4-20-1990; Ord. 46-90, passed 5-21-1990; Ord. 55-90, passed
6-4-1990; Ord. 14-91, passed 2-4-1991; Ord. 55-91, passed 7-1-1991; Ord. 79-91,
passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 25-92, passed 3-2-1992; Ord. 25-94, passed 4-4-1994;
Ord. 94-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 96-95, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 137-95, passed
11-6-1995; Ord. 27-96, passed 3-4-1996; Ord. 38-96, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 39-
96, passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 5-97, passed 1-21-1997; Ord. 17-98, passed 2-2-1998;
Ord. 4-99, passed 1-4-1999; Ord. 16-99, passed 2-16-1999; Ord. 24-99, passed 3-
1-1999; Ord. 25-99, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 75-01, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 99-01,
passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 4-03, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 20-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord.
85-04, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 108-04, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 56-05, passed 6-6-
2005; Ord. 121-05, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 128-05, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 08-
06, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 02-07, passed 1-2-2007; Ord. 01-08, passed 1-7-2008;
Ord. 60-08, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 103-09, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 112-09,
passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 91-12, passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013;
Ord. 34-18, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019; Ord. 104-21, passed
9-7-2021; Ord. 106-23, passed 11-7-2023; Ord. 5-24, passed 1-2-2024)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT
§ 160.630 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   The planning commission may recommend changes to the comprehensive
plan from time to time as set forth below. There are two types of comprehensive
plan amendments. The first amendment type is a general update which includes
policy updates and five-year updates to the plan. The process to update this
plan shall be adopted according to state law. The second type of comprehensive
plan amendment is a future land use map amendment, which are requested by
individual or groups of landowner to update the size of employment centers or
growth areas of the map.
   (b)   Requests for future land use map amendments shall follow the procedure
set out in this subchapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.60.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.631 APPLICATION.
   An application for a proposed amendment shall be filed with the planning
department. Amendments may be initiated by the property owner or his or her
designated representative or by an appropriate governmental agency. For
amendments initiated by the planning commission, the applicant shall be the
director of planning and building services.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.60.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.632 FILING FEE.
   Upon the filing of any application for an amendment with the department of
planning and building services, the applicant shall pay to the city the
appropriate fee as designated in §§
160.745 through
160.760.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.60.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.633 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARINGS.
   (a)   Date. Upon the filing of an application for a future land use plan
amendment, the department of planning and building services shall set a date
for public hearing on the request.
   (b)   Day. The date for the public hearing shall be a day when the planning
commission is regularly scheduled to meet as determined by the rules, policies
and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the planning
commission for holding public hearings on those requests, or the planning
commission may designate a special meeting at which to hear a requested
comprehensive plan or future land use plan amendment.
   (c)   Public notice.
      (1)   Signs.
         A.   Applicants requesting future land use plan amendments on parcels
between 20 acres and 640 acres shall post signs ten days immediately prior to
the public hearing.
         B.   The signs shall be furnished by the department of planning and
building services; state the date, time and location of the public hearing and
be posted by the applicant in the numbers, design and locations prescribed by
the director.
         C.   Before any action shall be taken by the planning commission, the
applicant shall first file with the department of planning and building
services a certificate verifying that the signs have been posted at the proper
location before the time specified by this section.
      (2)   Written notice. Written notice shall be sent by the city to
adjacent property owners within 300 feet, measured from lot line to lot line.
The letters shall be postmarked at least ten business days prior to the hearing
and state the date, time and location of the public hearing.
      (3)   Publication. The public hearing, date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper of
the community. After conducting the public hearing, the city planning
commission shall submit its recommendation to the city council.
      (4)   Failure to provide notice. Failure to provide actual notice to each
person so entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid, provided
that the applicant or the city substantially complies with the requisite
published legal newspaper notice, public notice and hearing requirements of
this subchapter.
   (d)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the planning commission
shall review the decisions and recommendations of the planning staff of all
applications coming before the planning commission as provided in this
subchapter. The planning commission, in making its determination of the
applications, may make changes in accordance with or in rejection or
modification of the recommendation of the planning staff.
   (e)   Action and protest. Approval or denial of any application for a
comprehensive plan or future land use plan amendment shall be by a majority of
members present.
   (f)   Planning commission report. The planning commission shall submit to
the city council a final report containing its recommendations on those
applications for amendments which were considered.
   (g)   Planning commission standards for approval. The future land use map
amendment shall be required when the director of planning and building services
determines that the policies of Chapter 3—Shape Neighborhoods within the Shape
Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan are not being met.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.60.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.634 CITY COUNCIL HEARING.
   The city council shall conduct a public hearing to act on all comprehensive
plan or future land use plan amendments applications which have been processed
and forwarded to them for public hearing as provided in this subchapter.
   (a)   Public notice.
      (1)   Signs.
         A.   Applicants requesting future land use plan amendments on parcels
between 20 acres and 640 acres shall post signs ten days prior to the public
hearing.
         B.   The signs shall be furnished by the department of planning and
building services; state the date, time and location of the public hearing and
be posted by the applicant in the numbers, design and locations prescribed by
the director.
         C.   Before any action shall be taken by the city council, the
applicant shall first file with the department of planning and building
services a certificate verifying that the signs have been posted at the proper
location before the time specified by this section.
      (2)   Publication. The public hearing date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper of
the community.
   (b)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the city council shall
review the decisions and recommendations of the planning commission of all
applications coming before the city council as provided in this subchapter. The
city council, in making its determination of the applications, may make changes
in accordance with or in rejection or modification of the recommendation of the
planning commission.
   (c)   Action and protest. Approval or denial of any application for a
comprehensive plan or future land use plan amendment shall be by a majority of
members present. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the city council, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department or
board of the city, may make application with the circuit court for appropriate
writ not later than 30 days after the filing of the decision. Twenty days after
publication of the city council’s approval, the amendment shall take effect
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.60.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.635 REAPPLICATION.
   No applicant requesting a comprehensive plan or future land use plan
amendment whose application includes the same or substantially the same
requirements for the same or substantially the same property as that which has
been denied by the planning commission or city council shall be again
considered by the planning commission before the expiration date of six months
from the date of the final action on the petition.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.60.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
CHANGE OF ZONE
§ 160.650 APPLICATION TO CITY OR BY CITY FOR ZONING DISTRICT CHANGE.
   (a)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring a change in regulations,
restriction, or boundaries of the zoning map shall make application for that
change to the planning commission. Written application shall be filed with the
department of planning and building services of the city, requesting a change
in the zoning district classification.
   (b)   The application shall be provided by the planning department and be
completed in full by the applicant. The application shall include a legal
description or zoning exhibit to legally describe the property within the
application.
   (c)   The applicant shall ensure that the property owner(s) within the area
desiring a zoning district change has been notified. Notification may include
signatures on the application or letters sent to the owner(s). The applicant
shall provide evidence of the notification at the time of the application.
   (d)   The city council may from time to time on its own motion, after public
notice and hearing, and after a report by the planning commission, amend,
supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently
established.
   (e)   In conjunction with a change of zoning classification, a developer or
city council may include certain conditions that shall guide the development of
the zoning district. Conditions may only be amended by a subsequent change of
zoning. Types of situations where conditions are eligible include:
      (1)   Limitations in certain uses typically eligible within a zoning
district.
      (2)   Additional transitional requirements for the zoning district to
transition to an adjacent zoning district by conditioning the approval of an
alternative site plan.
   (f)   Any transitional conditions issued by the city council shall be in
written form and with enough detail to provide the applicant with enough
guidance to develop and build the site transitions. All conditions shall be
included in the approval letter sent by the planning office to the applicant.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.61.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 50-09,
passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.651 FEES.
   Upon the filing of any application for a zoning district classification
change with the department of planning and building services and the city, the
applicant shall pay to the city the appropriate fee as designated in §§
160.745 through
160.760.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.61.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 120-01,
passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.652 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The planning commission and city council shall consider the following
criteria in their review of zoning change requests. Proposed zoning change
amendments that satisfy all of the criteria may be approved.
   (a)   The requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions
since the previous zoning classification was established or by an error in the
zoning map.
   (b)   The city and other agencies will be able to provide necessary public
services, facilities, and programs to serve the development allowed by the new
zoning classification at the time the property is developed.
   (c)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the purpose of this Land
Development Code, the adopted Shape Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan and
other adopted policies of the city.
   (d)   No proposed amendment shall be allowed that is a spot zoning. Spot
zoning is a rezoning of a lot or parcel to benefit an owner for a use that is
incompatible with surrounding land uses and that does not further the Shape
Sioux Falls 2035 Comprehensive Plan. Spot zoning does not necessarily occur
when there is an isolated parcel that is zoned differently than the adjacent
zoning. Spot zoning occurs only when all of the following situations occur:
      (1)   A small parcel of land is singled out for special and privileged
treatment.
      (2)   The singling out is not in the public interest but only for the
benefit of the land owner.
      (3)   The action is not in accord with the Shape Sioux Falls 2035
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.653 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING.
   Upon the filing of an application for a request of zoning district
classification change with the department of planning accompanied by the
deposit to defray the cost in the manner prescribed in §§
160.745 through
160.760, the department of planning shall set a date for public hearing on the
requested change of district classification. The date for a public hearing
shall be a day when the planning commission is regularly scheduled to hear
zoning district classification change requests as determined by the rules,
policies and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the
planning commission for holding public hearings on the requests; or the
planning commission may designate a special meeting at which to hear a
requested change of district classification.
   (a)   Public notice.
      (1)   Signs.
         A.   Signs shall be posted on the property for a continuous period of
ten days immediately prior to any public hearing held by the planning
commission or city council to consider any rezoning application.
         B.   The signs shall be furnished by the department of planning and
building services; state the date, time and location of the public hearing and
be posted by the applicant in the numbers, design and locations prescribed by
the director.
         C.   Before any action shall be taken by the planning commission, the
applicant shall first file with the department of planning and building
services a certificate verifying that the signs have been posted at the proper
location before the time specified by this section.
      (2)   Written notice. Letters shall be sent by the city to adjacent
property owners within 300 feet, measured from lot line to lot line. The
letters shall be postmarked ten business days prior to the hearing and state
the date, time, and location of the public hearing.
      (3)   Publication. The public hearing date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper of
the community. After conducting the public hearing, the city planning
commission shall submit its recommendation to the city council.
      (4)   Failure to provide notice. Failure to provide actual notice to each
person so entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid, provided
that the applicant or the city substantially complies with the requisite
published legal newspaper notice, public notice and hearing requirements of
this subchapter.
   (b)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the planning commission
shall review the decisions and recommendations of the planning staff of all
applications coming before the planning commission as provided in this
subchapter. The planning commission, in making its determination of the
applications, may make changes in accordance with or in rejection or
modification of the recommendation of the planning staff.
   (c)   Action and protest. Approval or denial of any application for a zoning
district classification change shall be by a majority of members present.
   (d)   Planning commission report. The planning commission shall submit to
the city council a final report containing its recommendations on those
applications for zoning district classification changes which it has considered
and all other amendments to this subchapter. If no report is received from the
planning commission in 65 days, it may be assumed that the commission has
approved the amendment. Whenever the proposed change of boundaries or
regulations affects the area outside the city limits of the city, no amendment,
supplement or change in any area shall be effective unless the county planning
commission of the county in which the area lies shall sit with the city
planning commission and both the commissions make a recommendation to the city
council and the board of county commissioners.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.61.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 95-95,
passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 18-96, passed 2-5-1996; Ord. 120-01, passed 12-10-2001;
Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.654 CITY COUNCIL HEARING.
   The city council shall conduct a public hearing to act on all zoning
district classification change applications which have been processed and
forwarded to them for public hearing as provided in this subchapter. After the
planning commission hearing, the department of planning shall set a date for
public hearing on the requested change of district classification. The date for
a public hearing shall be a day when the city council is regularly scheduled to
hear zoning district classification change requests as determined by the rules,
policies and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by city
council for holding public hearings on the requests; or city council may
designate a special meeting at which to hear a requested change of district
classification.
   (a)   Public notice.
      (1)   Signs.
         A.   Signs shall be posted on the property for a continuous period of
ten days immediately prior to any public hearing held by the city council to
consider any rezoning application.
         B.   The signs shall be furnished by the department of planning and
building services; state the date, time, and location of the public hearing and
be posted by the applicant in the numbers, design, and locations prescribed by
the director.
         C.   Before any action shall be taken by the city council, the
applicant shall first file with the department of planning and building
services a certificate verifying that the signs have been posted at the proper
location before the time specified by this section.
      (2)   Publication. The public hearing date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper of
the community.
   (b)   Hearing. Upon the day of the public hearing, the city council shall
review the decisions and recommendations of the planning commission of all
applications coming before the city council as provided in this subchapter. The
city council, in making its determination of the applications, may make changes
in the zoning map in accordance with or in rejection or modification of the
recommendation of the planning commission.
   (c)   Action and protest. Approval or denial of any application for a zoning
district classification shall be by a majority of members present. Twenty days
after publication of the city council’s approval, the zoning district
classification change shall take effect unless the referendum be invoked, or
unless a written protest be filed with the city clerk, signed by at least 40%
of the owners of equity in the lots included in any proposed district and the
lands within 250 feet from any part of the proposed district. A corporation
shall be construed to be a sole owner, and when parcels of land are in the name
of more than one person, owner representation shall be in proportion to the
number of signers who join in the petition in relation to the number of owners.
If a protest is filed, the ordinance does not become effective unless the
ordinance is approved by a resolution by six members of the city council at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The protest provisions of this section do not
apply to any ordinance regulating or establishing floodplain areas.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.61.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 55-97,
passed 8-4-1997; Ord. 67-98, passed 7-6-1998; Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord.
9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.655 REAPPLICATION.
   No application requesting a zoning district classification change on any
property whose application includes any property either entirely or
substantially the same as that which has been denied by the city council shall
again be considered by the planning commission before the expiration of six
months from the date of the final action of the city council.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.61.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATION OF REQUIRED YARDS AND BUFFER YARD BERMS
§ 160.660 TYPES AND STANDARDS.
   The city council has authorized the director of planning and development
services to grant minor modification of the setback and landscaping regulations
of any form based upon the following standards. Minor modifications are
intended to allow very narrow changes that do not change the performance of the
required yards or required buffer yard berms.
   (a)   Types. The following types of modifications are allowed.
      (1)   The modification is a maximum of 10% or less than 1 foot whichever
is less of the setback requirement.
      (2)   Buffer yard berms may be reduced or eliminated if differences in
topography of the adjacent sites perform the same as the required berm would.
      (3)   Allow required landscape units to be placed outside the required
yard if located within a drainage, electrical, or gas easement.
   (b)    Standards. The following standards must be reached before approving a
modification.
      (1)   The applicant must justify the extenuating circumstances and show
good cause for the modification.
      (2)   The modification does not alter significantly the intent of the
zoning ordinance regulations.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 37-19, passed 4-2-2019)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 160.665 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a board of adjustment which may, in appropriate
cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, grant variances,
hear appeals or make special exceptions to the terms of this chapter in harmony
with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with the general or
specific rules herein contained.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see title III
§ 160.666 MEMBERSHIP.
   The board shall consist of five persons, who are not members of any
governing body, to be appointed by the mayor, three of whom shall be persons
with expert knowledge of construction, architecture, fine arts, engineering,
landscape architecture, law, or practical experience in related areas. The
terms of all members shall be for three years each and so arranged that the
term of at least one member will expire each year. Members of the board shall
be removable for cause by the mayor upon written charges and after a public
hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
term becomes vacant. The mayor shall also appoint a first alternate and a
second alternate for a term of three years each. If a member is unable to
attend a meeting, the first alternate or second alternate, in turn, shall serve
in that person’s place.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 26-99, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.667 RULES.
   The board shall organize and adopt rules to govern its proceedings,
provided, however, that the rules are not inconsistent with the City Code of
Ordinances, the city comprehensive development plan, state or federal law.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.668 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and held as the board
may determine. Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairperson. The
chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting chairperson may administer
oaths, and the board may compel the attendance of witnesses. All business of
the board shall be transacted at the meetings. The board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep records of
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.669 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of
the administrative officer. The appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time,
as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal was taken shall transmit
to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.670 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   (a)   Signs. Signs shall be posted on the affected property for a continuous
period of ten days prior to any public hearing held by the board of adjustment.
The signs shall be furnished by the department of planning and building
services and posted by the applicant in the numbers and locations prescribed by
the director, but in no case less than two signs. The signs shall be located in
a conspicuous place. Before any action can be taken by the board, the applicant
shall first file with planning and building services a certificate verifying
that the signs have been posted at the proper location before the time
specified in this section.
   (b)   Written notice. Letters shall be sent by the city to abutting property
owners, marked as contiguous properties including those abutting properties
separated by public right-of-way. The letters shall be postmarked ten days
prior to the hearing and state the date, time, and location of the public
hearing.
   (c)   Publication. The public hearing date, time, and location shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the hearing in a legal newspaper of
the community.
   (d)   Failure to provide notice. Failure to provide actual notice to each
person so entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid, provided
that the applicant or the city substantially complies with the requisite
published legal newspaper notice, public notice and hearing requirements of
this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 7-12, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013 ;
Ord. 16-21, passed 2-2-2021 )
§ 160.671 STAYS.
   An appeal to the board stays all proceedings in the action appealed from,
unless the building service administrator shall file a certificate that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate the stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the board or by a court of record, on application, on notice to the chief
building official and on due cause shown. The certificate of the building
service administrator shall be effective ten days only and shall be
nonrenewable.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.672 JURISDICTION.
   The jurisdiction of the board of adjustment shall be limited to the
following:
   (a)   Powers relative to errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   Powers relative to variances. To hear and decide upon petitions for
variances to vary the strict application of the height, area, required yard, or
other bulk requirements; reduction in minimum landscaping or minimum buffer
yard landscape elements of §
160.485; minimum parking requirements in §
160.550; or off-premise sign spacing requirements of §
160.591(f) as will not be contrary to the public interest where:
      (1)   Due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of
the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
      (2)   Exceptional and extraordinary circumstances apply to the property
that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity
and that result from lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances which
are not of the applicant's making.
      (3)   The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right
of the applicant that is substantially the same as that possessed by owners of
other property in the same zone.
      (4)   The variance requested is the minimum variance that would alleviate
the hardship.
      (5)   Grant or revoke waivers in the required hard surfacing of parking,
loading and maneuvering areas or a portion thereof. Waivers shall be for a
finite period and may be linked to a specific event, such as pending street or
utility improvements. In no case shall the board grant permanent waivers of
hard surfacing.
   (c)   Powers relative to exceptions. Upon petition, the board is hereby
empowered to make the following zoning exceptions:
      (1)   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has
been destroyed or partially destroyed by fire or act of God, where the board
shall find some compelling public necessity requiring the continuance of the
nonconformance use.
      (2)   Allow, by permit, the temporary location, and placement of a single
manufactured home, as defined by the ordinance, to be used as a primary
temporary residence on a lot in any residential zoning district wherein the use
is not otherwise specifically authorized for a period not to exceed one year,
if the board first finds the following:
         A.   That the principal residence on the lot has been destroyed in
whole or in part by unexpected catastrophe such as fire, flood, explosion or
storm.
         B.   The board may determine the placement of the manufactured home on
the lot.
   (d)   Limits to jurisdiction.
      (1)   The board of adjustment shall have no jurisdiction to hear requests
or grant variances of the height limitations for broadcast towers,
telecommunications towers, antenna support structures, and wireless
communications facilities regulated by this code.
      (2)   The board of adjustment shall have no jurisdiction to hear requests
or grant variances within the airport district regulated by this code.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 5-88, passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 72-88, passed 8-1-1988;
Ord. 94-95, passed 7-3-1995; Ord. 17-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 76-07, passed 6-
4-2007; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 79-14, passed 10-14-2014; Ord. 37-19,
passed 4-2-2019)
§ 160.673 DECISIONS OF BOARD; SCOPE AND FACTORS CONSIDERED.
   In exercising its jurisdiction, the board may, in conformity with law,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and may make the order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all
appeals and petitions within its jurisdiction under this chapter, the board
shall, before making any finding in a specific case, first determine that the
proposed change will not constitute a change in the zoning district map and
will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or
increase the congestion in public streets or increase the public danger of fire
and safety or materially diminish or impair established property values within
the surrounding area or in any other respect impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare of the city. In making a determination, the board
may request information and recommendations from any department of the city.
Every decision by the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact
based on testimony and other evidence, specifying the reason for granting or
denying the variation. The concurring vote of at least two-thirds of the
members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official, or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board of
adjustment is required to pass under any ordinance, or to effect any variation
in an ordinance.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.090) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 28-10, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.674 LIMITATIONS.
   Any order of the board of adjustment granting a variance or special
exception shall be invalid unless substantially completed within two years from
the date of the order, and the order shall expire without notice. For good
cause, the board may extend this.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.100) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.675 COURT REVIEW.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of
the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city, may petition a court of record within 30 days after the
filing of the board’s decision, as provided by SDCL 11-4-25.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.63.110) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 43-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 160.690 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   (1)   The director of planning and building services is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and
establish rules for its administration. For those purposes, he or she shall
have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
      (2)   The director shall have the power to render interpretations of this
chapter and to adopt and enforce supplemental policies in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. The interpretations or policies shall be within
the intent and purpose of this Code, and be set forth in writing.
   (b)   In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the
appointing authority, the director may appoint technical officers and
inspectors and other employees that shall be authorized from time to time.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.65.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 39-96,
passed 4-1-1996; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.691 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the director or his or her authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any
building or upon any premises an ordinance violation, the director or his or
her authorized representative may enter the building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
director by this chapter, provided that if the building or premises be
occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry;
and if the building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the building or premises and request entry. If the entry is refused, the
director or his or her authorized representative shall have recourse to every
remedy provided by law to secure entry.
   (b)   When the director or his or her authorized representative shall have
first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to
secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or
control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request
is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building
official or its authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.65.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.692 STOP ORDER.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
the director or building services administrator may order the work stopped by
notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing the
work to be done; and any persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized
by the director or building services administrator to proceed with the work.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.65.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.693 OCCUPANCY VIOLATION.
   Whenever any building or structure regulated by this chapter is being used
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the director or building services
administrator may order the use discontinued and the structure, or portion
thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing the use to be
continued. Those persons shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed
after receipt of the notice to make the structure, or portion thereof, comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.65.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.694 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS.
   The director may request and shall receive so far as is required, in the
discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials of this jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.65.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
ZONING PERMITS
§ 160.705 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, change, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert,
demolish, use, occupy, or maintain any building, structure or land use
regulated by this chapter or cause the same to be done without first obtaining
a separate zoning permit for each building, structure, or land use change from
the department of planning and building services.
   (b)   Neither a zoning permit nor a planning permit supersedes or gives the
recipient special privileges in relationship to other required permits
including but not limited to: access to arterial street public right-of-way
(ROW) will be required to be permitted and approved by the city engineer;
building permits will be required to be permitted and approved by the chief
building official; fire will be required to be permitted and approved by the
fire prevention.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 45-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 160.706 APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a zoning permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of
planning and building services. A zoning permit may be applied in conjunction
with a building permit.
   (b)   Every application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made.
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
      (3)   Indicate the proposed use or occupancy and work proposed.
      (4)   Be accompanied by a plot plan.
      (5)   When outdoor lighting fixtures are adjacent to DD and AD forms,
then plans submitted shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the
following:
         A.   Site plans indicating the location of all outdoor lighting
fixtures on the premises.
         B.   Description of the outdoor lighting devices, fixtures, lamps,
supports, reflectors, and other devices and the description may include, but is
not limited to, catalog cut sheets showing angle of cutoff or light emissions,
shielding information, and drawings.
         C.   Photometric data including photometric plans shall be submitted
when adjacent to residentially zoned or used property.
      (6)   Fences shall require a separate fence permit plan detailing the
location and style of the fence.
      (7)   Be signed by applicant, or his or her authorized agent, who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate the authority; and
      (8)   Give other data and information as may be required by the director.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.707 INFORMATION ON PLOT PLAN.
   (a)   Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of
the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   (b)   Exception: The director may waive the submission of plans if he or she
finds that the nature of the work or change in land use applied for is such
that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this
chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 46-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.708 ISSUANCE.
   (a)   The application, plans, and other data filed by an applicant for a
zoning permit shall be reviewed by the director. The plans may be reviewed by
other departments to verify compliance with any applicable laws or requirements
under their jurisdictions.
   (b)   If the director finds that the work described in an application for a
zoning permit and the plans and other data filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that
the fees specified in §§
160.745 through
160.760 have been paid, he or she shall issue a permit.
   (c)   When the director issues the zoning permit where plans are required,
he or she shall endorse in writing and/or stamp his or her approval of the
plans and may stipulate required modifications or conditions in order to
establish compliance with any applicable ordinances of the city. The approved
plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without
authorization from the director, and all work shall be done in accordance with
approved plans.
   (d)   The director may issue a zoning permit for the construction or use of
part of a building or a structure before the entire plans for the whole
building or structure have been submitted or approved, providing adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of the zoning permit shall
proceed at his or her own risk, without assurance that the zoning permit for
the entire building, structure, or use will be granted.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 47-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.709 RETENTION OF PLANS.
   Plans shall be retained by the director for the periods established by the
city through its record retention program. All records shall be open to public
inspection during regular business hours but shall not be removed from the
office of the director.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.710 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The issuance or granting of a zoning permit or approval of plans shall
not be construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction.
No zoning permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this chapter shall be valid.
   (b)   The issuance of a zoning permit based upon plans and other data shall
not prevent the director from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in
the plans and other data, or from preventing operations being carried on
thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.711 EXPIRATION.
   (a)   Every zoning permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire by limitation and become null and void if the work or use authorized by
the permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the zoning permit,
or if the work or use authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at any
time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before the work can
be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, provided no
changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications
for the work; and provided further that the suspension or abandonment has not
exceeded one year.
   (b)   Any applicant holding an unexpired zoning permit may apply for an
extension of the time within which he or she may commence work under that
zoning permit when he or she is unable to commence work within the time
required for this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The director may,
except as otherwise provided herein, extend the time for action by the
applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the
applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have
prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 58-93,
passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.712 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The director may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in error or on the
basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or
regulation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.67.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
§ 160.725 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (a)   No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied and no
change in the existing use of a building, structure or land shall be made until
a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (b)   Exception: One- and two-family dwellings shall not require a
certificate of occupancy but shall comply with all applicable ordinances and
laws of this jurisdiction.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.69.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 48-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Building, see
ch. 150
§ 160.726 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; REQUIRED FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
   No zoning or building permit shall be issued before an application has been
submitted, reviewed and a finding made that the proposed uses or work will meet
the requirements of this chapter for a certificate of occupancy, and no
building or premises shall be used or occupied until the certificate is issued.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.69.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 48-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.727 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; ISSUANCE.
   After final inspection, if it is found that the building, structure, or land
complies with the provisions of this chapter and other laws of this
jurisdiction, the director shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.69.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 48-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.728 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE.
   If the director finds that no hazard or public nuisance will result from the
occupancy of any building, structure, land, or portion thereof, before the same
is completed, he or she may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the
use of a portion or portions of a building, structure or land prior to
completion of all the required improvements. The director may require in
writing assurances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
public.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.69.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 48-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.729 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; REQUIRED FOR NONCONFORMING USES.
   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all lawful nonconforming
uses of land or buildings created by adoption of or amendment to this chapter.
Application for the certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be
filed with the director by the owner or lessees of the land or building
occupied by the nonconforming use, within two years from the date that the
nonconforming use is created. Failure to apply may be considered evidence that
the nonconforming use did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto creating a nonconforming use.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.69.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 48-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.730 RECORD OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY TO BE KEPT.
   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the director, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person
having a proprietary or tenant interest in land or buildings affected by the
certificate of occupancy.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.69.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 48-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
FEES
§ 160.745 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The fees set forth in this subchapter shall apply to this chapter. Under no
conditions shall any fee required hereunder be refunded after the application
has been heard by the planning commission or board of adjustment.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.746 CHANGE OF ZONE.
   A charge of $650 shall be made for filing an application to change to any
zoning district. Applica tions which require exhibits will be charged an
additional $125.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 2-87,
passed 1-19-1987; Ord. 114-90, passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 93-91, passed 12-2-1991;
Ord. 119-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 50-06, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 18-11, passed
4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 55-14, passed 8-5-2014; Ord. 59-15,
passed 7-7-2015; Ord. 59-17, passed 7-18-2017)
§ 160.747 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.748 INITIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   A charge of $350 shall be made for filing an application for an initial
development plan when not concurrent with a PUD application.
(Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 55-14, passed 8-5-2014; Ord. 59-17, passed
7-18-2017)
§ 160.749 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   A charge of $350 shall be made for filing an application for a final
development plan in a PUD, except that no additional fee shall be charged when
a final development plan is submitted concurrently with an initial development
plan.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 93-91,
passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 5-03, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 50-06, passed 5-1-2006; Ord.
9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 55-14, passed 8-5-2014; Ord. 59-17, passed 7-18-
2017)
§ 160.750 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AMENDMENTS.
   A charge of $175 shall be made for filing an application for an amendment to
a planned unit development district, the associated initial development plan,
or final development plan.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.060) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 93-91,
passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 5-03, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord.
55-14, passed 8-5-2014)
§ 160.751 CONDITIONAL USE.
   A charge of $375 shall be made for filing an application for a conditional
use or an amendment thereto in any district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 114-90,
passed 12-3-1990; Ord. 93-91, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 119-01, passed 12-10-2001;
Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 55-14, passed 8-
5-2014; Ord. 59-15, passed 7-7-2015)
§ 160.752 [RESERVED.]
§ 160.753 DESIGN REVIEW AND ALTERNATIVE SITE PLAN.
   A charge of $150 shall be made for filing an application for a design review
and alternative site plan or an amendment thereto in any district.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.072) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 5-03,
passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 55-14, passed 8-5-2014)
§ 160.754 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   A charge of $95 shall be made for filing an application for an appeal to the
board of adjustment.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 119-01,
passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 54-14, passed 8-5-2014)
§ 160.755 EXEMPTION FOR CITY FILING ON ITS OWN BEHALF.
   No fee shall be required when any action is recommended by the city council
on its own motion or by any person or group officially designated to
participate in the administration of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.090) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.756 ZONING PERMIT.
   (a)   A fee of $25 shall be paid for all zoning permits not requiring a
building permit fee.
   (b)   A fee of $20 shall be paid for all fence permits; however, a double
fee may be charged when fences are erected prior to obtaining a fence permit.
   (c)   When submittal documents are required by § 160.707 for the issuance of
zoning permits, a site plan review fee of $50 shall be paid.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.100) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 116-88,
passed 12-5-1988; Ord. 58-93, passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 95-97, passed 12-15-1997;
Ord. 119-01, passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 23-05, passed 3-7-2005; Ord. 9-13, passed
3-19-2013; Ord. 54-14, passed 8-5-2014)
§ 160.757 FEES FOR ZONING VERIFICATION LETTERS.
   A fee of $65 shall be charged for any property compliance letter where the
legal description is the same as the legal description on the certificate of
occupancy on file for that property. A fee of $100 shall be charged for any
property compliance letter where the legal description cannot be matched to a
certificate of occupancy on file.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.110) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 69-99,
passed 7-6-1999; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 54-14, passed 8-5-2014)
§ 160.758 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.
   A charge of $350 shall be made for filing a preliminary subdivision plan. A
charge of $80 shall be made for the first two lots on final plats and $110 for
the first two lots on replats; plus a fee of $10 for each additional lot within
a plat and $10 for each additional lot within a replat.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.120) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 119-01,
passed 12-10-2001; Ord. 24-05, passed 3-7-2005; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013;
Ord. 55-14, passed 8-5-2014; Ord. 59-17, passed 7-18-2017)
§ 160.759 ANNEXATIONS.
   A charge of $350 shall be made for filing an application for a petitioned
annexation.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.130) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 113-05,
passed 11-7-2005; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord. 55-14, passed 8-5-2014;
Ord. 59-17, passed 7-18-2017)
§ 160.760 FUTURE LAND USE PLAN AMENDMENTS.
   A charge of $425 shall be made for filing an application for a comprehensive
plan amendment.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.71.140) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 06-06,
passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 18-11, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013; Ord.
55-14, passed 8-5-2014)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.775 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The following general regulations shall apply to all zoning districts.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall
any structure or land be used:
      (1)   Except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the
structure or land is located.
      (2)   Except in conformance with the height and minimum lot requirements,
and the parking, loading, stacking and sign regulations, and any other
applicable requirements of the district in which the structure or land is
located.
      (3)   Except in conformance with any federal, state, or municipal codes
as may be applicable. Where this chapter and another ordinance conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (b)   The density and yard regulations of this chapter are minimum
regulations for each and every building existing at the effective date of this
chapter or for any building hereafter erected or structurally altered. No land
required for yards or other open spaces about an existing building or any
building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be considered a yard
or lot area for more than one building.
   (c)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one
main building on a lot except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (d)   Cooperatives, condominiums and all other forms of property ownership
do not affect the provisions of these regulations; and all requirements shall
be observed as though the property were under single ownership.
   (e)   All inhabited and occupied manufactured homes shall conform to one of
the following:
      (1)   Used as a dwelling and located in a licensed manufactured home park
operating under a valid license.
      (2)   Used as a dwelling and located in a MH residential district or PD
planned development district.
      (3)   Used as a dwelling associated with a farm in conformance with §
160.052.
      (4)   Used as a temporary office or shelter on a construction or
development site.
      (5)   Used as a temporary business office when approved pursuant to § 104
(e) of the Uniform Building Code.
      (6)   Used as a temporary dwelling as specified in §
160.672(c)(2).
      (7)   Used as a caretaker quarters in the AG agricultural district and RC
recreation/conservation district.
      (8)   A.   Used as a sales office at a location where manufactured homes
or manufactured homes are offered for sale when approved pursuant to § 104(e)
of the Uniform Building Code.
         B.   A manufactured home not in conformance with one of the above
shall not be occupied or inhabited, nor shall it be connected to utilities,
except when being displayed for sale by a dealer or manufacturer.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.010) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 90-92,
passed 10-5-1992; Ord. 103-94, passed 11-21-1994; Ord. 94-95, passed 7-3-1995;
Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.776 PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS; INTRODUCTORY STATEMENTS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
   The catch heads appearing in connection with the sections of this chapter
are inserted simply for convenience to serve the purpose of an index. The
introductory statements found at the beginning of each chapter are to serve as
general references only. The catch heads, introductory statements and
illustrative examples of zoning terms shall be wholly disregarded by any
person, office, court or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions
of this chapter.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.020) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.777 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this chapter will be handled in the following manner.
   (a)   The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law, amend, supplement
or otherwise modify this chapter herein or subsequently established. Any
proposed amendment, supplement, or modification shall first be submitted to the
planning commission for its recommendations and report. The report shall
contain the findings of the planning commission regarding the effect of the
proposed amendment, supplement, or modifications upon adjacent property and
upon the comprehensive plan of the City of Sioux Falls. If no report is
received from the planning commission in 90 days, it may be assumed that the
commission has approved the amendment. Whenever a municipality assumes zoning
jurisdiction in any area outside the limits of the municipality, the county
zoning commission of the county in which the area lies shall sit with the city
planning commission on all matters pertaining to the planning and regulation of
the area; and no zoning powers provided by this subchapter shall be effective
in any area until each of the commissions makes a recommendation to the city
council and the board of county commissioners. Each planning commission shall
make the recommendation to the city council and county commissioners within 90
days of a request by the city planning commission that the county planning
commission sit with them for purposes of zoning in the area outside the city
limits of the municipality.
   (b)   If the ordinance be adopted, the same shall be published and take
effect as other ordinances unless the referendum be invoked.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.030) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 5-88,
passed 1-18-1988; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.778 FRACTIONS.
   Where fractional numbers occur in this chapter, they shall be rounded off to
the nearest whole number.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.040) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.779 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Violations of the ordinance shall be treated in the manner specified below.
   (a)   The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of this chapter has been committed or shall exist;
or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon
which violation has been committed or shall exist; or the agent, architect,
building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in
any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which the
violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a violation of a city ordinance. Each
and every day that the violation continues after notification may constitute a
separate offense.
   (b)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the appropriate
authorities of the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute
injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure or land.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.050) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.780 INTERPRETATION, ABROGATION AND SEVERABILITY.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
the intent of this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
this inconsistency only. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.070) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.781 TERM OR TITLE OF DIRECTOR.
   Whenever the term or title of director is used herein, it shall be construed
to include his or her authorized representative.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.071) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 49-86,
passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.782 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall in no manner affect pending actions, either civil or
criminal, founded on or growing out of any ordinance or part of any ordinance
hereby repealed; this chapter shall in no manner affect rights or causes of
action, either civil or criminal, not in suit that may have already accrued or
grown out of any ordinance or part of any ordinance hereby repealed.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.080) (Ord. 42-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. 9-13,
passed 3-19-2013)
§ 160.783 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after April 16,
2014.
(1992 Code, App. B, § 15.73.090) (Ord. 9-13, passed 3-19-2013)
CHAPTER 161: SIOUX FALLS DOWNTOWN RAILYARD
ENVIRONMENTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section
   
161.001   Title
   
161.002   Definitions
   
161.003   Designated properties
   
161.004   Scope
   
161.005   Objectives
   
161.006   Permitting and reviewing authorities
   
161.007   Environmental controls and restrictions
   
161.008   Compliance with other obligations and ordinances
§ 161.001 TITLE.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “Sioux Falls Downtown Railyard
Environmental Overlay District.”
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVITY. Any development or use encompassed within the jurisdiction of this
chapter.
   ARSD. The Administrative Rules of South Dakota.
   DENR. The South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   DENR GROUND WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Groundwater quality standards
promulgated by the DENR in ARSD Ch. 74:54.
   DENR SOIL REMEDIATION CRITERIA. Remediation criteria for petroleum-
contaminated soils promulgated by the DENR in ARSD 74:56:05.
   EPA RISK-BASED SCREENING CRITERIA. Environmental Protection Agency regional
screening levels using a risk-based approach to assess soil contamination on
specific sites in light of the type of development and proposed use of the
site.
   DEVELOPER. The owner (or authorized representative) of any land in the
Railyard Environmental District area on which any development will occur.
   DEVELOP OR DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, erecting, constructing, changing,
enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting,
demolishing, using, occupying, or maintaining any building, structure, or land
use regulated by the 2013 Shape Places Zoning Ordinance as set forth in Chapter
160 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls, or activity regulated by the city
engineer including platting, replatting, and subdividing land, grading,
drainage, and excavation, and construction of public improvements under Chapter
157 of the Code of Ordinances of Sioux Falls.
   DOWNTOWN RAILYARD ENVIRONMENTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT. Railyard property as
legally described and designated below and subject to environmental controls as
provided in this chapter. The official map shall be on file at the city clerk’s
office and the city planning and development services office. It is also
referred to in this chapter as the “Railyard Environmental District.” The
Railyard Environmental District in this chapter is subject to unique criteria
in this chapter and is not a subsection of §
160.426 of the Ordinances of the City of Sioux Falls.
   ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT. An environmental assessment using ASTM E 1527
environmental assessment standards for commercial real estate (or functional
equivalent approved by the city).
   ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS. Engineered, operational, administrative, and/or
legal controls that minimize the potential for human exposure to regulated
substances throughout the life of development activities. Such controls may
include limiting land or groundwater use or access, mitigation, or monitoring
of dust or particulate generation and contaminate mitigation or remediation of
the site.
   REGULATED SUBSTANCE. A regulated substance as defined in SDCL 34A-12-1(8)
and ARSD 74:34:01:03.
      References:
      ARSD 74:56:05, Remediation Criterial for Petroleum - Contaminated Soils
South Dakota Legislative Research Council
http://www.sdlegislature.gov/Rules/DisplayRule.asp x?Rule=74:56:05
      ARSD Chapter 74:54, Groundwater Quality Standards, South Dakota
Legislative Research Council
http://www.sdlegislature.gov/Rules/DisplayRule.asp x?Rule=74:54:01
      EPA Regional Screening Levels
https://www.epa.gov/risk/regional-screening-levels- rsls-generic-tables-
november-2017
      Reference: List of Lists, Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to the
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compen-sation and Liability Act (CERCLA) and Section
112 (r) of the Clean Air Act, March 2015, Stock Number EPA 550-B-15-001,
published by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-03/ documents/list_of_lists.pdf
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.003 DESIGNATED PROPERTIES.
   This chapter applies to the property designated in this section as the
Railyard Environmental District and legally described as follows, as well as to
subdivisions created therefrom:
      Tracts 1, 2, and 4 of Burlington Northern Santa-Fe 4th Addition to the
City of Sioux Falls in Minnehaha County; and Lots A and B of Tract 3 of
Burlington Northern Santa-Fe 4th Addition to the City of Sioux Falls in
Minnehaha County, SD (the “Property”).
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.004 SCOPE.
   This chapter augments existing criteria for city review and permitting and
coordination with the DENR prior to development of the Railyard Environmental
District. The controls in this chapter are directly governed and administered
by existing city permitting authorities along with requirements under other
city ordinances. This chapter does not create or replace zoning designations,
zoning requirements, or zoning approval procedures, except to the extent
expressly provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.005 OBJECTIVES.
   The city recognizes potential or actual environ-mental concerns may exist in
the Railyard Environ-mental District, including, but not limited to, areas
where the city is required to monitor, oversee, and administer state or federal
environmental restrictions. Based upon an evaluation of environmental factors
and physical characteristics, the following objectives apply:
   (a)   Environmental controls and restrictions will be used to prevent or
avoid the risk that development and redevelopment could create an exposure to
regulated substances in concentrations that pose a risk to human health or
further risk to the environment.
   (b)   Environmental controls require that development is uniformly reviewed
and restrictions are applied under established procedures.
   (c)   Environmental controls require proper notification and coordination
between regulatory agencies and the property owners, and a reasoned process to
comply with environmental concerns.
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.006 PERMITTING AND REVIEWING AUTHORITIES.
   (a)   Any developer who intends to develop on property in the Railyard
Environmental District shall first apply to the chief planning and zoning
official and shall obtain the required zoning and/or land use permit authority
prior to the start of development as provided in Section
160.705 of the City Ordinances of the City of Sioux Falls. The chief planning
and zoning official may make all such applications available to the city
engineer and environmental/storm water manager.
   (b)   Any developer who intends to plat, replat, subdivide, construct public
improvements, or undertake any filling, grading, drainage, excavation, or
surface or subsurface construction in the Railyard Environmental District or
adjacent rights of way shall apply prior to any development to the city
engineer and shall obtain the required authority from the city engineer.
   (c)   The city environmental/storm water manager shall review any
groundwater collection, dewatering, and remediation plans and advise other city
permitting authorities regarding the Railyard Environmental District.
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.007 ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   All development in the Railyard Environmental District shall be subject to
the environmental controls and restrictions listed in this section. As part of
the purchase of any surplus or other real property of the city in the Railyard
Environmental District, the developer shall comply with any existing deed
restrictions and must agree to do the following:
   (a)   An experienced, qualified, environmental consultant such as a
registered professional engineer with a Petroleum Release Remediation
Certification shall be retained by the developer to perform an environmental
assessment in compliance with DENR criteria. If requested, the city may
authorize the developer to perform the environmental assessment prior to
purchase of any railyard property from the city to a developer. If an
environmental assessment is not performed prior to purchase, it must be
performed prior to the design phase of any development of the site.
   (b)   If the environmental assessment reveals the existence of regulated
substances in groundwater at levels exceeding DENR groundwater quality
standards or in soils exceeding the DENR soil remediation criteria or EPA risk-
based screening criteria, the requirements in paragraphs (1) through (7) of
this subsection apply.
      (1)   The developer’s environmental consult-ant shall develop a plan to
remediate or clean up the contaminated area (“Clean-Up Plan”). The Clean-Up
Plan must be approved by DENR and the city prior to remediating or cleaning up
the site.
      (2)   Following approval of any required Clean-Up Plan, the developer
must comply with the plan and clean up or remediate the property to meet DENR
standards.
      (3)   In the alternative, if the developer does not clean up or remediate
the property to meet DENR standards and DENR determines that allowing such
contaminants to remain in situ would be acceptable or prudent in light of the
proposed use of the property, the developer shall place a deed restriction or
covenant on the property prior to final DENR approval and prior to any
development of the property. If a required deed restriction or covenant is not
placed on the property, the city may deny any city permit or approval for
development, including, but not limited to, construction or building permits,
platting, replatting, or subdivision platting, or a certificate of occupancy
for such property.
      (4)   Any required covenant or deed restriction must be suitable to
apprise future owners of regulated substances on the property and continuing
DENR regulatory requirements, if any, and the requirements of this chapter. The
covenant or deed restriction shall be submitted by the developer to the city
attorney and DENR at least 30 calendar days prior to development. The language
of any such covenant or deed restriction is subject to the approval of the city
attorney. Following approval, the developer shall promptly record the covenant
or deed restriction on the property.
      (5)   The city may deny any city permit, approval, or certificate for any
development activities or property uses which would be contrary to the terms of
any deed restriction or covenant required under this chapter.
      (6)   As part of the transfer of any of the above-described property from
the city, the city shall reserve the right to deny approval of any future
construction or building permit, certificate of occupancy, plat, replat, or
subdivision plat for such property in the event: (i) the property has not been
cleaned up or remediated under this chapter to the extent required; or (ii) a
covenant or deed restriction has not been placed on the property if required;
or (iii) the developer seeks a building permit or approval of a use which, if
granted, would be contrary to the terms of any deed restriction or covenant
required under this chapter.
      (7)   The city engineer may, after consul-tation with the DENR, consent
to release any deed restriction or covenant if any required removal or
remediation is completed or no further action is required by the DENR and
monitoring demonstrates that the release of the deed restriction or covenant is
consistent with the objectives in this chapter and the purposes of the covenant
or deed restriction.
   (c)   Any development over, under, through, or on property in the Railyard
Environmental District shall conform to the requirements listed below:
      (1)   Installing any wells to use or access groundwater for any potable
purposes or for connecting groundwater to the municipal water system is
expressly prohibited. Monitoring wells may be installed. Installation of wells
for nonpotable uses including, but not limited to, closed loop geothermal
systems, construction dewatering, and sump pump collection systems may be
authorized by the city environmental storm water manager after consultation
with the DENR, provided such uses are not otherwise prohibited by city
ordinance or state law.
      (2)   Development may be undertaken only after the developer has obtained
authority from the DENR, if any is required. Regardless of the size of the
parcel to be developed, the developer must submit a Notice of Intent with the
DENR prior to development and must comply with the current DENR General Permit
for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activities.
      (3)   The minimum engineered environmental control required for soil
remediation is removal of the top six (6) inches of soil from the area to be
developed and replacement with uncontaminated soil. Additional work may be
required by the city engineer or DENR based on specific design and
construction, and environmental review by a qualified consultant as required by
this chapter.
   (d)   Description, history, source document, and engineering controls.
      (1)   The property within the Railyard Environmental District was
purchased by the city as part of its Downtown Sioux Falls Rail Yard
Redevelopment Project (5th to 11th Street Corridor).
      (2)   History. This site was previously used for railroad operations. A
Phase I and Phase II Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) was conducted in 2008.
Contaminants of Concern (COC) identified on site included Total Petroleum
Hydrocarbons (TPH), Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs), and lead.
Exceedances of commercial and/or residential standards of COCs in soils down to
the bedrock were identified in some areas. Minor remedial activity has or will
occur (see Engineering Controls) as part of the “Downtown Sioux Falls Rail Yard
Redevelopment Project.” This remedial activity does not allow for unlimited use
and unrestricted exposure at the site. Therefore, engineering and institutional
environmental controls have been established to reduce or eliminate potential
future exposure.
      (3)   Source document. Prior to future land use or development, the
developer shall review, at a minimum, the following documents which are
available from the city engineer: 1) the August 2013 Downtown Sioux Falls Rail
Yard Redevelopment Project Environmental Assessment and Section 4(f)
Evaluation; 2) September 26, 2013, Finding of No Significant Impact; and 3)
August 31, 2015, Purchase and Sale Agreement and environmental commitments
contained therein. Prior to future zoning development, the developer shall
review any available site-specific information available from the South Dakota
Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   (e)   Procedures for Railyard Environmental District.
      (1)   When considering whether to accept, approve, or issue permits or
otherwise grant authority for any work in the Railyard Environmental District,
each of the city-permitting authorities listed in this chapter shall consider
whether the means and methods proposed by the developer and its environmental
consultant(s): (a) are consistent with the objectives listed above; (b) meet
the requirements of the environmental controls listed in this chapter to the
extent applicable; and (c) meet the criteria for approval or permitting
required under other city ordinances for the activity under review.
      (2)   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, review and
permitting for development in the Railyard Environmental District shall include
all other city requirements. In the event other city requirements are
inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter, then the more stringent
requirement applies.
      (3)   New land uses or changes in land use, as well as any new
developments, or any changes from current uses which are within the Railyard
Environmental District will be reviewed by the chief planning and zoning
official and forwarded to the city environmental/storm water manager for review
to provide applicable requirements to maintain compliance with this ordinance.
The procedures in Chapter 160.449 Downtown Planned Unit Development of the
Ordinances of the City of Sioux Falls apply in addition to any requirements in
this chapter.
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 161.008 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER OBLIGATIONS AND ORDINANCES.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to waive compliance with state, federal,
or local statutes, ordinances, rules, judgments, deed restrictions, enforcement
actions, or other legal criteria requiring responsive action, remediation,
environmental review, environmental controls, or environmental monitoring
prior, during, or after development or redevelopment of the Railyard
Environmental District or other railyard area. Further, nothing in this chapter
is intended to waive compliance with any ordinances administered by the chief
planning and zoning official or the city engineer which are not listed in this
chapter.
(Ord. 73-18, passed 8-21-2018)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
   
I.   REZONING
TABLE I: REZONING
   Rezoning ordinances are held on file in the planning and building services
department for public viewing.
CODE OF ORDINANCES PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
References to 1957 Code
References to 1972 Code
References to 1992 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
 
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
SDCL Cite Code Section
SDCL Cite                 Code Section
1-19B                     151.001,
                          151.019
1-19B-1 et seq.           ch. 151
1-19B-2                   151.015
1-19B-53                  151.035
1-24                      50.001
1-25-1.1                  30.014
1-25-2                    35.031
1-27                      123.033,
                          123.303
1-27-1                    35.027
1-27-1.16                 30.014
1-27-1-16                 30.002
1-30-1 et seq.            ch. 33
2-6-8                     39.292,
                          39.365
3-3-1 et seq.             ch. 39
3-12                      ch. 39
3-12-47(5)                39.365
3-12-47(6)                39.292
3-12-47(7)                39.365
3-12-47(9)                39.292
3-21                      30.029
5-18A-1                   36.020
5-18A-9                   33.028
5-18A-14                  36.033
5-18D-6                   36.032
6-4-1 et seq.             ch. 32
7-18-14                   156.001
7-18A-2                   159.999
9-4-1                     153.003
9-4-1.1                   153.004
9-4-4.1 through 9-4-4.10  153.003
9-9                       ch. 30
9-12-13                   ch. 159,
                          ch. 160
9-12-14                   ch. 99
9-13                      ch. 38
9-14                      ch. 39
9-14-6.1                  39.107
9-14-14                   ch. 39
9-14-15                   ch. 39
9-14-28                   ch. 39
9-16                      ch. 39
9-16-45                   39.319
9-19-3                    10.999
9-19-15                   10.001
9-19-16                   10.001,
                          10.002
                          10.001,
9-19-17                   10.002,
                          10.006
9-21A                     37.035
9-29-2                    ch. 131
9-29-3                    ch. 131
9-29-11                   90.005
9-29-12                   90.002
9-29-13                   ch. 92
9-30                      ch. 96
9-30-3                    ch. 97,
                          ch. 155
9-30-4                    ch. 70
9-30-5                    ch. 94,
                          ch. 96
9-31-1 et seq.            ch. 70
9-31-1                    ch. 81,
                          ch. 152
9-32                      ch. 92
9-32-2                    ch. 92
9-32-3                    ch. 112
9-32-10                   57.002
9-32-11                   ch. 57
9-32-12                   ch. 94
9-33                      ch. 91
9-33-4 et seq.            ch. 150
9-33-5                    ch. 150
9-34                      ch. 110
9-34-5                    ch. 112
9-34-7                    ch. 117
9-34-8                    ch. 116,
                          ch. 117
9-34-9                    123.427
9-34-10                   ch. 124
9-34-12                   ch. 150
9-34-13                   ch. 113
9-34-19                   96.237
9-36-15                   156.001
9-38-1 et seq.            ch. 95
9-38-90.1 et seq.         ch. 95
9-39                      ch. 50
9-45                      ch. 96
9-45-2                    ch. 96
9-46                      ch. 96
9-47-1                    52.001
9-48                      50.001
9-52                      111.014.1
9-52-1 et seq.            ch. 32
9-53                      111.014.1
9-53-1(1)                 111.001
                          37.105,
                          37.109,
                          37.113,
9-55                      37.190,
                          37.199,
                          37.113,
                          37.200
9-55-11                   37.106
9-55-16                   37.113,
                          37.193
10-4                      37.111
10-6-35.4                 37.055,
                          37.070
10-6-137.5                37.080,
                          37.085
10-6-138                  37.080,
                          37.085
10-13-35                  30.022
                          37.001,
10-45                     37.002,
                          37.007,
                          37.999
                          ch. 37,
                          37.020,
10-46                     37.021,
                          37.023,
                          37.999
10-52                     37.022
11                        ch. 154
                          158.002,
11-2                      158.397,
                          158.398,
                          159.486
11-3                      ch. 157,
                          157.003
11-3-6                    157.003,
                          157.068
                          158.002,
                          158.397,
                          158.398,
11-4                      ch. 159,
                          159.486,
                          ch. 160;
                          160.002
11-4-5                    154.030
11-4-25                   160.675
                          157.003,
                          157.006,
11-6                      158.002,
                          158.397,
                          158.398,
                          159.486
11-6-1 et seq.            ch. 154
11-6-26.1                 157.068
11-6-27                   ch. 157
11-8-4                    37.072
11-9                      37.216
12-27                     38.005
12-27-1(4)                35.000
15-17                     98.037
19-5                      30.043
19-16-10                  30.042
19-16-12                  30.042
20-12-4                   ch. 98
20-12-5 et seq.           ch. 98
20-13-2 et seq.           ch. 98
20-13-42                  98.037
21-3-2                    98.034
21-10                     130.005
21-31                     35.059
21-54-17                  152.087
22                        ch. 119,
                          ch. 130
                          117.022,
22-1-2(9)                 117.126,
                          124.062
22-3                      130.001
22-5-1                    133.003
22-5-9                    133.003
22-13                     ch. 131
22-14-7                   133.003
22-14-8                   133.001
22-18                     130.001
22-18-4                   133.003
22-18-35                  131.001
22-24-1.2                 130.004
22-24B                    92.170,
                          92.190
                          117.022,
22-24b-1                  117.126,
                          124.062
22-34-1                   132.001
22-42-1                   121.001
22-44                     132.004
23                        119.006,
                          ch. 130
23-3-1 et seq.            ch. 131
26-6                      92.171,
                          92.190
26-6-1                    121.001
26-6-14.11                92.190
26-8A-10                  92.170,
                          92.190
26-10                     92.170
27-16.11                  111.022
27A-1-1                   121.001
27B-1-17                  121.001
31-28-7                   76.064
32                        ch. 70
32-3-1                    79.007
32-5-76                   75.010
32-5-76.1                 75.010
32-5-76.2                 75.010
32-9                      124.029
32-14-1                   70.001,
                          79.001
32-15-11                  93.008
32-15-12                  73.003
32-15-18                  73.006
32-20B-7 et seq.          81.022
32-22                     73.005
32-22-24                  79.006
32-22-42                  79.007
32-22-57                  79.013
32-23                     81.041
32-24-1 et seq.           76.075
32-25-5.1                 76.005
32-25-13                  76.003
32-25-15                  76.003
32-26-1                   72.002
32-26-2                   72.003
32-26-3                   72.004
32-26-5 et seq.           72.005
32-26-9                   72.007
32-26-13                  74.001
32-26-14                  76.061
32-26-14 through 32-26-16 74.001
32-26-15                  74.003
32-26-17                  76.021
32-26-18                  76.022
32-26-19                  74.002
32-26-20                  76.024
32-26-21.1                76.082
32-26-23                  76.042
32-26-26                  72.011
32-26-27                  72.012
32-26-31                  72.015
32-26-34                  72.013
32-26-35                  72.010
32-26-36                  72.009
32-26-37                  72.014
32-26-40                  76.081
32-26-43                  76.079
32-26-44                  76.080
32-27                     ch. 80
32-27-1                   80.003
32-27-2                   80.004
32-27-4                   80.005
32-28                     ch. 75
32-28-1 et seq.           75.006
32-28-6 et seq.           75.007
32-29                     ch. 76
32-29-2                   76.056
32-29-2.1                 76.059
32-29-3                   76.060
32-29-4                   76.063
32-29-5                   76.064
32-30                     71.006,
                          ch. 77
32-30-2.5                 70.007
32-30-5                   77.001
32-30-6                   77.002
32-30-6.1                 77.003
32-30-12                  93.030
32-30-12 et seq.          ch. 93
32-30-13 through 32-30-18 93.030
32-30-20                  76.078
32-31-7                   76.083
32-31-8                   76.084
32-33                     ch. 71
32-34                     ch. 72
32-34-10                  72.038
32-34-13                  72.037
32-35                     ch. 124
32-36                     93.029
32-36-2                   93.030
32-36-2 through 32-36-10  93.030
34-1                      ch. 114
34-2-2                    55.002
34-9-1 et seq.            ch. 114
34-10-1 et seq.           ch. 114
34-11                     124.080
34-11-11                  92.158
34-12                     ch. 114
34-12-1.1                 121.001
34-12E                    ch. 114
34-14                     ch. 114
                          111.020,
34-18                     117.133,
                          150.177
34-18-9.1                 159.486
34-20A-2                  121.001
                          121.001,
                          121.002,
34-20G                    121.003,
                          158.471,
                          159.486,
                          160.005
34-20G-1                  121.001
34-20G-26                 121.001
34-20G-29 to 34-20G-42    121.001
34-20G-43                 121.001
34-20G-55                 121.003
34-20G-56                 121.002
34-20G-72                 121.001
34-28-3                   130.005
34-37-1(1)                133.004
34-45-1                   58.002
34-46                     92.212
34-46-14                  130.010
34-48A-1 et seq.          ch. 33
34-48A-39                 ch. 33
34A-2-2                   55.002
34A-6-81                  57.047
34A-7-6 et seq.           57.002
34A-7-14                  57.002
34A-12-1(8)               161.002
35                        111.016,
                          111.017
35-1                      160.005
                          37.003,
35-1-1                    95.029,
                          111.001 ,
                          160.005
35-1-5.5                  111.023
35-2-1.2                  111.025
35-2-5.3                  111.015.1
35-4                      95.029,
                          111.030
35-4-2                    124.071
35-4-2(4)                 111.014.1
35-4-2(9)                 124.070
35-4-2.12                 124.071
35-4-10                   111.012.1,
                          111.013
                          111.003,
35-4-11                   111.014.2,
                          111.015.1
35-4-11.2                 111.021
35-4-14.1                 111.014.1
35-4-106                  111.014.2
35-4-124                  95.029,
                          111.022
36                        ch. 110
36-2-2                    110.026
36-2-1(6)                 110.026
36-4                      92.158,
                          122.002
36-4B                     92.158
36-16-2                   150.222
36-16-35                  ch. 150
36-18                     150.031,
                          150.302
                          150.031,
36-18A                    150.218,
                          150.302
37                        ch. 110
38-18                     90.100,
                          90.105
37-20                     130.008
37-21                     130.008
37-21-6                   124.009
38-20                     ch. 120
38-20A                    ch. 120
38-22                     ch. 94
39-5-6(11)                79.012
40-1                      90.005
40-34-13 et seq.          90.003.1
42-2                      ch. 95
42-7A-41                  111.030
                          111.031,
42-7A-64                  111.032,
                          111.034
43-15A-5                  157.008
43-18                     157.067
43-20                     157.067
43-21                     157.067
43-41-11                  57.051
46-1-6                    156.051
49-7A                     117.078
50                        ch. 99
                          37.058,
                          37.073,
57A-9                     37.081,
                          37.086,
                          37.169
58-11-9.4                 124.049
 
REFERENCES TO 1957 CODE
   This table gives the disposition of the sections of the 1957 Revised
Ordinances which were retained in this codification. Sections of the 1957
Revised Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded
or obsolete.
1957 Code 2012 Code
1957 Code                2012 Code
1.6005                   150.015
1.6101                   150.017
2.114                    39.323
2.204                    39.003
2.205                    39.002
2.208                    39.120
2.209                    39.001
2.210                    39.121
2.211                    39.123
2.212                    39.124
2.213                    39.127
2.214                    39.125
2.215                    39.126
2.216                    39.128
2.217                    39.129
2.218                    39.131
2.219                    39.132
2.221                    39.134
2.222                    39.156
2.223                    39.157
2.224                    39.158
2.225                    39.159
2.226                    39.130
2.228                    39.135
2.301                    36.001
2.302                    36.001
2.303                    36.001
2.304                    36.001
2.305                    36.001
2.307                    36.002
2.401                    39.004
2.502                    39.220
2.503                    39.280,
                         39.281
2.504                    39.282
2.505                    39.283,
                         39.284
2.506                    39.285
2.507                    39.286—
                         39.290
2.508                    39.221
2.509                    39.291—
                         39.293
2.510                    39.222
2.511                    39.223
2.512                    39.224
2.513                    39.225
2.514                    39.226
2.515                    39.227
2.516                    39.229
2.517A                   39.230
2.517B                   39.231
2.517C                   39.232
2.517D                   39.233
2.517E                   39.234
2.518                    39.235
2.519                    39.236
2.520                    39.237
2.521                    39.238
2.522                    39.239
2.523                    39.240
2.524                    39.241
2.525                    39.242
2.526                    39.243
2.527                    39.244
2.528                    39.245
2.529                    39.246
2.530                    39.247
2.531                    39.248
2.532                    39.249
2.533                    39.250
2.534                    39.251
2.535                    39.252
2.536                    39.253
2.537                    39.254
2.538                    39.255
2.539                    39.256
2.540                    39.257
2.541                    39.258
2.542                    39.259
2.543                    39.260
2.544                    39.262
2.546                    39.261
2.601                    32.035
2.602                    32.036,
                         32.037
2.603                    32.038
2.604                    32.039
2.605                    32.042
2.606                    32.040
2.801                    99.015,
                         99.016
2.804                    99.017,
                         99.018
2.806                    99.019,
                         99.020
2.901                    154.015
2.902                    154.016,
                         154.017
2.903                    154.018
2.904                    154.019
2.905                    154.020
2.906                    154.021
2.907                    154.022
2.908                    154.023
2.909                    154.024
2.910                    154.025
2.911                    154.026
2.912                    154.028
2.913                    154.029
2.914                    154.030
2.915                    154.027
2.916                    154.031
2.917                    154.032
2.918                    154.033
2.919                    154.034—
                         154.036
2.920                    154.037
2.921                    154.038
2.922                    154.039
2.1102                   39.305
2.1103                   39.355—
                         39.357
2.1104                   39.358
2.1105                   39.359—
                         39.363
2.1106                   39.306
2.1107                   39.364,
                         39.365
2.1108                   39.366
2.1109                   39.307
2.1110                   39.308
2.1111                   39.309
2.1112                   39.310
2.1113                   39.311
2.1114                   39.312
2.1115                   39.314
2.1116                   39.315
2.1117                   39.316
2.1118                   39.317
2.1119                   39.318
2.1120                   39.319
2.1121                   39.320
2.1122                   39.321
2.1123                   39.322
2.1125                   39.324
2.1126                   39.325
2.1127                   39.326
2.1128                   39.327
2.1129                   39.328
2.1130                   39.329
2.1131                   39.330
2.1132                   39.331
2.1133                   39.332
2.1134                   39.333
2.1135                   39.334
2.1136                   39.335
2.1137                   39.336
2.1141                   39.337
2.1801                   98.002
2.1802                   98.001
2.1803                   98.003
2.1804                   98.004
2.1805                   98.005
2.1806                   98.020—
                         98.031
2.1807                   98.032—
                         98.041
                         39.080—
3.101                    39.083,
                         39.085—
                         39.088
3.102                    39.035,
                         39.036
3.103                    39.036
3.104                    39.036
3.105                    39.089
3.108                    39.047
3.109                    39.090,
                         39.091
3.110                    39.046
3.111                    39.084
3.112                    75.007
3.113                    39.043
3.114                    39.044
3.116                    39.045
3.119                    39.046
3.120                    39.050,
                         39.051
3.121                    39.037
                         39.058,
3.122                    39.060—
                         39.063
3.123                    39.039
3.124                    39.038
3.125                    39.040
3.126                    39.041
3.127                    39.042
3.128                    39.052
3.129                    39.053
3.130                    39.056
3.132                    39.049
3.133                    39.054
3.134                    39.055
3.137                    39.048
3.138                    39.057
3.139                    39.059
3.140                    39.064
3.141                    39.065
3.142                    39.092
3.201                    39.162
3.202                    39.160
3.203                    39.163
3.204                    39.161
3.205                    39.180—
                         39.183
3.206                    39.195—
                         39.206
3.207                    39.155
3.301                    39.020
3.302                    39.022
3.303                    39.021
4.403, Rule 24           50.019
4.405, Rules 17, 20, 23  50.013
4.416, Rules 17, 20, 23  50.013
4.502                    51.001,
                         51.004
4.601                    50.007
4.602, Rules 17, 20, 23  50.013
4.604, Rule 21           50.008
6.102                    51.004
6.208, Rules 13—16     50.018
7.204                    92.001
7.205                    92.002
7.301                    114.001,
                         114.003
7.401                    92.110
7.403                    92.111—
                         92.113
7.404                    92.114
7.405                    92.115
7.406                    92.116
7.407                    92.117
7.408                    92.118
7.409                    92.119,
                         92.120
7.411                    92.121
7.412                    92.122
7.413                    92.123
7.501                    120.001
7.502                    120.020
7.503                    120.022
7.504                    120.023,
                         120.024
7.505                    120.025,
                         120.026
7.506                    120.002—
                         120.006
7.507                    120.007
7.508                    120.008
7.509                    120.009
7.510                    120.027
7.601                    92.003
7.602                    92.004
7.604                    92.005
7.605                    92.006
7.606                    92.007
7.609                    92.008
7.610                    92.009
7.611                    92.010
7.613                    92.011
7.701                    92.096
7.702                    92.097
7.708                    92.098
7.801                    92.070,
                         92.071
7.802                    92.077
7.901                    57.001
7.908                    57.046
7.909                    57.047
7.910                    57.050
7.911                    57.051
7.1201                   112.001
7.1202                   112.002
7.1203                   112.004
7.1204                   112.005
7.1205                   112.006,
                         124.048
7.1206                   112.008
7.1207                   112.009
7.1208                   112.010
7.1209                   112.011
7.1210                   112.007
7.1211                   112.012
7.1213                   112.013
7.1214                   112.014
7.1215                   112.015
7.1217                   112.016
7.1601                   114.015,
                         114.016
7.1602                   114.030—
                         114.034
7.1612                   114.017
7.1613                   114.018
7.1614                   114.019
8.101                    110.002
8.102                    110.003
8.103                    110.004
8.104                    110.005
8.105                    110.006
8.106                    110.007
8.107                    110.009
8.108                    110.001
8.109                    110.010
8.204                    117.027
8.205                    117.027
8.206                    117.027
8.208                    117.027
8.209                    117.027
8.210                    117.027
8.211                    116.001
8.304                    113.002
8.401                    117.001
8.402                    117.002,
                         117.003
8.501                    97.035
8.502                    97.037
8.503                    97.038
8.505                    97.039
8.701                    124.001
8.702                    124.025
8.703                    124.027
8.704                    124.028
8.706                    124.045—
                         124.047
8.707                    124.061—
                         124.063
8.709                    124.029
8.711                    124.031
8.712                    124.005
8.713                    124.006
8.714                    124.007
8.715                    124.008
8.716                    124.032
8.720                    124.034
8.721                    124.012
8.1601                   117.001
8.1602                   117.027
8.1603                   117.024
9.202                    131.001
9.203                    131.002
9.204                    130.007
9.205                    133.002
9.206                    133.001
9.207                    130.002
9.210                    130.004
9.501                    134.001,
                         134.002
9.502                    134.003,
                         134.004
9.703                    133.003
9.801                    96.181
9.802                    57.002
9.803                    96.006
9.805                    96.181
9.806                    76.082
9.807                    113.001
                         57.002,
9.809                    97.017,
                         97.018
9.810                    97.001
9.811                    99.001
9.901                    132.001
9.902                    75.005
9.904                    132.001
9.905                    132.002
9.907                    110.008
9.909                    132.001
9.910                    132.001
9.911                    73.003
9.912                    132.001
9.1102                   116.003,
                         116.004
9.1105                   96.007
9.1106                   130.008
11.104                   96.003
11.201                   96.140
11.202                   96.141
11.203                   96.142
11.204                   96.143
11.205                   96.144
11.601                   96.008
11.605                   96.009
11.606                   96.004
11.607                   96.005
11.801                   96.100
11.802                   96.102
11.901                   94.001
                         94.016,
11.902                   94.030—
                         94.033
11.903                   94.034—
                         94.037
11.904                   94.041
11.905                   94.043—
                         94.046
11.906                   94.040
11.907                   94.039
11.908                   94.060
11.909                   94.062—
                         94.067
11.910                   94.068
11.1101                  94.015
11.1102                  94.017
11.1106                  94.018
12.102, Rules 1, 33      50.009
12.104, Rule 9           50.006
12.403                   51.004
12.404                   51.004
12.405                   51.005
13.101                   70.001
13.103                   75.009
13.104                   76.024,
                         76.025
13.106                   77.063
13.107                   77.045
13.108                   76.056—
                         76.059
13.109                   70.008
13.110                   80.005
13.111                   80.003
13.113                   75.003
13.114                   71.003,
                         73.001
13.115                   71.006
13.116                   71.002
13.118                   76.040—
                         76.043
                         76.021,
13.119                   76.022,
                         76.024,
                         76.025
13.120                   76.023
13.121                   72.002
                         72.011,
13.122                   72.013,
                         76.081
13.123                   76.078
13.124                   72.015,
                         76.005
13.125                   72.001
                         71.007,
13.126                   74.001—
                         74.003,
                         77.004
13.127                   76.061
13.128                   76.061
13.130                   77.001
13.134                   73.002
13.136                   73.005
13.137                   73.004,
                         73.006
13.138                   76.055
13.139                   77.002,
                         77.003
13.140                   77.005—
                         77.007
13.141                   71.026,
                         77.046
13.142                   77.008
13.144                   77.011
13.145                   77.060
13.146                   130.006
13.148                   77.064
13.150                   70.004
13.151                   70.005
13.152                   70.003
13.153                   70.006
13.154                   76.083
13.155                   76.084
13.156                   76.085
13.157                   76.001,
                         76.003
13.158                   76.004
13.159                   76.075—
                         76.077
13.161                   72.032—
                         72.034
13.162                   72.036
13.163                   72.030,
                         72.031
13.164                   72.038
13.165                   78.001
13.167                   77.061
13.168                   77.062,
                         77.065
13.169                   72.004
13.201                   71.020
13.202                   71.021
13.203                   71.022
13.204                   71.023
13.205                   71.024
13.206                   71.025
13.301                   81.015
13.306                   81.001,
                         81.002
13.307                   81.023
13.308                   81.016—
                         81.022
13.402                   77.080
13.404                   77.081
13.405                   77.082,
                         77.083
13.406                   77.084
13.407                   77.085
13.408                   77.086
13.409                   77.087
14.102                   50.005,
                         50.007
14.102, Rules 1, 33      50.009
14.102, Rules 7, 8, 10   50.016
14.102, Rule 9           50.006
14.102, Rules 13—16    50.018
14.102, Rules 17, 20, 23 50.013
14.102, Rule 21          50.008
14.102, Rule 22          50.012
14.102, Rule 24          50.019
14.102, Rule 25          51.008
14.102, Rule 28          50.015
14.102, Rules 32, 34     50.004
                         51.004,
                         51.045,
14.201                   51.046,
                         51.048,
                         51.050
                         51.004,
14.202                   51.047,
                         51.049
14.203                   51.001,
                         51.005
14.501                   50.007
14.502, Rules 17, 20, 23 50.013
14.506                   92.012
14.601                   54.001
                         51.004,
14.602                   54.002—
                         54.005
16.101                   10.002
16.201                   10.001
16.301                   10.999,
                         130.001
16.403                   10.005
16.405                   10.005
16.406                   10.005
16.407                   154.001
16.410                   10.006
                         
 
REFERENCES TO 1972 CODE
   This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972
Code, as updated through May 18, 1992, which have new section numbers herein.
Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein or in the
preceding table, have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of
a general and permanent nature.
1972 Code 2012 Code
1972 Code    2012 Code
9-1          93.001
9-2          93.002
9-3          93.003
9-4          93.004
9-5          93.005
9-6          93.007
9-7          93.008
9-8          93.009
9-10         93.010
13-1         98.001
13-2         98.002
13-3         98.003
13-4         98.004
13-5         98.005
13-6         98.006
13-16        98.020
13-17        98.021
13-18        98.022
13-19        98.023
13-21        98.024
13-22        98.025
13-23        98.026
13-24        98.027
13-25        98.028
13-26        98.029
13-27        98.030
13-28        98.031
13-29        98.032
13-30        98.033
13-31        98.034
13-32        98.035
13-33        98.036
13-34        98.037
13-35        98.038
13-36        98.039
13-37        98.040
13-38        98.041
13-39        98.042
19-1/2-11(6) 151.020
26-93        134.001
26-94        134.001
30-63        39.084
30-64        39.085
30-65        39.086
30-66        39.087
30-67        39.088
30-68        39.089
30-69        39.090
30-70        39.091
30-71        39.092
30-112       39.135
40-61        72.035
40-62        72.035
 
REFERENCES TO 1992 CODE
   This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1992
Code, as updated through January 9, 2012, which have new section numbers
herein. Sections of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein or in the
preceding table, have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of
a general and permanent nature.
1992 Code 2012 Code
1992 Code             2012 Code
1-1                   10.001
1-2                   10.002
1-3                   10.003
1-4                   10.999
1-5                   10.004
1-6                   10.005
1-7                   10.006
1-8                   10.007
1-9                   10.008
1-10                  10.009
1-11                  10.010
1-12                  10.011
2-1                   10.005
2-3                   30.001
2-4                   30.002
2-5                   30.003
2-5.1                 30.004
2-6                   30.005
2-7                   30.006
2-8                   30.007
2-9                   30.008
2-10                  30.009
2-11                  30.010
2-12                  30.011
2-13                  30.012
2-14                  30.013
2-15                  30.014
2-16                  30.015
2-17                  30.016
2-18                  30.017
2-19                  30.018
2-20                  30.019
2-21                  30.020
2-22                  30.021
2-23                  30.022
2-24                  30.023
2-25                  30.024
2-26                  30.025
2-26.1                30.026
2-27                  30.027
2-28                  30.028
2-29                  30.029
2-34                  31.001
2-35                  31.002
2-37                  31.003
2-40                  32.001
2-41                  32.002
2-42                  32.003
2-43                  32.004
2-51                  36.001
2-52                  36.002
2-54                  36.003
2-55                  36.004
2-56                  36.005
2-60                  30.040
2-61                  30.041
2-62                  30.042
2-63                  30.043
2-64                  30.044
2-65                  30.045
2-66                  30.046
2-80                  33.025
2-81                  33.026
2-82                  33.027
2-83                  33.028
2-90                  30.075
2-100                 34.001
2-110                 40.001
2-111                 40.002
2-112                 40.003
2-113                 40.004
2-114                 40.005
2-115                 40.006
2-116                 40.007
2-117                 40.008
2-118                 40.009
2-119                 40.999
2-120                 40.999
2-121                 40.010
2-122                 77.105
2-123                 77.106
2-133                 32.015
2-134                 32.016
2-135                 32.017
2-136                 32.018
2-137                 32.019
2-138                 32.020
2-139                 32.021
2-140                 32.022
2-141                 32.023
3-1                   97.001
3-2                   97.002
3-3                   97.003
3-17                  97.015
3-18                  97.016
3-19                  97.017
3-20                  97.018
3-21                  97.019
3-22                  97.020
3-23                  97.021
3-34                  97.035
3-35                  97.036
3-36                  97.037
3-37                  97.038
3-38                  97.039
4-2                   99.001
4-3                   99.002
4-21                  99.015
4-22                  99.016
4-28                  99.017
4-29                  99.018
4-37                  99.019
4-38                  99.020
5-1                   111.001
5-2                   111.002
5-2.1                 111.003
5-2.2                 111.004
5-2.3                 111.005
5-2.4                 111.006
5-2.5                 111.007
5-2.7                 111.008
5-2.8                 111.009
5-2.10                111.010
5-2.11                111.011
5-2.12                111.013
5-2.13                111.014
5-3                   111.016
5-4                   111.017
5-5                   111.018
5-6                   111.019
5-7                   111.020
5-8                   111.021
5-8.1                 111.022
5-9                   111.023
5-10                  111.024
5-11                  111.025
5-12                  111.026
5-15                  111.028
5-17                  111.030
6-1                   113.001
6-2                   113.002
6-3                   113.003
6-4                   113.004
6-79                  113.999
7-1                   90.001
7-2                   90.002
7-3                   90.003
7-4                   90.004
7-5                   90.005
7-6                   90.006
7-7                   90.007
7-8                   90.008
7-9                   90.009
7-10                  90.010
7-11                  90.011
7-12                  90.012
7-13                  90.013
7-14                  90.014
7-15                  90.015
7-20                  90.030
7-21                  90.031
7-22                  90.032
7-24                  90.033
7-25                  90.034
7-26                  90.035
7-27                  90.036
7-28                  90.037
7-29                  90.038
7-30                  90.039
7-41                  90.050
7-42                  90.051
7-43                  90.052
7-44                  90.053
7-45                  90.054
7-46                  90.055
7-47                  90.056
7-48                  90.057
7-49                  90.058
7-50                  90.059
7-51                  90.060
7-52                  90.061
7-53                  90.062
7-60                  90.075
7-61                  90.076
7-62                  90.077
7-80                  90.090
7-81                  90.091
7-82                  90.092
7-83                  90.093
8-26                  32.035
8-27                  32.036
8-28                  32.037
8-29                  32.038
8-30                  32.039
8-31                  32.040
8-32                  32.041
8-33                  32.042
9-1                   153.001
9-1.1                 153.002
9-2                   153.003
9-3                   153.005
9-3.1                 153.006
9-4                   153.007
10-1                  81.001
10-2                  81.002
10-34                 81.015
10-35                 81.016
10-36                 81.017
10-37                 81.018
10-38                 81.019
10-39                 81.020
10-40                 81.021
10-41                 81.022
10-42                 81.023
11-1                  150.001
11-2                  150.002
11-17                 150.015
11-18                 150.016
11-20                 150.017
11-31                 150.030
11-32                 150.031
11-33                 150.032
11-34                 150.033
11-35                 150.034
11-37                 150.035
11-38                 150.036
11-39                 150.037
11-40                 150.038
11-41                 150.039
11-42                 150.040
11-43                 150.041
11-44                 150.042
11-45                 150.043
11-46                 150.044
11-47                 150.045
11-48                 150.046
11-49                 150.047
11-50                 150.048
11-51                 150.060
11-52                 150.061
11-59                 150.075
11-60                 150.076
11-61                 150.077
11-62                 150.078
11-63                 150.079
11-64                 150.080
11-65                 150.081
11-75                 150.095
11-76                 150.096
11-81                 150.125
11-82                 150.126
11-83                 150.127
11-84                 150.128
11-85                 150.129
11-86                 150.130
11-87                 150.131
11-88                 150.132
11-89                 150.133
11-90                 150.134
11-91                 150.135
11-92                 150.136
11-93                 150.137
11-94                 150.138
11-95                 150.139
11-96                 150.140
11-97                 150.141
11-100                150.155
11-101                150.156
11-102                150.157
11-103                150.158
11-104                150.159
11-105                150.160
11-106                150.999
11-107                150.161
11-110                150.175
11-111                150.176
11-112                150.177
11-113                150.178
11-114                150.179
11-115                150.180
11-116                150.181
12-16                 33.001
12-17                 33.002
12-18                 33.003
12-19                 33.004
12-20                 33.005
12-21                 33.006
12-22                 33.007
12-23                 33.008
12-24                 33.009
12-25                 33.010
12.5-1                35.001
12.5-2                35.002
12.5-3                35.003
12.5-4                35.004
12.5-5                35.005
12.5-6                35.006
12.5-7                35.007
12.5-8                35.008
12.5-9                35.009
12.5-10               35.010
12.5-11               35.011
12.5-12               35.012
12.5-13               35.025
12.5-14               35.026
12.5-16               35.028
12.5-17               35.029
12.5-18               35.030
12.5-19               35.031
12.5-20               35.032
12.5-21               35.033
12.5-22               35.034
12.5-23               35.035
12.5-25               35.036
12.5-27               35.050
12.5-28               35.051
12.5-30               35.053
12.5-31               35.054
12.5-32               35.055
12.5-33               35.056
12.5-34               35.057
12.5-35               35.058
12.5-37               35.059
14-1                  38.002
14-2                  38.003
14-50                 38.004
14-68                 38.005
14-73                 38.999
14-78                 38.006
14-79                 38.007
14-80                 38.008
14-84                 38.009
14-85                 38.010
14-130                56.001
14-131                56.002
14-132                56.003
14-133                56.004
14-134                56.005
14-135                56.006
15-1                  150.201
15-2                  150.202
15-3                  150.203
15-4                  150.204
15-5                  150.205
15-6                  150.206
15-7                  150.207
15-8                  150.208
15-9                  150.209
15-10                 150.210
15-11                 150.211
15-12                 150.212
15-13                 150.213
15-14                 150.214
15-15                 150.215
15-16                 150.216
15-17                 150.217
15-18                 150.218
15-19                 150.219
15-20                 150.220
15-21                 150.221
15-22                 150.222
15-23                 150.223
15-24                 150.224
15-25                 150.225
15-26                 150.226
15-27                 150.227
15-28                 150.228
15-29                 150.229
15-30                 150.230
15-32                 150.232
15-34                 150.233
15-36                 150.235
15-37                 150.236
15-38                 150.237
15-39                 150.238
15-40                 150.239
15.5-1                41.001
15.5-2                41.002
15.5-3                41.003
15.5-4                41.004
15.5-5                41.005
15.5-5.1              41.006
15.5-6                41.007
15.5-7                41.008
15.5-8                41.009
15.5-9                41.010
16-1                  91.001
16-2                  91.002
16-15                 91.015
16-15.1               91.016
16-16                 91.017
16-23                 91.018
16-28                 91.019
16-29                 91.020
16-31                 91.021
17-1                  112.001
17-2                  112.002
17-2.1                112.003
17-3                  112.004
17-4                  112.005
17-5                  112.006
17-6                  112.007
17-7                  112.008
17-8                  112.009
17-9                  112.010
17-10                 112.011
17-11                 112.012
17-12                 112.013
17-13                 112.014
17-14                 112.015
17-15                 112.016
17-27                 112.030
17-28                 112.031
17-29                 112.032
17-30                 112.033
18-1                  57.001
18-2                  57.002
18-3                  57.003
18-4                  57.004
18-5                  57.005
18-6                  57.006
18-16                 57.021
18-17                 57.022
18-22                 57.028
18-23                 57.029
18-24                 57.030
18-25                 57.031
18-26                 57.032
18-27                 57.033
18-28                 57.045
18-29                 57.046
18-30                 57.047
18-30.1               57.048
18-31                 57.049
18-32                 57.050
18-33                 57.051
18-34                 57.052
18-35                 57.053
18-44                 57.065
18-46                 57.067
18-48                 57.068
18-49                 57.069
18-50                 57.070
18-51                 57.071
18-52                 57.072
18-53                 57.073
18-54                 57.074
18-56                 57.075
18-57                 57.076
18-58                 57.077
18-59                 57.078
18-60                 57.079
18-61                 57.080
18-62                 57.081
18-63                 57.082
18-66                 57.084
18-67                 57.085
18-68                 57.086
18-70                 57.100
18-71                 57.101
18-72                 57.102
18-73                 57.103
18-74                 57.104
18-75                 57.105
18-76                 57.106
18-77                 57.107
18-78                 57.108
18-79                 57.109
18-80                 57.120
18-81                 57.121
18-82                 57.122
18-83                 57.123
19-1                  92.001
19-2                  92.002
19-3                  92.003
19-4                  92.004
19-5                  92.005
19-6                  92.006
19-7                  92.007
19-8                  92.008
19-9                  92.009
19-10                 92.010
19-12                 92.011
19-13                 92.012
19-14                 92.013
19-23                 92.025
19-24                 92.026
19-25                 92.027
19-26                 92.028
19-27                 92.029
19-28                 92.030
19-29                 92.031
19-30                 92.032
19-31                 92.033
19-32                 92.034
19-33                 92.045
19-34                 92.046
19-35                 92.047
19-36                 92.048
19-37                 92.049
19-38                 92.050
19-39                 92.051
19-40                 92.052
19-41                 92.053
19-42                 92.054
19-43                 92.055
19-44                 92.056
19-49                 92.070
19-50                 92.071
19-51                 92.072
19-52                 92.073
19-53                 92.074
19-54                 92.075
19-55                 92.076
19-56                 92.077
19-56.1               92.078
19-57                 92.079
19-58                 92.080
19-59                 92.081
19-66                 92.095
19-67                 92.096
19-68                 92.097
19-69                 92.098
19-80                 92.110
19-82                 92.111
19-83                 92.112
19-84                 92.113
19-85                 92.114
19-86                 92.115
19-87                 92.116
19-88                 92.117
19-89                 92.118
19-90                 92.119
19-91                 92.120
19-93                 92.121
19-94                 92.122
19-95                 92.123
19-100                92.135
19-101                92.136
19-102                92.137
19-103                92.138
19-110                92.150
19-112                92.151
19-113                92.152
19-114                92.153
19-115                92.154
19-116                92.155
19-117                92.156
19-118                92.157
19-119                92.158
19-120                92.170
19-121                92.171
19-122                92.172
19-123                92.173
19-124                92.175
19-125                92.176
19-126                92.178
19-127                92.179
19-127.1              92.180
19-128.1              92.181
19-128.2              92.182
19-128.3              92.183
19-128.4              92.184
19-128.5              92.185
19-129                92.186
19-130                92.187
19-131                92.188
19-132                92.189
19-133                92.190
19-134                92.192
19.5-1                151.001
19.5-7                151.015
19.5-8                151.016
19.5-9                151.017
19.5-10               151.018
19.5-11               151.019
19.5-12               151.020
19.5-21               151.035
19.5-22               151.036
19.5-23               151.037
19.5-24               151.038
19.5-25               151.039
19.5-26               151.040
19.5-27               151.041
19.5-28               151.042
19.5-29               151.043
19.5-30               151.044
19.5-31               151.045
19.5-32               151.046
19.5-33               151.047
19.5-34               151.999
19.5-35               151.048
20-13                 114.001
20-14                 114.002
20-15                 114.003
20-27                 114.015
20-28                 114.016
20-30                 114.017
20-31                 114.018
20-32                 114.019
20-40                 114.030
20-41                 114.031
20-42                 114.032
20-43                 114.033
20-44                 114.034
21.5-1                98.001
21.5-2                98.002
21.5-3                98.003
21.5-4                98.004
21.5-5                98.005
21.5-6                98.006
21.5-16               98.020
21.5-17               98.021
21.5-18               98.022
21.5-19               98.023
21.5-21               98.024
21.5-22               98.025
21.5-23               98.026
21.5-24               98.027
21.5-25               98.028
21.5-26               98.029
21.5-27               98.030
21.5-28               98.031
21.5-29               98.032
21.5-30               98.033
21.5-31               98.034
21.5-32               98.035
21.5-33               98.036
21.5-34               98.037
21.5-35               98.038
21.5-36               98.039
21.5-37               98.040
21.5-38               98.041
21.5-39               98.042
23-1                  110.001
23-2                  110.002
23-3                  110.003
23-4                  110.004
23-5                  110.005
23-6                  110.006
23-7                  110.007
23-8                  110.008
23-9                  110.009
23-10                 110.010
23-21                 110.025
23-22                 110.026
23-23                 110.027
23-24                 110.028
23-25                 110.029
23-25.1               110.030
23-25.2               110.031
23-26                 110.032
23-27                 110.033
23-28                 110.034
23-29                 110.035
23-30                 110.036
23-32                 110.037
23.5-26               118.001
23.5-27               118.002
23.5-28               118.003
23.5-29               118.004
23.5-30               118.005
23.5-31               118.006
23.5-32               118.007
23.5-33               118.008
23.5-34               118.009
23.5-35               118.010
23.5-36               118.011
23.5-37               118.012
23.5-38               118.013
23.5-39               118.014
23.5-40               118.015
23.5-41               118.016
23.5-42               118.017
23.5-43               118.018
23.5-44               118.019
23.5-45               118.020
23.5-46               118.021
24-1                  152.001
24-2                  152.002
24-3                  152.003
24-4                  152.015
24-5                  152.030
24-7                  152.031
24-7.1                152.032
24-8                  152.045
24-9                  152.046
24-10                 152.047
24-11                 152.048
24-12                 152.049
24-13                 152.050
24-14                 152.065
24-15                 152.066
24-16                 152.067
24-17                 152.068
24-18                 152.069
24-19                 152.070
24-20                 152.071
24-21                 152.072
24-22                 152.085
24-23                 152.086
24-24                 152.087
24-25                 152.088
24-26                 152.089
25-17                 73.001
25-19                 73.002
25-21                 73.003
25-25                 73.004
25-27                 73.005
25-29                 73.006
25-30                 73.007
25-40                 93.025
25-41                 93.026
25-42                 93.027
25-43                 93.028
25-44                 93.029
25-45                 93.030
25-46                 93.031
25-47                 93.032
25-48                 93.033
25-49                 93.034
25-50                 93.035
25.5-1                93.001
25.5-2                93.002
25.5-3                93.003
25.5-4                93.004
25.5-5                93.005
25.5-5.5              93.006
25.5-6                93.007
25.5-7                93.008
25.5-8                93.009
25.5-9                93.010
25.5-16               93.011
26-1                  130.001
26-2                  130.002
26-3                  130.003
26-6                  130.004
26-10                 130.005
26-11                 130.006
26-13                 130.007
26-14                 130.008
26-16                 130.009
26-17                 130.010
26-18                 130.011,
                      130.999
26-25                 131.001
26-26                 131.002
26-27                 131.003
26-28                 131.004
26-29                 131.005
26-37                 132.001
26-38                 132.002
26-39                 132.003
26-41                 132.004
26-42                 132.005
26-51                 133.001
26-52                 133.002
26-53                 133.003
26-54                 133.004
26-94                 134.001
26-95                 134.002
26-96                 134.003
26-97                 134.004
26-120                135.001
26-121                135.002
26-122                135.003
26-123                135.004
27-1                  95.001
27-2                  95.002
27-3                  95.003
27-4                  95.004
27-5                  95.005
27-5.1                95.006
27-6                  95.007
27-7                  95.008
27-8                  95.009
27-9                  95.010
27-10                 95.011
27-11                 95.012
27-12                 95.013
27-12.1               95.014
27-13                 95.015
27-15                 95.016
27-15.1               95.017
27-16                 95.018
27-16.1               95.019
27-16.2               95.020
27-16.3               95.021
27-16.4               95.022
27-16.5               95.023
27-16.6               95.024
27-16.7               95.025
27-16.8               95.026
27-16.9               95.027
27-16.10              95.028
27-16.11              95.029
27-16.12              95.030
27-16.13              95.031
27-16.14              95.032
27-16.15              95.033
27-17                 95.045
27-18                 95.046
27-19                 95.047
27-20                 95.048
27-21                 95.049
27-22                 95.050
27-24                 95.051
27-25                 95.052
27-26                 95.053
27-27                 95.054
27-27.1               95.055
27-28                 95.056
27-28.1               95.057
27-29                 95.058
27-40                 95.070
27-41                 95.071
28-1                  116.001
28-2                  116.002
28-3                  116.003
28-4                  116.004
28-5                  116.005
28-15                 116.020
28-16                 116.021
28-17                 116.022
28-18                 116.023
28-19                 116.024
28-20                 116.025
28-21                 116.026
28-22                 116.027
28-23                 116.028
28-24                 116.029
28-25                 116.030
29-1                  117.001
29-2                  117.002
29-3                  117.003
29-4                  117.004
29-5                  117.005
29-6                  117.006
29-7                  117.007
29-17                 117.020
29-18                 117.021
29-18.1               117.023
29-19                 117.024
29-20                 117.025
29-21                 117.026
29-22                 117.027
29-23                 117.028
29-24                 117.029
29-25                 117.030
29-26                 117.040
29-27                 117.041
29-28                 117.042
29-29                 117.043
29-30                 117.044
29-31                 117.045
29-32                 117.046
29-50                 117.060
29-51                 117.061
29-52                 117.062
29-53                 117.063
29-54                 117.064
29-55                 117.065
29-56                 117.066
29-57                 117.067
29-58                 117.068
29-59                 117.069
29-60                 117.070
29-61                 117.071
29-62                 117.072
29-63                 117.073
29-64                 117.074
29-65                 117.075
29-66                 117.076
29-67                 117.077
29-68                 117.079
29-69                 117.999
29-76                 117.090
29-77                 117.091
29-78                 117.092
29-79                 117.093
29-84                 117.094
29-85                 117.095
29-86                 117.096
29-87                 117.097
29-91                 117.098
29-92                 117.110
29-94                 117.112
30-1                  39.001
30-2                  39.020
30-3                  39.021
30-4                  39.022
30-5                  39.002
30-6                  39.003
30-7                  39.004
30-8                  39.005
30-18                 39.035
30-19                 39.036
30-22                 39.037
30-23                 39.038
30-24                 39.039
30-25                 39.040
30-26                 39.041
30-27                 39.042
30-29                 39.043
30-30                 39.044
30-32                 39.045
30-33                 39.046
30-34                 39.047
30-35                 39.048
30-36                 39.049
30-37a                39.050
30-37b                39.051
30-38                 39.052
30-39                 39.053
30-40                 39.054
30-41                 39.055
30-42                 39.056
30-44                 39.057
30-45                 39.058
30-46                 39.059
30-47                 39.060
30-48                 39.061
30-49                 39.062
30-50                 39.063
30-51                 39.064
30-52                 39.065
30-53                 39.066
30-54                 39.067
30-55                 39.068
30-58                 39.080
30-59                 39.081
30-60                 39.082
30-61                 39.083
30-62                 39.084
30-63                 39.085
30-64                 39.086
30-65                 39.087
30-66                 39.088
30-67                 39.089
30-68                 39.090
30-69                 39.091
30-70                 39.092
30-83                 39.105
30-84                 39.106
30-85                 39.107
30-86                 39.108
30-87                 39.109
30-96                 39.120
30-97                 39.121
30-98                 39.122
30-99                 39.123
30-100                39.124
30-101                39.125
30-102                39.126
30-103                39.127
30-104                39.128
30-105                39.129
30-106                39.130
30-107                39.131
30-108                39.132
30-109                39.133
30-110                39.134
30-111                39.135
30-112                39.136
30-123                39.155
30-124                39.156
30-125                39.157
30-126                39.158
30-127                39.159
30-128                39.160
30-129                39.161
30-130                39.162
30-131                39.163
30-132                39.164
30-133                39.165
30-133.1              39.166
30-134                39.167
30-135                39.168
30-136                39.169
30-137                39.180
30-138                39.181
30-139                39.182
30-140                39.183
30-147                39.195
30-148                39.196
30-149                39.197
30-150                39.198
30-151                39.199
30-152                39.200
30-154                39.201
30-156                39.202
30-157                39.203
30-158                39.204
30-159                39.205
30-160                39.206
30-161                39.207
31-1                  120.001
31-2                  120.002
31-3                  120.003
31-4                  120.004
31-5                  120.005
31-6                  120.006
31-7                  120.007
31-8                  120.008
31-9                  120.009
31-20                 120.020
31-21                 120.021
31-22                 120.022
31-23                 120.023
31-24                 120.024
31-25                 120.025
31-26                 120.026
31-27                 120.027
32-1                  154.001
32-2                  154.002
32-17                 154.015
32-18                 154.016
32-19                 154.017
32-20                 154.018
32-21                 154.019
32-22                 154.020
32-23                 154.021
32-24                 154.022
32-25                 154.023
32-26                 154.024
32-27                 154.025
32-28                 154.026
32-29                 154.027
32-30                 154.028
32-31                 154.029
32-32                 154.030
32-33                 154.031
32-34                 154.032
32-35                 154.033
32-36                 154.034
32-37                 154.035
32-38                 154.036
32-39                 154.037
32-40                 154.038
32-41                 154.039
33-1                  150.301
33-3                  150.303
33-4                  150.304
33-5                  150.305
33-6                  150.306
33-7                  150.307
33-8                  150.308
33-9                  150.309
33-10                 150.310
33-11                 150.311
33-12                 150.312
33-13                 150.313
33-14                 150.314
33-15                 150.315
33-16                 150.316
33-17                 150.317
34-1                  131.020
34-2                  131.021
34.5-1                36.020
34.5-1.1              36.021
34.5-1.2              36.022
34.5-1.3              36.023
34.5-2                36.024
34.5-3                36.025
34.5-8                36.030
34.5-9                36.031
34.5-10               36.031
34.5-12               36.033
34.5-13               36.034
34.5-14               36.035
34.5-15               36.036
34.5-16               36.037
34.5-17               36.038
34.5-18               36.039
35-16                 39.220
35-17                 39.221
35-18                 39.222
35-19                 39.223
35-20                 39.224
35-21                 39.225
35-22                 39.226
35-23                 39.227
35-23.1               39.228
35-24                 39.229
35-25                 39.230
35-26                 39.231
35-27                 39.232
35-28                 39.233
35-29                 39.234
35-30                 39.235
35-31                 39.236
35-32                 39.237
35-33                 39.238
35-34                 39.239
35-35                 39.240
35-36                 39.241
35-37                 39.242
35-38                 39.243
35-39                 39.244
35-40                 39.245
35-41                 39.246
35-42                 39.247
35-43                 39.248
35-44                 39.249
35-45                 39.250
35-46                 39.251
35-47                 39.252
35-48                 39.253
35-49                 39.254
35-50                 39.255
35-51                 39.256
35-52                 39.257
35-53                 39.258
35-54                 39.259
35-55                 39.260
35-56                 39.261
35-57                 39.262
35-58                 39.263
35-59                 39.264
35-60                 39.265
35-61                 39.266
35-62                 39.267
35-62.1               39.268
35-63                 39.280
35-64                 39.281
35-65                 39.282
35-66                 39.283
35-67                 39.284
35-68                 39.285
35-69                 39.286
35-70                 39.287
35-71                 39.288
35-72                 39.289
35-73                 39.290
35-74                 39.291
35-75                 39.292
35-76                 39.293
35-77                 39.294
35-87                 39.305
35-88                 39.306
35-89                 39.307
35-90                 39.308
35-91                 39.309
35-92                 39.310
35-93                 39.311
35-94                 39.312
35-94.1               39.313
35-95                 39.314
35-96                 39.315
35-97                 39.316
35-98                 39.317
35-99                 39.318
35-100                39.319
35-101                39.320
35-102                39.321
35-103                39.322
35-104                39.323
35-105                39.324
35-106                39.325
35-107                39.326
35-108                39.327
35-109                39.328
35-110                39.329
35-111                39.330
35-112                39.331
35-113                39.332
35-114                39.333
35-115                39.334
35-116                39.335
35-117                39.336
35-119                39.337
35-120                39.338
35-121                39.339
35-122                39.340
35-123                39.341
35-124                39.342
35-124.1              39.343
35-124.2              39.344
35-125                39.355
35-126                39.356
35-127                39.357
35-128                39.358
35-129                39.359
35-130                39.360
35-131                39.361
35-132                39.362
35-133                39.363
35-134                39.364
35-135                39.365
35-136                39.366
35-137                39.367
35.5-1                96.235
35.5-2                96.236
35.5-3                96.237
35.5-4                96.238
35.5-5                96.239
35.5-6                96.240
35.5-7                96.241
35.5-8                96.242
35.5-9                96.243
37-1                  155.001
37-2                  155.002
37-14                 155.015
37-15                 155.016
37-16                 155.017
37-17                 155.018
37-18                 155.019
37-19                 155.020
37-29                 155.030
37-31                 155.031
37-32                 155.032
38-1                  96.001
38-2                  96.002
38-5                  96.003
38-6                  96.004
38-7                  96.005
38-8                  96.006
38-9                  96.007
38-10                 96.008
38-11                 96.009
38-12                 96.010
38-13                 96.011
38-22                 96.025
38-23                 96.026
38-24                 96.027
38-26                 96.028
38-27                 96.029
38-28                 96.030
38-29                 96.031
38-30                 96.032
38-31                 96.033
38-32                 96.034
38-32.1               96.035
38-39                 96.050
38-41                 96.053
38-42                 96.051
38-43                 96.052
38-46                 96.054
38-56                 96.070
38-57                 96.071
38-58                 96.072
38-59                 96.073
38-60                 96.085
38-61                 96.086
38-62                 96.087
38-64                 96.088
38-65                 96.089
38-76                 96.100
38-77                 96.101
38-78                 96.102
38-78.1               96.103
38-78.2               96.104
38-78.3               96.105
38-79                 96.120
38-80                 96.121
38-81                 96.122
38-82                 96.123
38-83                 96.124
38-84                 96.125
38-85                 96.126
38-94                 96.140
38-95                 96.141
38-96                 96.142
38-97                 96.143
38-98                 96.144
38-99                 96.145
38-100                96.146
38-101                96.147
38-102                96.148
38-113                96.160
38-114                96.161
38-115                96.162
38-116                96.163
38-118                96.164
38-119                96.165
38-121                96.166
38-133                96.180
38-134                96.181
38-135                96.183
38-141                96.188
38-142                96.189
38-144                96.191
38-145                96.192
38-146                96.205
38-147                96.206
38-150                96.220
38.5-1                122.001
38.5-2                122.002
38.5-3                122.003
38.5-4                122.004
38.5-5                122.005
38.5-6                122.006
38.5-7                122.007
38.5-8                122.008
38.5-9                122.009
38.5-10               122.010
38.5-11               122.011
38.5-12               122.012
38.5-13               122.013
38.5-14               122.014
38.5-15               122.015
38.5-16               122.016
38.5-17               122.017
38.5-18               122.018
38.5-19               122.019
38.5-20               122.020
38.5-21               122.021
38.5-22               122.022
38.5-23               122.023
38.5-24               122.035
38.5-25               122.036
38.5-26               122.037
38.5-27               122.038
38.5-28               122.039
38.5-29               122.040
38.5-30               122.041
38.5-31               122.042
38.5-32               122.043
38.5-33               122.055
38.5-34               122.056
38.5-35               122.070
38.5-36               122.071
38.5-37               122.072
38.5-38               122.073
38.5-39               122.074
38.5-40               122.075
38.5-41               122.076
38.5-42               122.077
38.5-43               122.078
38.5-44               122.079
38.5-45               122.080
38.5-46               122.081
38.5-47               122.082
38.5-48               122.083
38.5-49               122.084
38.5-50               122.085
38.5-51               122.086
38.5-52               122.087
38.5-53               122.088
38.5-54               122.089
38.5-55               122.090
38.5-56               122.091
38.5-57               122.092
39-16                 37.001
39-16.1               37.002
39-17                 37.003
39-17.1               37.004
39-18                 37.005
39-19.1               37.006
39-20                 37.007
39-21                 37.999
39-47                 37.020
39-47.1               37.021
39-48                 37.022
39-49                 37.023
39-50                 37.999
39-80                 37.035
39-81                 37.036
39-82                 37.037
39-82A                37.038
39-83                 37.039
39-84                 37.040
39-85                 37.041
39-86                 37.042
39-121                37.055
39-122                37.056
39-123                37.057
39-127                37.058
39-128                37.070
39-129                37.071
39-130                37.072
39-131                37.073
39-134                37.085
39-139                37.090
39-141                37.105
39-142                37.106
39-143                37.107
39-144                37.108
39-145                37.109
39-146                37.110
39-147                37.111
39-148                37.112
39-150                37.135
39-151                37.136
39-152                37.137
39-153                37.138
39-160                37.150
39-172                37.165
39-173                37.166
39-174                37.167
39-176                37.169
39-177                37.170
39-178                37.171
39-179                37.172
39-180                37.173
39-181                37.174
39-182                37.175
39-183                37.190
39-184                37.191
39-185                37.192
39-186                37.193
39-187                37.194
39-188                37.195
39-189                37.196
39-190                37.999
39-191                37.197
39-192                37.198
39-193                37.199
39-194                37.200
39-195                37.201
40-1                  70.001
40-2                  70.002
40-6                  70.003
40-7                  70.004
40-8                  70.005
40-9                  70.006
40-10                 70.007
40-11                 70.008
40-12                 70.009
40-13                 70.010
40-22                 71.001
40-23                 71.002
40-24                 71.003
40-25                 71.004
40-26                 71.005
40-27                 71.006
40-28                 71.007
40-38                 71.020
40-39                 71.021
40-40                 71.022
40-41                 71.023
40-42                 71.024
40-43                 71.025
40-45                 71.026
40-56                 72.030
40-57                 72.031
40-58                 72.032
40-59                 72.033
40-60                 72.034
40-61                 72.035
40-63                 72.036
40-64                 72.037
40-65                 72.038
40-66                 72.039
40-76                 72.001
40-77                 72.002
40-78                 72.003
40-79                 72.004
40-80                 72.005
40-81                 72.006
40-82                 72.007
40-83                 72.008
40-84                 72.009
40-85                 72.010
40-86                 72.011
40-86.1               72.012
40-87                 72.013
40-88                 72.014
40-89                 72.015
40-91                 72.016
40-100                74.001
40-101                74.002
40-102                74.003
40-103                74.004
40-114                75.001
40-115                75.002
40-116                75.003
40-117                75.004
40-118                75.005
40-119                75.006
40-120                75.007
40-121                75.008
40-124                75.009
40-127                75.010
40-137                76.001
40-138                76.002
40-139                76.003
40-142                76.004
40-143                76.005
40-154                78.001
40-154.1              ch. 82, sch. I
40-154.2              ch. 82, sch. I
40-155                78.002
40-166                76.020
40-167                76.021
40-168                76.022
40-169                76.023
40-170                76.024
40-171                76.025
40-182                76.040
40-183                76.041
40-184                76.042
40-185                76.043
40-196                76.055
40-197                76.056
40-198                76.057
40-199                76.058
40-200                76.059
40-201                76.060
40-202                76.061
40-203                76.062
40-204                76.063
40-205                76.064
40-219                76.075
40-220                76.076
40-221                76.077
40-222                76.078
40-223                76.079
40-224                76.080
40-225                76.081
40-226                76.082
40-227                76.083
40-228                76.084
40-229                76.085
40-230                76.086
40-232                76.087
40-233                76.088
40-234                76.089
40-235                76.090
40-241                77.001
40-242                77.002
40-243                77.003
40-244                77.004
40-245                77.005
40-246                77.006
40-247                77.007
40-248                77.008
40-249                77.009
40-250                77.010
40-251                77.011
40-252                77.012
40-253                77.999
40-254                77.013
40-256                77.025
40-257                77.026
40-257.3              77.028
40-257.5              77.029
40-257.6              77.030
40-258                77.045
40-259                77.046
40-260                77.047
40-265                77.060
40-266                77.061
40-267                77.062
40-268                77.063
40-269                77.064
40-270                77.065
40-276                77.080
40-277                77.081
40-278                77.082
40-279                77.083
40-280                77.084
40-281                77.085
40-282                77.086
40-283                77.087
40-284                77.088
40-286                77.089
40-287                77.090
40-296                80.001
40-297                80.002
40-298                80.003
40-299                80.004
40-300                80.005
40-301                80.006
40-302                80.007
40-303                80.008
40-315                81.035
40-316                81.036
40-317                81.037
40-318                81.038
40-319                81.039
40-320                81.040
40-321                81.041
40-322                81.042
40-323                81.043
40-349                79.001
40-350                79.002
40-351                79.003
40-352                79.004
40-353                79.005
40-354                79.006
40-355                79.007
40-356                79.008
40-357                79.009
40-358                79.010
40-359                79.011
40-360                79.012
40-361                79.013
40-362                79.014
40-363                79.015
40-364                79.016
40-365                79.017
40-366                79.018
40-367                79.019
40-368                79.020
40-369                79.021
40-369.1              79.022
40-369.2              79.023
40-369.3              79.024
40-370                76.105
40-371                76.106
40-372                76.107
40-373                76.108
41-1                  50.001
41-2                  50.002
41-3                  50.003
41-4                  50.004
41-5                  50.005
41-6                  50.006
41-7                  50.007
41-8                  50.008
41-9                  50.009
41-10                 50.010
41-11                 50.011
41-12                 50.012
41-13                 50.013
41-15                 50.015
41-16                 50.016
41-17                 50.017
41-18                 50.018
41-19                 50.019
41-20                 50.020
41-21                 50.021
41-22                 50.022
41-33                 51.001
41-34                 51.002
41-35                 51.003
41-36                 51.004
41-37                 51.005
41-38                 51.006
41-39                 51.007
41-40                 51.008
41-41                 51.009
41-42                 51.010
41-46                 51.025
41-47                 51.026
41-48                 51.027
41-49A                51.028
41-49B                51.029
41-50                 51.030
41-54                 51.032
41-56                 51.033
41-57                 51.045
41-58                 51.046
41-59                 51.047
41-60                 51.048
41-61                 51.049
41-62                 51.050
41-65                 51.052
41-66                 51.053
41-67                 51.054
41-68                 51.065
41-70                 51.080
41-71                 51.081
41-73                 51.082
41-74                 51.083
41-75                 51.084
41-76                 51.085
41-77                 51.086
41-77.1               51.087
41-78                 51.088
41-79                 51.089
41-80                 51.100
41-81                 51.101
41-82                 51.102
41-83                 51.103
41-85                 51.115
41-86                 51.116
41-89                 51.117
41-90                 51.118
41-91                 51.130
41-92.1               51.132
41-92.2               51.133
41-93                 54.001
41-95                 54.002
41-96                 54.003
41-97                 54.004
41-98                 54.005
41-109                53.002
41-110                53.001
41-111                53.015
41-112                53.016
41-112.1              53.017
41-113                53.018
41-113.1              53.019
41-113.2              53.020
41-114                53.021
41-115                53.022
41-116                53.023
41-117                53.024
41-118                53.025
41-119                53.026
41-119.1              53.041
41-119.2              53.042
41-119.3              53.043
41-119.4              53.044
41-119.5              53.045
41-120                53.046
41-120.1              53.047
41-120.2              53.048
41-121                53.049
41-122                53.050
41-122.1              53.051
41-122.2              53.052
41-122.3              53.053
41-122.4              53.054
41-122.5              53.055
41-122.6              53.056
41-122.7              53.057
41-122.8              53.058
41-122.9              53.059
41-122.10             53.060
41-122.11             53.061
41-122.12             53.062
41-122.13             53.063
41-123                53.064
41-124                53.065
41-125                53.066
41-125.1              53.067
41-125.2              53.068
41-125.3              53.069
41-125.4              53.070
41-125.5              53.071
41-125.6              53.072
41-125.7              53.073
41-125.8              53.074
41-125.9              53.075
41-125.10             53.076
41-125.11             53.077
41-125.12             53.078
41-126                53.079
41-126.1              53.080
41-127                53.081
41-128                53.082
41-129                53.095
41-129.1              53.096
41-129.2              53.097
41-129.3              53.098
41-129.4              53.099
41-129.5              53.100,
                      53.999
41-129.6              53.101
41-129.7              53.102
41-200                52.001
41-201                52.002
41-202                52.003
41-203                52.004
41-203.1              52.005
41-203.2              52.006
41-203.3              52.007
41-204                52.008
41-205                52.009
41-206                52.010
41-207                52.011
41-208                52.012
41-300                58.001
41-301                58.002
41-302                58.003
41-303                58.004
41-304                58.005
41-400                123.425
41-401                123.426
41-402                123.427
41-403                123.428
41-404                123.429
41-405                123.430
42-1                  94.001
42-17                 94.015
42-18                 94.017
42-22                 94.018
42-33                 94.030
42-34                 94.031
42-35                 94.016
42-36                 94.032
42-37                 94.033
42-38                 94.034
42-39                 94.035
42-40                 94.036
42-47                 94.037
42-48                 94.038
42-49                 94.040
42-50                 94.041
42-51                 94.043
42-52                 94.044
42-53                 94.045
42-54                 94.046
42-55                 94.047
42-56                 94.042
42-57                 94.039
42-65                 94.060
42-66                 94.061
42-67                 94.062
42-68                 94.063
42-69                 94.064
42-70                 94.065
42-71                 94.066
42-72                 94.067
42-73                 94.068
43-1                  124.001
43-2                  124.002
43-3                  124.003
43-5                  124.004
43-6                  124.005
43-7                  124.009
43-8                  124.010
43-9                  124.011
43-10                 124.012
43-11                 124.013
43-14                 124.014
43-15                 124.015
43-21                 124.025
43-22                 124.026
43-23                 124.027
43-24                 124.028
43-25                 124.029
43-26                 124.031
43-27                 124.032
43-28                 124.033
43-29                 124.034
43-34                 124.045
43-35                 124.046
43-37                 124.047
43-38                 124.048
43-49                 124.060
43-50                 124.061
43-51                 124.062
43-53                 124.063
43-54                 124.064
43-55                 124.065
43-56                 124.067
43-60                 124.080
43-61                 124.081
43-68                 124.082
44-1                  123.001
44-2                  123.015
44-3                  123.030
44-4                  123.031
44-5                  123.032
44-6                  123.033
44-7                  123.034
44-8                  123.035
44-9                  123.036
44-10                 123.037
44-11                 123.038
44-12                 123.050
44-13                 123.065
44-14                 123.066
44-15                 123.067
44-16                 123.068
44-17                 123.069
44-18                 123.080
44-19                 123.081
44-20                 123.095
44-21                 123.110
44-22                 123.125
44-23                 123.126
44-24                 123.127
44-25                 123.140
44-26                 123.141
44-27                 123.142
44-28                 123.143
44-29                 123.144
44-30                 123.145
44-31                 123.146
44-32                 123.147
44-33                 123.148
44-34                 123.149
44-35                 123.150
44-36                 123.151
44-37                 123.152
44-38                 123.153
44-39                 123.154
44-40                 123.155
44-41                 123.170
44-42                 123.171
44-43                 123.185
44-44                 123.186
44-45                 123.200
44-46                 123.201
44-47                 123.215
44-48                 123.216
44-49                 123.217
44-50                 123.218
44-51                 123.219
44-52                 123.220
44-53                 123.221
44-54                 123.222
44-55                 123.223
44-56                 123.224
44-57                 123.225
44-58                 123.226
44-59                 123.240
44-60                 123.255
44-61                 123.256
44-62                 123.257
44-63                 123.270
44-64                 123.285
44-65                 123.300
44-66                 123.301
44-67                 123.302
44-68                 123.303
44-69                 123.304
44-70                 123.305
44-71                 123.306
44-72                 123.307
44-73                 123.320
44-74                 123.321
44-75                 123.322
44-76                 123.323
44-77                 123.335
44-78                 123.336
44-79                 123.350
44-80                 123.351
44-81                 123.365
44-82                 123.366
44-83                 123.367
44-84                 123.368
44-85                 123.369
44-86                 123.370
44-87                 123.371
44-88                 123.372
44-89                 123.373
44-90                 123.374
44-91                 123.375
44-92                 123.390
44-93                 123.391
44-94                 123.392
44-95                 123.393
44-96                 123.394
44-97                 123.395
44-98                 123.410
44-99                 123.411
44-100                123.412
44-101                123.413
44-102                123.414
ch. 44, app. A        ch. 123, app. A 
ch. 44, app. B        ch. 123, app. B
ch. 44, app. C        ch. 123, app. C
45-1                  156.001
45-2                  156.002
45-3                  156.003
45-4                  156.004
45-5                  156.015
45-6                  156.030
45-7                  156.031
45-8                  156.032
45-9                  156.033
45-10                 156.034
45-11                 156.035
45-12                 156.036
45-13                 156.037
45-14                 156.050
45-15                 156.051
45-16                 156.052
45-17                 156.053
45-18                 156.054
45-19                 156.065
45-20                 156.066
45-21                 156.067
45-22                 156.068
45-23                 156.080
45-24                 156.081,
                      156.999
App. A, § 15A.01.010 157.001
App. A, § 15A.01.020 157.002
App. A, § 15A.01.030 157.003
App. A, § 15A.01.040 157.004
App. A, § 15A.01.050 157.005
App. A, § 15A.01.060 157.006
App. A, § 15A.01.070 157.007,
                      157.999
App. A, § 15A.01.080 157.008
App. A, § 15A.02.010 157.020
App. A, § 15A.02.020 157.021
App. A, § 15A.02.030 157.022
App. A, § 15A.02.040 157.023
App. A, § 15A.03.010 157.035
App. A, § 15A.04     157.050
App. A, § 15A.04.010 157.051
App. A, § 15A.04.020 157.052
App. A, § 15A.04.030 157.053
App. A, § 15A.04.040 157.054
App. A, § 15A.05.010 157.065
App. A, § 15A.05.020 157.066
App. A, § 15A.05.030 157.067
App. A, § 15A.05.040 157.068
App. A, § 15A.06.010 157.080
App. A, § 15A.06.020 157.081
App. A, § 15A.07.010 157.095
App. A, § 15A.07.020 157.096
App. A, § 15A.07.030 157.097
App. A, § 15A.07.040 157.098
App. A, § 15A.08.030 157.112
App. A, § 15A.08.040 157.113
App. A, § 15A.08.050 157.114
App. A, § 15A.08.070 157.115
App. A, § 15A.08.080 157.116
App. A, § 15A.08.090 157.117
App. A, § 15A.09.010 157.130
App. A, § 15A.09.020 157.131
App. A, § 15A.09.030 157.132
App. A, § 15A.10.010 157.145
App. A, § 15A.10.020 157.146
App. A, § 15A.10.030 157.147
App. A, § 15A.11.010 157.160
App. A, § 15A.11.020 157.161
App. A, § 15A.11.050 157.162
App. A, § 15A.12.010 157.175
App. A, § 15A.12.020 157.176
App. A, § 15A.13.010 157.190
App. A, § 15A.13.020 157.191
App. A, § 15A.14.010 157.205
App. A, § 15A.14.020 157.206
App. A, § 15A.14.030 157.207
App. A, § 15A.14.040 157.208
App. A, § 15A.14.050 157.209
App. A, § 15A.14.060 157.210
App. A, § 15A.15.010 157.225
App. A, § 15A, app. 1ch. 157, app. A
App. A, § 15A, app. 2ch. 157, app. B
App. A, § 15A, app. 3ch. 157, app. C
App. B, § 15.03.010  160.005
App. B, § 15.03.020  160.005
App. B, § 15.05.010  160.010
App. B, § 15.05.020  160.011
App. B, § 15.05.030  160.012
App. B, § 15.05.040  160.013
App. B, § 15.05.050  160.014
App. B, § 15.05.080  160.015
App. B, § 15.43.010  160.410
App. B, § 15.43.020  160.411
App. B, § 15.43.030  160.412
App. B, § 15.43.040  160.413
App. B, § 15.43.050  160.414
App. B, § 15.43.060  160.415
App. B, § 15.43.070  160.416
App. B, § 15.43.080  160.417
App. B, § 15.43.100  160.418
App. B, § 15.43.102  160.419
App. B, § 15.43.104  160.420
App. B, § 15.43.106  160.421
App. B, § 15.43.108  160.422
App. B, § 15.43.110  160.423
App. B, § 15.43.120  160.424
App. B, § 15.45.010  160.440
App. B, § 15.45.020  160.441
App. B, § 15.45.030  160.442
App. B, § 15.45.040  160.444
App. B, § 15.45.050  160.445
App. B, § 15.45.060  160.447
App. B, § 15.47.010  160.460
App. B, § 15.47.020  160.461
App. B, § 15.47.030  160.462
App. B, § 15.47.040  160.463
App. B, § 15.47.050  160.464
App. B, § 15.47.060  160.465
App. B, § 15.47.070  160.466
App. B, § 15.47.080  160.467
App. B, § 15.47.090  160.468
App. B, § 15.49.010  160.480
App. B, § 15.49.060  160.485
App. B, § 15.49.130  160.491
App. B, § 15.51.050  160.507
App. B, § 15.51.070  160.509
App. B, § 15.51.080  160.510
App. B, § 15.51.090  160.511
App. B, § 15.51.100  160.512
App. B, § 15.51.110  160.513
App. B, § 15.51.120  160.514
App. B, § 15.51.140  160.515
App. B, § 15.51.160  160.516
App. B, § 15.51.170  160.517
App. B, § 15.51.171  160.518
App. B, § 15.55.010  160.550
App. B, § 15.55.020  160.551
App. B, § 15.55.030  160.552
App. B, § 15.55.040  160.553
App. B, § 15.55.050  160.554
App. B, § 15.55.060  160.555
App. B, § 15.55.070  160.556
App. B, § 15.57.010  160.570
App. B, § 15.57.020  160.571
App. B, § 15.57.030  160.572
App. B, § 15.57.040  160.573
App. B, § 15.57.060  160.576
App. B, § 15.57.070  160.577
App. B, § 15.57.080  160.578
App. B, § 15.57.090  160.579
App. B, § 15.57.100  160.580
App. B, § 15.57.110  160.581
App. B, § 15.58.010  160.587
App. B, § 15.58.020  160.591
App. B, § 15.58.030  160.592
App. B, § 15.59.010  160.605
App. B, § 15.59.020  160.606
App. B, § 15.59.030  160.607
App. B, § 15.59.040  160.608
App. B, § 15.59.050  160.609
App. B, § 15.59.055  160.610
App. B, § 15.59.060  160.611
App. B, § 15.59.070  160.612
App. B, § 15.59.075  160.613
App. B, § 15.59.080  160.614
App. B, § 15.59.090  160.615
App. B, § 15.59.100  160.616
App. B, § 15.60.010  160.630
App. B, § 15.60.020  160.631
App. B, § 15.60.030  160.632
App. B, § 15.60.040  160.633
App. B, § 15.60.050  160.634
App. B, § 15.60.060  160.635
App. B, § 15.61.010  160.650
App. B, § 15.61.020  160.651
App. B, § 15.61.030  160.653
App. B, § 15.61.040  160.654
App. B, § 15.61.050  160.655
App. B, § 15.63.010  160.665
App. B, § 15.63.020  160.666
App. B, § 15.63.030  160.667
App. B, § 15.63.040  160.668
App. B, § 15.63.050  160.669
App. B, § 15.63.060  160.670
App. B, § 15.63.070  160.671
App. B, § 15.63.080  160.672
App. B, § 15.63.090  160.673
App. B, § 15.63.100  160.674
App. B, § 15.63.110  160.675
App. B, § 15.65.010  160.690
App. B, § 15.65.020  160.691
App. B, § 15.65.030  160.692
App. B, § 15.65.040  160.693
App. B, § 15.65.050  160.694
App. B, § 15.67.010  160.705
App. B, § 15.67.020  160.706
App. B, § 15.67.030  160.707
App. B, § 15.67.040  160.708
App. B, § 15.67.050  160.709
App. B, § 15.67.060  160.710
App. B, § 15.67.070  160.711
App. B, § 15.67.080  160.712
App. B, § 15.69.010  160.725
App. B, § 15.69.020  160.726
App. B, § 15.69.030  160.727
App. B, § 15.69.040  160.728
App. B, § 15.69.050  160.729
App. B, § 15.69.060  160.730
App. B, § 15.71.010  160.745
App. B, § 15.71.020  160.746
App. B, § 15.71.040  160.749
App. B, § 15.71.060  160.750
App. B, § 15.71.070  160.751
App. B, § 15.71.072  160.753
App. B, § 15.71.080  160.754
App. B, § 15.71.090  160.755
App. B, § 15.71.100  160.756
App. B, § 15.71.110  160.757
App. B, § 15.71.120  160.758
App. B, § 15.71.130  160.759
App. B, § 15.71.140  160.760
App. B, § 15.73.010  160.775
App. B, § 15.73.020  160.776
App. B, § 15.73.030  160.777
App. B, § 15.73.040  160.778
App. B, § 15.73.050  160.779
App. B, § 15.73.070  160.780
App. B, § 15.73.071  160.781
App. B, § 15.73.080  160.782
App. B, § 15.73.090  160.783
App. C, § 1.01       159.001
App. C, § 1.02       159.002
App. C, § 2.01       159.015
App. C, § 2.02       159.016
App. C, § 2.03       159.017
App. C, § 2.04       159.018
App. C, § 2.05       159.019
App. C, § 2.06       159.020
App. C, § 2.07       159.021
App. C, § 3.01       159.035
App. C, § 3.02       159.036
App. C, § 3.03       159.037
App. C, § 3.04       159.038
App. C, § 3.05       159.039
App. C, § 3.06       159.040
App. C, § 3.07       159.041
App. C, § 3.08       159.042
App. C, § 4.01       159.055
App. C, § 4.02       159.056
App. C, § 4.03       159.057
App. C, § 4.04       159.058
App. C, § 4.05       159.059
App. C, § 4.06       159.060
App. C, § 4.07       159.061
App. C, § 4.08       159.062
App. C, § 5.01       159.075
App. C, § 5.02       159.076
App. C, § 5.03       159.077
App. C, § 5.04       159.078
App. C, § 5.05       159.079
App. C, § 5.06       159.080
App. C, § 5.07       159.081
App. C, § 5.08       159.082
App. C, § 6.01       159.095
App. C, § 6.02       159.096
App. C, § 6.03       159.097
App. C, § 6.04       159.098
App. C, § 6.05       159.099
App. C, § 6.06       159.100
App. C, § 6.07       159.101
App. C, § 6.08       159.102
App. C, § 7.01       159.115
App. C, § 7.02       159.116
App. C, § 7.03       159.117
App. C, § 7.04       159.118
App. C, § 7.05       159.119
App. C, § 7.06       159.120
App. C, § 7.07       159.121
App. C, § 7.08       159.122
App. C, § 8.01       159.135
App. C, § 8.02       159.136
App. C, § 8.03       159.137
App. C, § 8.04       159.138
App. C, § 8.05       159.139
App. C, § 8.06       159.140
App. C, § 8.07       159.141
App. C, § 8.08       159.142
App. C, § 9.01       159.155
App. C, § 9.02       159.156
App. C, § 9.03       159.157
App. C, § 9.04       159.158
App. C, § 9.05       159.159
App. C, § 9.06       159.160
App. C, § 9.07       159.161
App. C, § 9.08       159.162
App. C, § 11.01      159.175
App. C, § 11.02      159.176
App. C, § 11.03      159.177
App. C, § 11.04      159.178
App. C, § 11.05      159.179
App. C, § 11.06      159.180
App. C, § 11.07      159.181
App. C, § 11.08      159.182
App. C, § 12.01      159.195
App. C, § 12.02      159.196
App. C, § 12.03      159.197
App. C, § 12.04      159.198
App. C, § 12.05      159.199
App. C, § 12.06      159.200
App. C, § 12.07      159.201
App. C, § 12.08      159.202
App. C, § 13.01      159.215
App. C, § 13.02      159.216
App. C, § 13.03      159.217
App. C, § 13.04      159.218
App. C, § 13.05      159.219
App. C, § 13.06      159.220
App. C, § 13.07      159.221
App. C, § 13.08      159.222
App. C, § 14.01      159.235
App. C, § 14.02      159.236
App. C, § 14.03      159.237
App. C, § 14.04      159.238
App. C, § 14.05      159.239
App. C, § 14.06      159.240
App. C, § 14A.01     159.255
App. C, § 14A.02     159.256
App. C, § 14A.03     159.257
App. C, § 14A.04     159.258
App. C, § 14A.05     159.259
App. C, § 14B.01     159.270
App. C, § 14B.02     159.271
App. C, § 14B.03     159.272
App. C, § 14B.04     159.273
App. C, § 15.01      159.285
App. C, § 15.02      159.286
App. C, § 15.03      159.287
App. C, § 15.04      159.288
App. C, § 15.05      159.289
App. C, § 15.06      159.290
App. C, § 15.07      159.291
App. C, § 15.08      159.292
App. C, § 15.10      159.293
App. C, § 15.11      159.294
App. C, § 15.12      159.295
App. C, § 15.13      159.296
App. C, § 15.14      159.297
App. C, § 15.15      159.298
App. C, § 15.15-1    159.299
App. C, § 15.16      159.300
App. C, § 15.17      159.301
App. C, § 16.01      159.315
App. C, § 16.02      159.316
App. C, § 16.03      159.317
App. C, § 16.04      159.318
App. C, § 16.05      159.319
App. C, § 17.01      159.330
App. C, § 17.02      159.331
App. C, § 17.03      159.332
App. C, § 17.04      159.333
App. C, § 17.05      159.334
App. C, § 17.06      159.335
App. C, § 17.07      159.336
App. C, § 17.08      159.337
App. C, § 17.09      159.338
App. C, § 17A.01     159.350
App. C, § 17A.02     159.351
App. C, § 17A.03     159.352
App. C, § 17A.04     159.353
App. C, § 17A.05     159.354
App. C, § 17A.06     159.355
App. C, § 18.01      159.370
App. C, § 18.02      159.371
App. C, § 18.03      159.372
App. C, § 18.04      159.373
App. C, § 18.05      159.374
App. C, § 18.06      159.375
App. C, § 18.07      159.376
App. C, § 18.08      159.377
App. C, § 18.09      159.378
App. C, § 19.01      159.390
App. C, § 19.02      159.391
App. C, § 19.03      159.392
App. C, § 19.04      159.393
App. C, § 19.04A     159.394
App. C, § 19.05      159.395
App. C, § 19.06      159.396
App. C, § 19.07      159.397
App. C, § 19.08      159.398
App. C, § 19.09      159.399
App. C, § 20.01      159.410
App. C, § 20.02      159.411
App. C, § 20.03      159.412
App. C, § 20.04      159.413
App. C, § 20.05      159.414
App. C, § 21.01      159.425
App. C, § 21.02      159.426
App. C, § 21.03      159.427
App. C, § 21.04      159.428
App. C, § 21.05      159.429
App. C, § 21.06      159.430
App. C, § 21.07      159.431
App. C, § 21.08      159.432
App. C, § 21.09      159.433
App. C, § 21.10      159.434
App. C, § 22.01      159.445
App. C, § 22.02      159.446
App. C, § 22.03      159.447
App. C, § 22.04      159.448
App. C, § 22.05      159.449
App. C, § 22.06      159.450
App. C, § 22.07      159.451
App. C, § 22.08      159.452
App. C, § 23.01      159.465
App. C, § 23.02      159.466
App. C, § 23.03      159.467
App. C, § 23.04      159.468
App. C, § 23.05      159.469,
                      159.999
App. C, § 23.06      159.470
App. C, § 23.07      159.471
App. C, § 23.08      159.472
App. C, § 23.09      159.473
App. C, § 23.10      159.474
App. C, § 24.01      159.485
App. C, § 24.02      159.486
App. E                34.002—
                      34.009
App. F, § 1.01       158.001
App. F, § 1.02       158.002
App. F, § 2.01       158.015
App. F, § 2.02       158.016
App. F, § 2.03       158.017
App. F, § 2.04       158.018
App. F, § 2.05       158.019
App. F, § 2.06       158.020
App. F, § 2.07       158.021
App. F, § 3.01       158.035
App. F, § 3.02       158.036
App. F, § 3.03       158.037
App. F, § 3.04       158.038
App. F, § 3.05       158.039
App. F, § 3.06       158.040
App. F, § 3.07       158.041
App. F, § 3.08       158.042
App. F, § 4.01       158.055
App. F, § 4.02       158.056
App. F, § 4.03       158.057
App. F, § 4.04       158.058
App. F, § 4.05       158.059
App. F, § 4.06       158.060
App. F, § 4.07       158.061
App. F, § 4.08       158.062
App. F, § 5.01       158.075
App. F, § 5.02       158.076
App. F, § 5.03       158.077
App. F, § 5.04       158.078
App. F, § 5.05       158.079
App. F, § 5.06       158.080
App. F, § 5.07       158.081
App. F, § 5.08       158.082
App. F, § 6.01       158.095
App. F, § 6.02       158.096
App. F, § 6.03       158.097
App. F, § 6.04       158.098
App. F, § 6.05       158.099
App. F, § 6.06       158.100
App. F, § 6.07       158.101
App. F, § 6.08       158.102
App. F, § 7.01       158.115
App. F, § 7.02       158.116
App. F, § 7.03       158.117
App. F, § 7.04       158.118
App. F, § 7.05       158.119
App. F, § 7.06       158.120
App. F, § 7.07       158.121
App. F, § 7.08       158.122
App. F, § 8.01       158.135
App. F, § 8.02       158.136
App. F, § 8.03       158.137
App. F, § 8.04       158.138
App. F, § 8.05       158.139
App. F, § 8.06       158.140
App. F, § 8.07       158.141
App. F, § 8.08       158.142
App. F, § 9.01       158.155
App. F, § 9.02       158.156
App. F, § 9.03       158.157
App. F, § 9.04       158.158
App. F, § 9.05       158.159
App. F, § 9.06       158.160
App. F, § 9.07       158.161
App. F, § 9.08       158.162
App. F, § 10.01      158.175
App. F, § 10.02      158.176
App. F, § 10.03      158.177
App. F, § 10.04      158.178
App. F, § 10.05      158.179
App. F, § 10.06      158.180
App. F, § 10.07      158.181
App. F, § 10.08      158.182
App. F, § 11.01      158.195
App. F, § 11.02      158.196
App. F, § 11.03      158.197
App. F, § 11.04      158.198
App. F, § 11.05      158.199
App. F, § 11.06      158.200
App. F, § 11.07      158.201
App. F, § 11.08      158.202
App. F, § 12.01      158.215
App. F, § 12.02      158.216
App. F, § 12.03      158.217
App. F, § 12.04      158.218
App. F, § 12.05      158.219
App. F, § 12.06      158.220
App. F, § 12.07      158.221
App. F, § 12.08      158.222
App. F, § 13.01      158.235
App. F, § 13.02      158.236
App. F, § 13.03      158.237
App. F, § 13.04      158.238
App. F, § 13.05      158.239
App. F, § 13.06      158.240
App. F, § 14.01      158.255
App. F, § 14.02      158.256
App. F, § 14.03      158.257
App. F, § 14.04      158.258
App. F, § 14.05      158.259
App. F, § 15.01      158.270
App. F, § 15.02      158.271
App. F, § 15.03      158.272
App. F, § 15.04      158.273
App. F, § 15.05      158.274
App. F, § 15.06      158.275
App. F, § 15.07      158.276
App. F, § 15.08      158.277
App. F, § 15.09      158.278
App. F, § 15.10      158.279
App. F, § 15.11      158.280
App. F, § 15.12      158.281
App. F, § 15.13      158.282
App. F, § 16.01      158.295
App. F, § 16.02      158.296
App. F, § 16.03      158.297
App. F, § 16.04      158.298
App. F, § 16.05      158.299
App. F, § 17.01      158.310
App. F, § 17.02      158.311
App. F, § 17.03      158.312
App. F, § 17.04      158.313
App. F, § 17.05      158.314
App. F, § 17.06      158.315
App. F, § 17.07      158.316
App. F, § 17.08      158.317
App. F, § 17.09      158.318
App. F, § 17A.01     158.330
App. F, § 17A.02     158.331
App. F, § 17A.03     158.332
App. F, § 17A.04     158.333
App. F, § 17A.05     158.334
App. F, § 17A.06     158.335
App. F, § 18.01      158.350
App. F, § 18.02      158.351
App. F, § 18.03      158.352
App. F, § 18.04      158.353
App. F, § 18.05      158.354
App. F, § 18.06      158.355
App. F, § 18.07      158.356
App. F, § 18.08      158.357
App. F, § 18.09      158.358
App. F, § 19.01      158.370
App. F, § 19.02      158.371
App. F, § 19.03      158.372
App. F, § 19.04      158.373
App. F, § 19.04A     158.374
App. F, § 19.05      158.375
App. F, § 19.06      158.376
App. F, § 19.07      158.377
App. F, § 19.08      158.378
App. F, § 19.09      158.379
App. F, § 19.10      158.380
App. F, § 19.11      158.381
App. F, § 19.12      158.382
App. F, § 20.01      158.395
App. F, § 20.02      158.396
App. F, § 20.03      158.397
App. F, § 20.04      158.398
App. F, § 20.05      158.399
App. F, § 21.01      158.410
App. F, § 21.02      158.411
App. F, § 21.03      158.412
App. F, § 21.04      158.413
App. F, § 21.05      158.414
App. F, § 21.06      158.415
App. F, § 21.07      158.416
App. F, § 21.08      158.417
App. F, § 21.09      158.418
App. F, § 21.10      158.419
App. F, § 22.01      158.430
App. F, § 22.02      158.431
App. F, § 22.03      158.432
App. F, § 22.04      158.433
App. F, § 22.05      158.434
App. F, § 22.06      158.435
App. F, § 22.07      158.436
App. F, § 22.08      158.437
App. F, § 22.09      158.438
App. F, § 23.01      158.450
App. F, § 23.02      158.451
App. F, § 23.03      158.452
App. F, § 23.04      158.453
App. F, § 23.05      158.454,
                      158.999
App. F, § 23.06      158.455
App. F, § 23.07      158.456
App. F, § 23.08      158.457
App. F, § 23.09      158.458
App. F, § 23.10      158.459
App. F, § 24.01      158.470
App. F, § 24.02      158.471
                      
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
257-73   12-3-1973   76.087
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     51.004,
1912     4-29-1957   54.001—
                     54.005
1930     11-4-1957   99.015—
                     99.020
1937     1-6-1958    77.080
1938     1-6-1958    77.082
1958     6-23-1958   39.020—
                     39.022
1962     8-4-1958    54.001
1488     7-6-1959    51.001
                     51.004,
                     51.005,
1988     7-6-1959    51.046,
                     51.048,
                     51.050
                     75.006,
                     75.007,
1991     7-27-1959   76.021,
                     76.022,
                     76.024,
                     76.025
1992     8-3-1959    154.015—
                     154.039
1999     9-21-1959   39.035,
                     39.036
2002     10-19-1959  39.306
2016     12-28-1959  39.084
                     32.035—
2096     5-8-1961    32.040,
                     32.042
2129     2-5-1962    39.056
2131     3-5-1962    33.001—
                     33.010
2150     9-4-1962    51.001,
                     51.004
2153     9-17-1962   39.036
                     50.018,
2170     12-3-1962   51.004,
                     51.046—
                     51.050
2174     12-10-1962  39.206
2184     2-18-1963   51.004
2196     6-10-1963   39.305
2255     3-23-1964   76.003
2283     9-15-1964   71.003,
                     73.001
2303     12-7-1964   76.003
                     57.001,
                     57.046,
2308     12-14-1964  57.047,
                     57.050,
                     57.051
2314     1-11-1965   50.004,
                     50.015
2395     12-20-1965  96.100,
                     96.102
                     70.001,
                     70.006,
                     71.007,
                     72.030,
                     72.031,
                     74.001—
                     74.003,
                     76.003,
2423     6-13-1966   76.021,
                     76.022,
                     76.024,
                     76.025,
                     76.075,
                     76.076,
                     77.002—
                     77.004,
                     77.011,
                     81.019
2426     6-20-1966   50.018
2449     9-26-1966   76.056—
                     76.059
2451     10-3-1966   76.077
2454     10-31-1966  39.035
2465     12-12-1966  39.180—
                     39.183
2467     2-6-1967    39.180
2468     2-13-1967   97.039
                     39.220,
                     39.227,
                     39.230,
2491     8-7-1967    39.231,
                     39.236—
                     39.239,
                     39.252,
                     39.255
2495     8-21-1967   51.004,
                     51.005
                     51.004,
2523     1-22-1968   51.046,
                     51.048,
                     51.050
2530     3-11-1968   150.015,
                     150.017
2586     12-30-1968  39.196,
                     39.197
2580     2-3-1969    51.004
2594     3-3-1969    124.012
2610     6-9-1969    124.012
2637     9-22-1969   124.005
2649     11-17-1969  39.306,
                     39.332
2650     11-17-1969  39.221,
                     39.255
2655     12-8-1969   57.047
2662     1-12-1970   96.102
2668     2-24-1970   76.003
                     39.001—
                     39.003,
                     39.120,
                     39.121,
2669     3-3-1970    39.123—
                     39.131,
                     39.133—
                     39.135,
                     39.156—
                     39.159
                     92.070,
2677     4-20-1970   92.071,
                     92.077
2682     5-18-1970   39.002
                     39.195,
2686     6-15-1970   39.198—
                     39.205
2695     7-27-1970   39.221,
                     39.261
                     39.306,
2696     7-27-1970   39.326,
                     39.337
                     98.001—
2700     8-17-1970   98.005,
                     98.020—
                     98.041
2721     11-30-1970  39.180
2722     11-30-1970  39.196,
                     39.197
2724     12-7-1970   39.002
2727     12-14-1970  51.005
2735     2-8-1971    39.002
2740     3-2-1971    120.023,
                     120.024
2747     4-12-1971   39.132
2757     6-8-1971    39.220,
                     39.257
2758     6-8-1971    39.334
                     112.007,
2763     6-28-1971   112.010,
                     112.015,
                     112.016
2769     7-6-1971    150.017
2774     7-26-1971   92.012
2791     12-6-1971   39.220,
                     39.227
2792     12-6-1971   39.315
2801     12-27-1971  81.035—
                     81.043
9-72     3-6-1972    124.004,
                     124.012
10-72    3-6-1972    124.061
19-72    4-10-1972   57.050,
                     57.052
21-72    4-17-1972   57.047
25-72    5-8-1972    70.009
27-72    5-15-1972   99.001
33-72    5-30-1972   150.015,
                     150.017
35-72    6-6-1972    92.071
25-73    4-16-1973   150.017
31-73    4-23-1973   39.180
33-73    4-30-1973   150.017
36-73    4-30-1973   39.220
37-73    4-30-1973   39.080
44-73    5-14-1973   57.047
                     98.001—
                     98.003,
52-73    6-25-1973   98.031,
                     98.033,
                     98.036,
                     98.042
                     77.025,
57-73    7-16-1973   77.026,
                     77.028—
                     77.030
70-73    9-4-1973    75.006
80-73    9-24-1973   51.046—
                     51.049
                     39.001,
82-73    10-1-1973   39.047,
                     39.061,
                     39.090
83-73    10-8-1973   130.009
84-73    10-8-1973   76.087
85-73    10-8-1973   73.007
                     93.025—
88-73    10-8-1973   93.029,
                     93.032—
                     93.035
99-73    11-19-1973  124.005
                     39.129,
108-73   12-3-1973   39.132,
                     39.156
112-73   12-17-1973  56.001—
                     56.006
12-74    4-8-1974    39.220,
                     39.248
                     39.196,
18-74    5-6-1974    39.197,
                     39.205
                     124.001,
42-74    8-5-1974    124.009,
                     124.013
55-74    10-21-1974  57.053
56-74    10-21-1974  57.050
64-74    12-2-1974   39.129,
                     39.156
65-74    12-2-1974   51.046—
                     51.050
70-74    12-16-1974  51.048
                     90.001—
                     90.010,
                     90.030—
21-75    4-7-1975    90.039,
                     90.050—
                     90.062,
                     90.075,
                     90.077
24-75    4-28-1975   39.180
50-75    9-2-1975    57.047
                     75.001,
                     75.002,
64-75    9-29-1975   76.002,
                     76.003,
                     76.055
68-75    10-6-1975   124.005
69-75    10-6-1975   77.026,
                     77.028
                     57.001,
                     57.005,
                     57.006,
73-75    11-17-1975  57.021,
                     57.022,
                     57.045,
                     57.050,
                     57.052
78-75    11-24-1975  51.046—
                     51.050
84-75    12-15-1975  39.056,
                     39.121
86-75    12-22-1975  39.180
12-76    3-8-1976    77.012
15-76    3-8-1976    77.047
20-76    3-22-1976   132.004
26-76    4-12-1976   76.057
27-76    4-19-1976   39.105—
                     39.109
                     75.003,
31-76    5-10-1976   75.005—
                     75.007
32-76    5-10-1976   10.999
43-76    5-24-1976   99.002
55-76    6-21-1976   98.032—
                     98.039
56-76    6-28-1976   57.047
96-76    11-22-1976  124.012
98-76    11-29-1976  51.046—
                     51.050
100-76   11-29-1976  39.121,
                     39.156
101-76   11-29-1976  36.003
                     93.025,
102-76   12-6-1976   93.028,
                     93.029
                     94.001,
                     94.016,
                     94.030—
                     94.037,
                     94.040,
11-77    2-14-1977   94.043—
                     94.047,
                     94.060,
                     94.062,
                     94.063,
                     94.067,
                     94.068
13-77    2-22-1977   39.090
18-77    3-14-1977   76.055
                     52.001—
20-77    3-21-1977   52.004,
                     52.008—
                     52.012
42-77    5-31-1977   51.002
45-77    6-13-1977   52.002
46-77    6-20-1977   124.013
47-77    6-20-1977   39.305
48-77    6-27-1977   124.005
69-77    10-10-1977  72.037
                     51.025—
                     51.027,
73-77    11-15-1977  51.030,
                     51.032,
                     51.033
80-77    11-28-1977  39.123,
                     39.132
87-77    12-27-1977  124.012
                     51.046—
89-77    12-27-1977  51.050,
                     51.052
                     90.033,
7-78     1-30-1978   90.075—
                     90.077
19-78    2-27-1978   110.003
21-78    3-6-1978    110.003
38-78    4-17-1978   51.007
44-78    5-15-1978   77.999
63-78    6-12-1978   133.003
70-78    6-26-1978   96.146—
                     96.148
                     93.001—
72-78    7-10-1978   93.005,
                     93.007—
                     93.010
77-78    7-31-1978   10.007
78-78    8-7-1978    117.002
                     93.002,
85-78    8-21-1978   93.005,
                     93.008
102-78   10-23-1978  51.032,
                     51.033
117-78   11-27-1978  39.156
120-78   12-18-1978  124.005
123-78   12-26-1978  39.230,
                     39.248
5-79     1-8-1979    150.030
13-79    2-12-1979   39.206
18-79    3-12-1979   57.047
21-79    3-19-1979   72.030,
                     72.038
27-79    4-16-1979   150.017
                     76.055,
40-79    5-21-1979   76.082,
                     77.002
                     37.001,
                     37.003,
                     37.005,
51-79    6-4-1979    37.007,
                     37.020,
                     37.022,
                     37.023,
                     37.999
68-79    7-23-1979   124.005
80-79    8-20-1979   131.001
82-79    9-4-1979    57.052
                     51.046—
94-79    10-8-1979   51.050,
                     51.052
                     90.001,
                     90.056,
12-80    3-3-1980    90.057,
                     90.077,
                     90.090—
                     90.093
13-80    3-10-1980   116.003
                     98.001,
                     98.003,
                     98.026,
22-81    3-16-1980   98.029,
                     98.033—
                     98.036,
                     98.038,
                     98.041
22-80    3-31-1980   90.008
38-80    5-19-1980   131.003
39-80    5-19-1980   39.001
44-80    5-27-1980   39.021,
                     39.022
47-80    6-9-1980    39.229
                     39.245,
49-80    6-9-1980    39.246,
                     39.322,
                     39.323
55-80    6-23-1980   39.036
61-80    7-7-1980    150.015,
                     150.017
62-80    7-7-1980    150.201
64-80    7-7-1980    150.030
86-80    9-22-1980   130.007
90-80    9-29-1980   124.005
101-80   10-27-1980  90.011,
                     90.012
102-80   10-27-1980  38.004
                     39.220,
112-80   11-24-1980  39.235,
                     39.248
115-80   11-24-1980  96.160—
                     96.166
                     116.005,
23-81    3-16-1981   116.020,
                     116.021,
                     116.022
31-81    4-6-1981    124.012
                     53.001,
                     53.002,
                     53.015,
                     53.016,
                     53.018,
                     53.021—
47-81    6-1-1981    53.024,
                     53.026,
                     53.041,
                     53.043,
                     53.046,
                     53.073,
                     53.100,
                     53.999
                     51.080,
48-81    6-1-1981    51.081—
                     51.088
52-81    6-15-1981   98.033
                     57.001,
                     57.021,
88-81    11-2-1981   57.022,
                     57.045,
                     57.046,
                     57.050
                     92.071,
                     92.072,
89-81    11-2-1981   92.074—
                     92.076,
                     92.079—
                     92.081
122-81   12-28-1981  39.205
123-81   12-28-1981  39.196
                     39.220,
124-81   12-28-1981  39.227,
                     39.235
125-81   12-28-1981  39.248
126-81   12-28-1981  39.156
127-81   12-28-1981  39.180
128-81   12-28-1981  39.132
129-81   12-28-1981  39.182
130-81   12-28-1981  39.121
4-82     1-14-1982   39.325
5-82     1-14-1982   39.197
6-82     1-14-1982   39.205
8-82     1-18-1982   51.081
12-82    2-1-1982    39.129
19-82    3-8-1982    53.016,
                     53.018
24-82    3-15-1982   51.081
27-82    3-29-1982   150.017
28-82    3-29-1982   150.201
42-82    4-19-1982   39.156
43-82    4-19-1982   39.182
                     39.001,
45-82    4-26-1982   39.050,
                     39.051
71-82    6-14-1982   150.017
                     124.001—
                     124.005,
                     124.009—
                     124.013,
                     124.025—
                     124.029,
84-82    8-9-1982    124.031—
                     124.034,
                     124.045—
                     124.048,
                     124.060—
                     124.065,
                     124.067
96-82    8-23-1982   37.001
101-82   9-20-1982   51.100—
                     51.103
103-82   9-27-1982   96.164
105-82   10-4-1982   51.081
                     94.015,
106-82   10-4-1982   94.017,
                     94.018
114-82   11-1-1982   37.001
117-82   11-29-1982  10.999
118-82   11-29-1982  71.023
122-82   12-13-1982  77.003
134-82   12-27-1982  75.002
135-82   12-27-1982  75.010
2-83     1-31-1983   39.206
3-83     1-31-1983   39.180,
                     39.182
4-83     1-31-1983   39.156
11-83    2-7-1983    70.006
12-83    2-7-1983    76.088
20-83    4-25-1983   51.100
                     81.001,
                     81.015,
27-83    5-2-1983    81.017,
                     81.019,
                     81.020,
                     81.022
                     70.001,
                     70.003,
                     72.002,
                     72.008,
28-83    5-2-1983    72.011,
                     74.004,
                     76.022,
                     76.041,
                     76.082,
                     77.003
33-83    5-16-1983   124.080—
                     124.082
                     124.001,
36-83    6-6-1983    124.014,
                     124.015,
                     124.045
41-83    6-27-1983   39.121,
                     39.133
                     160.005 ,
                     160.010 —
                     160.015 ,
                     160.410 —
                     160.424 ,
                     160.440 —
                     160.442 ,
                     160.444 ,
                     160.445 ,
                     160.447 ,
                     160.460 —
                     160.468 ,
                     160.480 ,
                     160.485 ,
                     160.491 ,
                     160.507 ,
                     160.509 —
                     160.518 ,
                     160.550 —
                     160.556 ,
                     160.570 —
                     160.573 ,
                     160.576 —
                     160.581 ,
                     160.587 ,
42-83    6-27-1983   160.591 ,
                     160.592 ,
                     160.605 —
                     160.616 ,
                     160.630 —
                     160.635 ,
                     160.650 ,
                     160.651 ,
                     160.653 —
                     160.655 ,
                     160.665 —
                     160.675 ,
                     160.690 —
                     160.694 ,
                     160.705 —
                     160.712 ,
                     160.725 —
                     160.730 ,
                     160.745,
                     160.746,
                     160.749—
                     160.751,
                     160.753 —
                     160.760 ,
                     160.775 —
                     160.782
50-83    7-11-1983   39.062
52-83    7-25-1983   112.030—
                     112.033
58-83    8-29-1983   39.123
68-83    10-3-1983   76.055
                     50.001,
82-83    11-7-1983   50.007,
                     51.007
87-83    11-14-1983  39.052
89-83    11-21-1983  71.026
95-83    11-21-1983  39.206
96-83    11-21-1983  39.156
97-83    11-21-1983  39.121
102-83   12-12-1983  39.263
103-83   12-12-1983  37.002,
                     37.021
104-83   12-12-1983  150.201
110-83   12-19-1983  39.132
1-84     1-3-1984    96.102
                     51.026,
                     51.027,
2-84     1-3-1984    51.030,
                     51.032,
                     51.033
12-84    1-23-1984   37.006
13-84    1-30-1984   39.156
14-84    1-30-1984   39.132
15-84    1-30-1984   39.129
16-84    1-30-1984   39.125
25-84    2-13-1984   38.004
32-84    2-21-1984   39.129
38-84    3-5-1984    160.442
39-84    3-5-1984    38.004
68-84    4-16-1984   90.013
69-84    4-23-1984   160.005
76-84    4-30-1984   39.197
77-84    4-30-1984   39.196
78-84    5-3-1984    39.222,
                     39.263
79-84    5-3-1984    39.205
                     37.035—
89-84    5-21-1984   37.037,
                     37.039—
                     37.042
95-84    6-4-1984    39.129
                     39.001,
                     39.022,
99-84    6-25-1984   39.044,
                     39.124,
                     39.183
115-84   8-6-1984    150.017
116-84   8-6-1984    150.017
119-84   8-27-1984   39.252,
                     39.326
                     50.001,
125-84   9-10-1984   53.002,
                     53.050
132-84   10-22-1984  37.002
138-84   11-13-1984  124.005
147-84   12-3-1984   124.013
150-84   12-24-1984  39.182
                     51.045—
4-85     1-14-1985   51.050,
                     51.052,
                     51.081
                     96.181,
15-85    2-19-1985   96.183,
                     96.188
24-85    4-1-1985    39.156
34-85    4-22-1985   76.055
39-85    5-6-1985    73.005
66-85    7-29-1985   160.576
                     152.001—
                     152.003,
                     152.015,
                     152.030—
76-85    9-23-1985   152.032,
                     152.045—
                     152.050,
                     152.065—
                     152.072
90-85    10-28-1985  37.002
92-85    11-12-1985  152.032
97-85    11-25-1985  39.196,
                     39.197
103-85   12-2-1985   150.015,
                     150.017
104-85   12-2-1985   150.030
                     39.220,
                     39.221,
                     39.223,
                     39.245,
                     39.248,
                     39.252,
                     39.261,
                     39.264—
                     39.266,
                     39.281,
                     39.292,
108-85   12-2-1985   39.294,
                     39.305,
                     39.306,
                     39.308,
                     39.318—
                     39.320,
                     39.325,
                     39.337—
                     39.341,
                     39.356,
                     39.365,
                     39.367
                     51.046—
                     51.050,
111-85   12-30-1985  51.081,
                     51.082,
                     53.001
                     151.001,
                     151.015—
14-86    2-10-1986   151.019,
                     151.035—
                     151.048
16-86    2-24-1986   39.180
22-86    3-31-1986   93.001
                     53.001,
23-86    3-31-1986   53.026,
                     53.043
41-86    5-12-1986   151.048
42-86    5-12-1986   151.048
                     160.556,
43-86    5-19-1986   160.665—
                     160.675
44-86    5-19-1986   160.507
45-86    5-19-1986   160.705
46-86    5-19-1986   160.707
47-86    5-19-1986   160.708
48-86    5-19-1986   160.725—
                     160.730
49-86    5-19-1986   160.781
58-86    6-9-1986    39.248
59-86    6-9-1986    39.325
                     98.001—
63-86    6-23-1986   98.003,
                     98.006
                     39.220,
                     39.227,
64-86    6-30-1986   39.229,
                     39.234,
                     39.235,
                     39.248
                     150.208,
                     150.209,
                     150.211,
                     150.213,
                     150.217—
                     150.219,
68-86    7-7-1986    150.222,
                     150.223,
                     150.225—
                     150.227,
                     150.229,
                     150.230,
                     150.233
70-86    7-7-1986    150.017
77-86    8-25-1986   39.004
                     90.001,
78-86    8-25-1986   90.003—
                     90.005,
                     90.076
                     51.026,
                     51.027,
81-86    9-15-1986   51.030,
                     51.032,
                     51.033
82-86    9-15-1986   51.081
83-86    9-22-1986   51.100
90-86    10-6-1986   92.012
92-86    10-20-1986  151.048
95-86    11-24-1986  150.017
103-86   12-1-1986   160.417
104-86   12-8-1986   150.201,
                     150.223
105-86   12-8-1986   150.017
106-86   12-8-1986   150.017
107-86   12-8-1986   57.047
1-87     1-5-1987    151.048
2-87     1-19-1987   160.746
12-87    3-2-1987    117.040—
                     117.046
13-87    3-2-1987    117.007,
                     117.027
                     93.025—
14-87    3-9-1987    93.029,
                     93.031—
                     93.034
16-87    3-30-1987   130.004
17-87    3-30-1987   96.006
21-87    4-6-1987    151.015
28-87    5-4-1987    97.016
                     160.005 ,
                     160.518 ,
29-87    5-4-1987    160.572 ,
                     160.573 ,
                     160.576 ,
                     160.616
                     155.001,
                     155.002,
30-87    5-18-1987   155.015—
                     155.020,
                     155.030—
                     155.032
35-87    5-26-1987   151.048
                     160.572 ,
                     160.579 —
37-87    6-1-1987    160.581 ,
                     160.587 ,
                     160.591 ,
                     160.592
38-87    6-1-1987    151.048
39-87    6-1-1987    150.017
                     151.019,
                     151.041,
45-87    6-22-1987   151.044—
                     151.046,
                     151.048
48-87    6-29-1987   151.048
                     160.417,
53-87    7-7-1987    160.550,
                     160.591
56-87    7-20-1987   50.020,
                     50.021
58-87    7-27-1987   98.022
59-87    7-27-1987   37.055—
                     37.057
66-87    8-3-1987    160.417
67-87    8-3-1987    150.227
69-87    8-31-1987   37.070—
                     37.072
                     96.180,
70-87    8-31-1987   96.181,
                     96.189,
                     96.191
                     37.001,
78-87    9-14-1987   37.002,
                     37.020,
                     37.021
86-87    10-5-1987   72.016
                     51.046—
88-87    10-26-1987  51.050,
                     51.081,
                     51.082
89-87    11-2-1987   117.043
                     39.220,
                     39.229,
                     39.236,
                     39.258,
96-87    11-16-1987  39.261,
                     39.305,
                     39.317,
                     39.337,
                     39.342
97-87    11-23-1987  151.048
101-87   12-7-1987   32.040
102-87   12-7-1987   32.035,
                     32.042
104-87   12-14-1987  93.030
                     160.005 ,
                     160.010 ,
                     160.011 ,
5-88     1-18-1988   160.013 ,
                     160.556 ,
                     160.672 ,
                     160.777
11-88    2-8-1988    98.021
16-88    3-7-1988    160.573
                     111.001,
                     111.002,
                     111.016—
18-88    3-7-1988    111.020,
                     111.023,
                     111.024,
                     111.026,
                     111.028
19-88    3-7-1988    98.028
25-88    4-11-1988   57.051
26-88    4-18-1988   37.071,
                     37.072
33-88    5-9-1988    151.048
35-88    5-16-1988   37.070—
                     37.072
38-88    5-23-1988   111.021
39-88    5-23-1988   92.078
46-88    6-20-1988   37.002,
                     37.021
48-88    6-20-1988   131.001
49-88    6-20-1988   72.038
50-88    6-20-1988   81.017
51-88    6-20-1988   53.001,
                     53.065
53-88    6-27-1988   98.033
64-88    7-11-1988   72.039
66-88    7-25-1988   150.017
67-88    7-25-1988   37.021
                     160.005,
                     160.550,
                     160.551,
72-88    8-1-1988    160.553,
                     160.556,
                     160.572,
                     160.672
75-88    8-8-1988    52.003
90-88    10-17-1988  98.021
                     57.001,
93-88    10-24-1988  57.100—
                     57.108
99-88    11-7-1988   160.616
112-88   11-28-1988  150.222,
                     150.230
116-88   12-5-1988   160.756
118-88   12-5-1988   96.192
                     160.005,
121-88   12-19-1988  160.417,
                     160.591
109-88   12-28-1988  150.030
110-88   12-28-1988  150.015,
                     150.017
6-89     1-16-1989   111.020
                     39.001,
                     39.035,
8-89     1-23-1989   39.131,
                     39.133,
                     39.134
10-89    1-23-1989   150.218
12-89    1-30-1989   92.012
18-89    2-27-1989   39.248
31-89    4-10-1989   118.001—
                     118.021
39-89    5-8-1989    39.050,
                     39.051
                     160.005,
41-89    5-15-1989   160.485,
                     160.556
43-89    5-15-1989   77.009,
                     77.011
46-89    5-22-1989   37.002,
                     37.021
48-89    5-30-1989   50.001
54-89    6-12-1989   72.016
55-89    6-12-1989   124.005
59-89    6-19-1989   39.001,
                     39.131
                     160.460—
70-89    7-31-1989   160.465,
                     160.467,
                     160.468
71-89    7-31-1989   160.005
72-89    7-31-1989   160.616
73-89    7-31-1989   58.001—
                     58.005
                     51.026,
94-89    9-11-1989   51.027,
                     51.030,
                     51.032
                     51.001,
95-89    9-11-1989   51.004,
                     51.007,
                     51.010
                     51.046—
96-89    9-11-1989   51.050,
                     51.081,
                     51.082
98-89    9-18-1989   39.038
106-89   10-2-1989   97.002
                     39.220,
                     39.227,
                     39.230,
                     39.231,
                     39.235,
                     39.245,
                     39.246,
                     39.261,
110-89   10-16-1989  39.267,
                     39.305,
                     39.312,
                     39.314—
                     39.316,
                     39.319,
                     39.322,
                     39.323,
                     39.337,
                     39.343
                     57.065,
111-89   10-16-1989  57.068—
                     57.077
114-89   10-23-1989  37.105—
                     37.111
116-89   11-20-1989  111.020
118-89   11-20-1989  160.577
127-89   12-11-1989  57.047
131-89   12-18-1989  150.017
11-90    2-20-1990   150.223
21-90    3-26-1990   150.201
32-90    4-2-1990    72.016
33-90    4-9-1990    53.065
36-90    4-16-1990   57.047
30-90    4-20-1990   160.005,
                     160.417
31-90    4-20-1990   160.606,
                     160.616
37-90    4-23-1990   52.002
39-90    5-7-1990    160.417
                     160.005,
46-90    5-21-1990   160.550,
                     160.553,
                     160.616
55-90    6-4-1990    160.005,
                     160.616
56-90    6-4-1990    77.010
57-90    6-4-1990    75.002
60-90    6-25-1990   111.021
61-90    6-25-1990   76.089
67-90    7-23-1990   150.218
80-90    8-13-1990   97.003
                     51.025—
                     51.027,
                     51.030,
85-90    9-4-1990    51.032,
                     51.045—
                     51.050,
                     51.081,
                     150.223
87-90    9-19-1990   55.023
93-90    10-1-1990   160.465
94-90    10-1-1990   160.572
102-90   10-22-1990  51.081
109-90   11-26-1990  90.077
                     39.220,
                     39.230,
                     39.231,
                     39.236,
                     39.245,
                     39.246,
                     39.248,
110-90   12-3-1990   39.250,
                     39.261,
                     39.305,
                     39.315,
                     39.317,
                     39.322,
                     39.323,
                     39.325—
                     39.337
114-90   12-3-1990   160.746 ,
                     160.751
                     150.213,
                     150.219,
                     150.222,
116-90   12-3-1990   150.223,
                     150.225—
                     150.227,
                     150.230
124-90   12-24-1990  39.156
125-90   12-24-1990  57.047
4-91     1-7-1991    160.485
                     160.005 ,
5-91     1-7-1991    160.572 ,
                     160.577
7-91     1-14-1991   150.223
14-91    2-4-1991    160.616
20-91    3-4-1991    160.485
21-91    3-11-1991   76.089
                     39.056,
24-91    3-25-1991   39.120—
                     39.123
29-91    4-1-1991    160.613
32-91    4-1-1991    90.014
                     39.224,
                     39.225,
                     39.285,
34-91    4-8-1991    39.307,
                     39.309,
                     39.310,
                     39.358
35-91    4-8-1991    57.047
40-91    5-6-1991    160.417
41-91    5-13-1991   111.021
50-91    6-3-1991    53.001,
                     53.082
                     53.026,
                     53.043,
                     98.001—
51-91    6-3-1991    98.003,
                     98.034,
                     98.036,
                     98.037,
                     98.039
52-91    6-10-1991   10.999
                     160.005 ,
55-91    7-1-1991    160.463 ,
                     160.616
59-91    7-22-1991   92.135—
                     92.138
                     51.025—
                     51.027,
                     51.030,
64-91    8-5-1991    51.032,
                     51.045—
                     51.050,
                     51.081
71-91    9-23-1991   57.047
72-91    9-30-1991   130.010
                     160.005 ,
79-91    10-21-1991  160.480 ,
                     160.616
83-91    11-4-1991   160.572
                     39.001—
                     39.004,
                     39.020—
                     39.022,
                     39.035—
                     39.065,
                     39.080—
                     39.092,
87-91    11-25-1991  39.105—
                     39.109,
                     39.120—
                     39.135,
                     39.155—
                     39.165,
                     39.180—
                     39.183,
                     39.195—
                     39.206
                     39.228,
                     39.230,
                     39.231,
88-91    11-25-1991  39.248,
                     39.313,
                     39.315,
                     39.319,
                     39.325
                     160.746 ,
93-91    12-2-1991   160.749 —
                     160.751
96-91    12-16-1991  124.005
99-91    12-23-1991  37.002,
                     37.003
5-92     1-21-1992   57.047
10-92    2-3-1992    150.030,
                     150.031
11-92    2-3-1992    150.015,
                     150.017
25-92    3-2-1992    160.616
28-92    3-9-1992    57.047
39-92    4-6-1992    160.591
46-92    5-18-1992   77.003
47-92    5-18-1992   77.003,
                     77.013
48-92    5-18-1992   111.030
                     57.001,
60-92    6-22-1992   57.022,
                     57.047,
                     57.050
70-92    8-3-1992    160.551
74-92    8-3-1992    160.005 ,
                     160.576
77-92    8-10-1992   58.003
78-92    8-17-1992   37.110
79-92    8-24-1992   32.035—
                     32.042
64-92    8-27-1992   160.417
84-92    9-28-1992   39.054
90-92    10-5-1992   160.775
93-92    10-26-1992  132.005
94-92    10-26-1992  75.010
96-92    11-2-1992   160.417
97-92    11-9-1992   39.123
101-92   11-16-1992  96.100—
                     96.105
                     39.245,
104-92   12-7-1992   39.246,
                     39.322,
                     39.323
105-92   12-7-1992   57.047
107-92   12-21-1992  53.100,
                     53.999
10-93    2-1-1993    92.150—
                     92.157
11-93    2-8-1993    151.048
21-93    3-1-1993    160.445 ,
                     160.447
25-93    4-5-1993    160.612
27-93    4-5-1993    51.100
28-93    4-12-1993   96.102
29-93    4-12-1993   92.013
30-93    4-12-1993   131.001
                     160.480 ,
58-93    4-19-1993   160.711 ,
                     160.756
                     70.001,
32-93    4-26-1993   76.055,
                     76.056
41-93    5-3-1993    77.002,
                     77.003
42-93    5-3-1993    150.031
                     57.001,
43-93    5-17-1993   57.075,
                     57.078,
                     57.079
44-93    5-24-1993   39.123
                     122.001—
                     122.023,
                     122.035—
54-93    7-6-1993    122.043,
                     122.055,
                     122.056,
                     122.070—
                     122.092
                     53.001,
                     53.001,
                     53.015,
                     53.016,
                     53.018,
                     53.021—
                     53.025,
57-93    7-12-1993   53.026,
                     53.041—
                     53.062,
                     53.064—
                     53.082,
                     53.095—
                     53.102,
                     53.999
58-93    7-19-1993   160.005
                     150.201—
65-93    8-9-1993    150.230,
                     150.233
66-93    8-16-1993   110.029
69-93    9-7-1993    110.003,
                     117.023
70-93    9-20-1993   57.047
76-93    10-18-1993  96.100
77-93    10-25-1993  110.029
                     39.220,
                     39.231,
83-93    11-22-1993  39.261,
                     39.305,
                     39.337
                     51.006,
                     51.026,
                     51.027,
84-93    12-6-1993   51.030,
                     51.046—
                     51.050,
                     51.081,
                     51.100
93-93    12-6-1993   110.028
                     150.030,
94-93    12-6-1993   150.031,
                     150.033—
                     150.045
95-93    12-6-1993   57.047
14-94    2-22-1994   150.035,
                     150.041
15-94    2-22-1994   150.218,
                     150.229
20-94    3-7-1994    160.005 ,
                     160.480
25-94    4-4-1994    160.616
28-94    4-4-1994    160.572
30-94    4-4-1994    38.004
                     39.001,
                     39.046,
                     39.048,
                     39.056,
                     39.060,
                     39.120,
                     39.123,
                     39.125,
                     39.127—
                     39.129,
32-94    4-11-1994   39.132,
                     39.158,
                     39.159,
                     39.162,
                     39.164,
                     39.165,
                     39.180,
                     39.182,
                     39.196,
                     39.197,
                     39.204—
                     39.206
35-94    4-25-1994   96.102
39-94    5-2-1994    160.572
40-94    5-2-1994    160.576
44-94    5-23-1994   131.021
45-94    5-23-1994   116.003,
                     116.004
51-94    6-6-1994    160.005,
                     160.485
55-94    6-20-1994   130.010
56-94    6-20-1994   57.050
60-94    7-5-1994    160.515
61-94    7-5-1994    51.050
66-94    7-25-1994   39.248
67-94    7-25-1994   39.283,
                     39.356
72-94    8-1-1994    160.551
73-94    8-15-1994   57.047
                     160.005 ,
81-94    9-6-1994    160.572 ,
                     160.573 ,
                     160.576
82-94    9-6-1994    160.515
84-94    9-19-1994   93.002
85-94    9-19-1994   117.002
                     110.026,
96-94    10-31-1994  110.029,
                     110.035—
                     110.037
                     160.485 ,
100-94   11-7-1994   160.517 ,
                     160.518
                     150.017,
                     152.003,
                     152.030,
103-94   11-21-1994  152.048,
                     152.049,
                     160.005 ,
                     160.775
104-94   11-21-1994  150.218,
                     150.229
110-94   12-5-1994   51.100
111-94   12-5-1994   51.087
112-94   12-19-1994  150.017
113-94   12-19-1994  110.028
114-94   12-19-1994  124.005
115-94   12-19-1994  150.125—
                     150.138
12-95    1-3-1995    160.554
26-95    2-21-1995   31.002
27-95    2-21-1995   92.158
                     36.020,
                     36.024,
28-95    2-21-1995   36.025,
                     36.030,
                     36.031
29-95    2-21-1995   41.001—
                     41.004
30-95    2-21-1995   150.017
35-95    3-6-1995    154.002
                     39.220—
                     39.222,
                     39.229,
                     39.250,
                     39.263,
                     39.264,
                     39.281,
                     39.283,
                     39.285,
                     39.291,
36-95    3-6-1995    39.292,
                     39.305—
                     39.307,
                     39.318,
                     39.326,
                     39.338,
                     39.355,
                     39.356,
                     39.358,
                     39.364,
                     39.365
                     39.002—
                     39.004,
                     39.020,
                     39.022,
                     39.036,
                     39.050,
                     39.052,
                     39.055,
                     39.066,
                     39.067,
                     39.082,
                     39.089,
                     39.091,
                     39.106,
                     39.107,
                     39.120—
37-95    3-6-1995    39.122,
                     39.124,
                     39.125,
                     39.129,
                     39.130,
                     39.132,
                     39.136,
                     39.156,
                     39.157,
                     39.162—
                     39.169,
                     39.180,
                     39.182,
                     39.196,
                     39.201,
                     39.205—
                     39.207
38-95    3-6-1995    110.009
43-95    3-6-1995    30.028
45-95    3-6-1995    160.609,
                     160.610
                     30.001—
                     30.003,
50-95    3-20-1995   30.005—
                     30.025,
                     30.027
51-95    4-3-1995    160.447
54-95    4-3-1995    32.001—
                     32.004
55-95    4-17-1995   31.001
66-95    5-1-1995    39.001,
                     39.131
67-95    5-15-1995   150.017
74-95    6-5-1995    150.015,
                     150.017
                     150.030,
75-95    6-5-1995    150.031,
                     150.041
                     150.301,
77-95    6-5-1995    150.303—
                     150.314
80-95    6-5-1995    150.128
81-95    6-5-1995    110.028
82-95    6-5-1995    110.033—
                     110.035
89-95    6-19-1995   41.002
                     110.028,
                     110.035,
                     110.037,
                     150.017,
                     152.001—
                     152.003,
93-95    7-3-1995    152.015,
                     152.030—
                     152.032,
                     152.045—
                     152.050,
                     152.065—
                     152.072
                     160.005 ,
                     160.010 ,
94-95    7-3-1995    160.572 ,
                     160.616 ,
                     160.672 ,
                     160.775
95-95    7-3-1995    160.442,
                     160.653
96-95    7-17-1995   160.616
100-95   7-17-1995   98.021
105-95   8-7-1995    124.012
106-95   8-7-1995    51.010
111-95   9-5-1995    132.003
117-95   9-5-1995    94.042
120-95   9-5-1995    92.071
121-95   9-18-1995   90.009
122-95   9-18-1995   90.008
123-95   9-18-1995   90.054
124-95   9-18-1995   90.003
131-95   10-2-1995   76.025
133-95   10-2-1995   32.037
                     111.002,
136-95   10-16-1995  111.003,
                     111.013,
                     111.014
137-95   11-6-1995   160.616
138-95   11-6-1995   160.576
139-95   11-6-1995   39.108
140-95   11-6-1995   51.100
141-95   11-6-1995   110.036
142-95   11-20-1995  110.029
143-95   11-20-1995  76.078
146-95   11-20-1995  41.005
                     57.001—
                     57.003,
                     57.005,
                     57.006,
                     57.021,
                     57.022,
                     57.028,
                     57.029,
                     57.045—
149-95   11-20-1995  57.047,
                     57.050—
                     57.053,
                     57.065,
                     57.068—
                     57.080,
                     57.082,
                     57.084,
                     57.100—
                     57.108
150-95   12-4-1995   37.003—
                     37.005
                     98.022,
                     98.023,
153-95   12-18-1995  98.026,
                     98.033,
                     98.035,
                     98.038
156-95   12-18-1995  152.045
157-95   12-18-1995  155.019
7-96     1-2-1996    74.002
11-96    1-16-1996   39.167
                     160.442 ,
18-96    2-5-1996    160.609 ,
                     160.653
19-96    2-5-1996    76.090
20-96    2-20-1996   77.003
25-96    2-20-1996   36.033
27-96    3-4-1996    160.005 ,
                     160.616
28-96    3-4-1996    57.085
29-96    3-18-1996   95.071
31-96    3-18-1996   30.008,
                     30.009
                     160.273,
38-96    4-1-1996    160.293,
                     160.312,
                     160.616
                     160.005 ,
                     160.514 ,
39-96    4-1-1996    160.553 ,
                     160.616 ,
                     160.690
46-96    4-1-1996    116.023,
                     116.024
52-96    4-15-1996   41.007
61-96    5-20-1996   95.071
68-96    6-3-1996    160.572,
                     160.573
69-96    6-3-1996    76.002
70-96    6-17-1996   30.040—
                     30.046
78-96    7-15-1996   133.003
83-96    8-5-1996    36.034
92-96    8-19-1996   53.019
93-96    9-3-1996    160.417
94-96    9-3-1996    160.576
                     39.062,
99-96    9-3-1996    39.080,
                     39.087
101-96   9-3-1996    37.002
                     50.001,
                     51.001,
                     51.004,
                     51.007,
                     51.081,
                     53.001,
                     53.015,
                     53.016,
                     53.018,
                     53.021—
                     53.024,
102-96   9-3-1996    53.026,
                     53.043,
                     53.048,
                     53.051—
                     53.053,
                     53.055,
                     53.057,
                     53.060,
                     53.061,
                     53.063—
                     53.065,
                     53.079,
                     53.095
112-96   10-7-1996   110.004
                     150.211,
113-96   10-7-1996   150.235—
                     150.239
114-96   10-7-1996   150.312—
                     150.317
                     150.017,
115-96   10-7-1996   150.137—
                     150.141
                     150.031,
116-96   10-7-1996   150.043—
                     150.048
                     150.201,
117-96   10-7-1996   150.213,
                     150.216,
                     150.223
135-96   12-2-1996   160.514
                     51.046,
141-96   12-16-1996  51.048,
                     51.050
2-97     1-6-1997    124.005
                     160.005 ,
5-97     1-21-1997   160.447 ,
                     160.616
9-97     2-3-1997    160.005
10-97    2-3-1997    160.576
18-97    3-27-1997   130.011,
                     130.999
22-97    4-7-1997    160.576
27-97    4-21-1997   95.071
41-97    6-2-1997    160.005
                     57.001,
                     57.028,
43-97    6-2-1997    57.029,
                     57.045,
                     57.050
                     37.135—
48-97    7-7-1997    37.138,
                     37.150
49-97    7-7-1997    36.033
50-97    7-7-1997    124.082
                     160.442,
55-97    8-4-1997    160.610,
                     160.654
56-97    8-4-1997    160.576
57-97    8-4-1997    30.001
58-97    8-4-1997    41.005
71-97    10-6-1997   160.573,
                     160.576
76-97    11-3-1997   160.485
82-97    11-17-1997  30.026
83-97    11-17-1997  124.012
                     39.001,
                     39.020—
                     39.022,
                     39.050,
                     39.057,
                     39.059—
                     39.062,
                     39.065—
                     39.067,
                     39.107,
                     39.109,
                     39.122,
                     39.124,
87-97    12-2-1997   39.125,
                     39.128,
                     39.135,
                     39.156,
                     39.158,
                     39.159,
                     39.164,
                     39.165,
                     39.167,
                     39.168,
                     39.180—
                     39.183,
                     39.196,
                     39.204—
                     39.206
93-97    12-15-1997  150.017,
                     150.031
94-97    12-15-1997  152.045
95-97    12-15-1997  160.756
96-97    12-15-1997  160.480
97-97    12-15-1997  36.003
98-97    12-15-1997  31.003
                     150.015,
                     150.017,
12-98    2-2-1998    150.125,
                     150.128,
                     150.130—
                     150.137
14-98    2-2-1998    150.095,
                     150.096
                     150.030,
15-98    2-2-1998    150.031,
                     150.034,
                     150.036
                     150.301,
16-98    2-2-1998    150.303—
                     150.314
                     160.005 ,
17-98    2-2-1998    160.616 ,
                     160.672
22-98    2-17-1998   39.248
26-98    3-2-1998    39.258,
                     39.342
27-98    3-2-1998    51.100
28-98    3-2-1998    124.005
34-98    3-16-1998   30.001
39-98    4-6-1998    111.025
                     160.572 ,
45-98    5-4-1998    160.573 ,
                     160.576
51-98    5-18-1998   30.013
                     93.001—
57-98    6-15-1998   93.003,
                     93.005,
                     93.007
60-98    6-15-1998   41.005
61-98    6-15-1998   57.120—
                     57.123
67-98    7-6-1998    160.610,
                     160.654
70-98    8-3-1998    ch. 82, sch. I
76-98    8-3-1998    39.166
77-98    8-3-1998    110.026
92-98    9-14-1998   36.004
104-98   10-5-1998   38.009,
                     38.010
106-98   10-5-1998   51.089
109-98   10-19-1998  78.001
111-98   10-19-1998  150.017
119-98   11-9-1998   160.572
123-98   11-23-1998  36.005
                     39.067,
                     39.125,
                     39.128,
                     39.129,
                     39.158,
                     39.159,
                     39.162,
131-98   12-7-1998   39.165,
                     39.167,
                     39.169,
                     39.183,
                     39.196,
                     39.197,
                     39.201,
                     39.205,
                     39.206
                     51.002,
132-98   12-7-1998   51.046—
                     51.049,
                     51.081
133-98   12-7-1998   41.005
136-98   12-21-1998  ch. 82, sch. I
                     124.001—
                     124.003,
                     124.013,
137-98   12-21-1998  124.029,
                     124.031,
                     124.033,
                     124.046,
                     124.062
3-99     1-4-1999    160.005,
                     160.485
4-99     1-4-1999    160.005,
                     160.616
5-99     1-4-1999    77.009
6-99     1-4-1999    51.010
8-99     1-4-1999    36.033
9-99     1-4-1999    39.124
16-99    2-16-1999   160.005,
                     160.616
18-99    2-16-1999   ch. 82, sch. I
19-99    2-16-1999   32.035—
                     32.042
20-99    2-16-1999   76.082
24-99    3-1-1999    160.005,
                     160.616
25-99    3-1-1999    160.616
                     30.025,
                     32.036,
                     39.081,
                     92.150,
26-99    3-1-1999    98.021,
                     99.015,
                     151.016,
                     154.016,
                     160.666
27-99    3-15-1999   51.010
28-99    3-15-1999   30.013
29-99    3-15-1999   130.010
30-99    3-15-1999   41.008
34-99    3-15-1999   70.010
35-99    3-15-1999   160.005 ,
                     160.576
45-99    4-19-1999   95.071
46-99    4-19-1999   39.005
48-99    4-19-1999   124.013
                     95.001—
                     95.013,
49-99    4-19-1999   95.015—
                     95.033,
                     95.045—
                     95.058
55-99    5-17-1999   96.235—
                     96.243
56-99    5-17-1999   30.029
69-99    7-6-1999    160.757
70-99    7-6-1999    160.005 ,
                     160.553
74-99    7-6-1999    135.002—
                     135.004
75-99    7-6-1999    33.025—
                     33.028
76-99    7-19-1999   30.002,
                     30.008
82-99    8-2-1999    160.576
90-99    9-7-1999    41.008
92-99    9-7-1999    30.075
95-99    9-20-1999   36.033
102-99   10-4-1999   36.035
103-99   10-14-1999  96.034,
                     96.035
                     96.025—
                     96.033,
                     96.050—
104-99   10-14-1999  96.054,
                     96.070—
                     96.073,
                     96.085—
                     96.089
105-99   10-18-1999  96.120—
                     96.126
                     160.005,
115-99   11-1-1999   160.485,
                     160.491
116-99   11-1-1999   95.014
                     30.001,
                     30.003,
117-99   11-15-1999  30.017,
                     30.022,
                     31.002,
                     32.001
118-99   12-6-1999   124.082
                     30.001,
                     30.003,
121-99   12-6-1999   30.017,
                     30.022,
                     31.002,
                     32.001
125-99   12-13-1999  31.003
126-99   12-13-1999  39.319
127-99   12-13-1999  39.220,
                     39.305
128-99   12-13-1999  39.183
129-99   12-13-1999  39.122
131-99   12-13-1999  51.081
133-99   12-20-1999  41.009
1-00     1-3-2000    160.005 ,
                     160.578
3-00     1-18-2000   39.169
11-00    2-14-2000   39.180
                     95.027,
12-00    2-14-2000   95.028,
                     95.046,
                     95.058
14-00    3-6-2000    160.572
15-00    3-6-2000    160.005
16-00    3-13-2000   95.071
17-00    3-13-2000   124.005
20-00    3-20-2000   95.014
27-00    4-3-2000    95.029
                     39.001,
                     39.004,
                     39.020—
                     39.022,
                     39.035,
                     39.038,
                     39.043,
                     39.046—
                     39.050,
                     39.055—
                     39.061,
28-00    4-10-2000   39.068,
                     39.084,
                     39.085,
                     39.109,
                     39.124—
                     39.126,
                     39.162,
                     39.165,
                     39.167,
                     39.180,
                     39.196,
                     39.197
31-00    4-10-2000   124.082
34-00    4-11-2000   34.001—
                     34.009
45-00    5-1-2000    160.517 ,
                     160.518
46-00    5-15-2000   94.041
55-00    6-19-2000   36.033
67-00    8-14-2000   39.125
68-00    8-14-2000   98.037
69-00    8-14-2000   131.004
70-00    8-14-2000   41.005
71-00    8-14-2000   30.075
                     110.028,
73-00    8-14-2000   150.222,
                     150.223
93-00    10-10-2000  51.053
99-00    11-13-2000  41.005
                     41.002,
103-00   12-4-2000   110.032,
                     150.017
106-00   12-12-2000  96.087
110-00   12-18-2000  36.036—
                     36.039
109-00   12-22-2000  124.082
                     39.001,
                     39.005,
                     39.066,
                     39.067,
                     39.121,
                     39.124,
                     39.125,
                     39.132,
4-01     1-8-2001    39.135,
                     39.156,
                     39.159,
                     39.164,
                     39.165,
                     39.180,
                     39.196,
                     39.197,
                     39.204—
                     39.206
5-01     1-16-2001   39.325
13-01    2-12-2001   98.021,
                     98.028
15-01    2-12-2001   111.021
19-01    3-5-2001    124.062
25-01    3-12-2001   36.034
39-01    5-7-2001    160.485
56-04    5-10-2001   123.425—
                     123.430
41-01    5-14-2001   51.054
42-01    5-14-2001   51.081
43-01    5-14-2001   51.010
44-01    5-14-2001   41.005
45-01    5-21-2001   111.002
46-01    5-21-2001   111.003
47-01    5-21-2001   111.013
70-01    7-9-2001    53.023
73-01    8-6-2001    39.121
                     57.001,
                     57.047,
                     57.050,
                     57.053,
                     57.100,
                     57.101,
                     57.104,
75-01    8-6-2001    57.108,
                     57.109,
                     92.135—
                     92.138,
                     110.029,
                     160.005 ,
                     160.447 ,
                     160.616
78-01    9-4-2001    160.551
87-01    10-1-2001   160.005 ,
                     160.576
88-01    10-1-2001   160.572
89-01    10-9-2001   98.032
90-01    10-15-2001  38.002,
                     38.003
97-01    11-5-2001   160.005,
                     160.417
98-01    11-5-2001   160.612
99-01    11-5-2001   160.616
102-01   11-13-2001  36.033
105-01   11-19-2001  95.071
109-01   12-3-2001   160.417
113-01   12-10-2001  150.015,
                     150.017
114-01   12-10-2001  150.001,
                     150.002
                     110.028,
115-01   12-10-2001  150.030—
                     150.048
116-01   12-10-2001  150.095,
                     150.096
                     150.201,
117-01   12-10-2001  150.216,
                     150.218,
                     150.235
                     150.301,
                     150.303,
118-01   12-10-2001  150.307,
                     150.312—
                     150.314
                     160.746 ,
                     160.751 ,
119-01   12-10-2001  160.754 ,
                     160.756 ,
                     160.758
                     160.417,
120-01   12-10-2001  160.651,
                     160.653
123-01   12-10-2001  110.028
126-01   12-17-2001  41.003
5-02     1-14-2002   51.115—
                     51.118
6-02     2-11-2002   75.002
7-02     2-11-2002   73.005
9-02     2-11-2002   96.034,
                     96.035
15-02    3-4-2002    160.573
16-02    3-18-2002   41.005
                     159.001,
                     159.002,
                     159.015,
                     159.016—
                     159.021,
                     159.035—
                     159.042,
                     159.055—
                     159.062,
                     159.075—
                     159.082,
                     159.095—
                     159.102,
                     159.115—
                     159.122,
                     159.135—
                     159.142,
                     159.155—
                     159.162,
                     159.175—
                     159.182,
                     159.195—
                     159.202,
                     159.215—
                     159.222,
20-02    3-18-2002   159.235—
                     159.240,
                     159.255—
                     159.259,
                     159.285—
                     159.298,
                     159.300,
                     159.315—
                     159.319,
                     159.330—
                     159.338,
                     159.350—
                     159.355,
                     159.370—
                     159.378,
                     159.390—
                     159.399,
                     159.410—
                     159.414,
                     159.425—
                     159.434,
                     159.465—
                     159.474,
                     159.485,
                     159.486,
                     159.999
23-02    4-1-2002    160.491
24-02    4-1-2002    160.553
                     40.001—
26-02    4-8-2002    40.010,
                     40.999
                     39.122,
30-02    4-8-2002    39.180,
                     39.196
33-02    5-6-2002    124.005,
                     124.046
34-02    5-6-2002    38.002,
                     38.003
41-02    5-13-2002   38.004
51-02    7-1-2002    41.005
52-02    7-1-2002    152.049
53-02    7-8-2002    39.305
54-02    7-8-2002    39.248
55-02    7-8-2002    39.325
68-02    9-3-2002    30.013
                     91.001,
                     91.002,
                     91.015—
                     91.019,
79-02    10-15-2002  91.021,
                     92.012,
                     120.008,
                     150.219,
                     150.222
80-02    10-15-2002  110.033—
                     110.035
                     77.105,
82-02    10-21-2002  77.106,
                     77.999
96-02    11-12-2002  31.003
98-02    11-18-2002  57.065
99-02    11-25-2002  57.047
104-02   12-9-2002   51.130
                     160.591,
4-03     1-6-2003    160.592,
                     160.616
                     160.749 ,
5-03     1-6-2003    160.750 ,
                     160.753
6-03     1-13-2003   41.005
7-03     1-21-2003   124.082
8-03     1-21-2003   36.033,
                     53.020
                     57.006,
                     57.029,
                     57.047,
                     57.050,
                     57.053,
                     57.069,
                     57.071,
                     57.073,
                     57.082,
                     57.084,
15-03    2-10-2003   57.100,
                     57.101,
                     57.103,
                     57.105,
                     57.106,
                     57.109,
                     57.123,
                     92.136—
                     92.138,
                     110.029,
                     110.036
20-03    3-3-2003    160.005 ,
                     160.616
21-03    3-3-2003    160.572,
                     160.576
22-03    3-3-2003    133.003,
                     133.004
                     150.002,
23-03    3-3-2003    150.017,
                     150.075—
                     150.081
                     150.201,
                     150.206,
24-03    3-3-2003    150.213,
                     150.216,
                     150.218
37-03    5-5-2003    96.010,
                     160.485
38-03    5-5-2003    53.020
                     51.045—
39-03    5-12-2003   51.049,
                     51.053
40-03    5-12-2003   90.002
42-03    5-12-2003   111.022
48-03    6-9-2003    53.015—
                     53.017
49-03    6-9-2003    96.030
51-03    6-9-2003    39.106
                     96.180,
55-03    6-16-2003   96.181,
                     96.191,
                     96.192
56-03    6-23-2003   76.105—
                     76.108
57-03    6-23-2003   10.999,
                     95.024
59-03    7-7-2003    160.553
70-03    8-4-2003    37.002,
                     37.021
72-03    8-11-2003   92.071,
                     94.015
76-03    8-18-2003   30.075
95-03    10-14-2003  51.046—
                     51.049
96-03    10-14-2003  50.021
97-03    10-14-2003  51.116,
                     51.118
98-03    10-14-2003  51.100
                     159.001,
                     159.015—
                     159.017,
100-03   10-20-2003  159.021,
                     159.297,
                     159.393,
                     159.486
                     40.999,
111-03   11-17-2003  150.175—
                     150.181
                     40.999,
112-03   11-17-2003  150.155—
                     150.161,
                     150.999
118-03   12-8-2003   79.001—
                     79.024
                     39.061,
04-04    1-12-2004   39.128,
                     39.159,
                     39.160
05-04    1-12-2004   39.248
06-04    1-12-2004   39.325
07-04    1-12-2004   75.008
11-04    2-2-2004    41.005
                     71.026,
                     77.003,
                     77.005,
                     77.006,
                     77.012,
                     77.013,
                     77.025,
                     77.026,
                     77.028—
12-04    2-2-2004    77.030,
                     77.045,
                     77.046,
                     77.080—
                     77.083,
                     77.086,
                     77.087,
                     77.089,
                     77.090,
                     77.999
13-04    2-9-2004    36.034
14-04    2-9-2004    37.002,
                     37.021
19-04    3-1-2004    91.015,
                     91.016
20-04    3-1-2004    38.003
                     110.028,
22-04    3-1-2004    150.015,
                     150.017
23-04    3-1-2004    150.001,
                     150.002
                     110.028,
24-04    3-1-2004    150.030—
                     150.040,
                     150.043
                     110.028,
25-04    3-1-2004    150.301,
                     150.303,
                     150.304
                     150.095,
26-04    3-1-2004    150.096,
                     152.003,
                     152.015
27-04    3-1-2004    41.007
28-04    3-1-2004    40.006,
                     40.999
32-04    3-8-2004    160.005
33-04    3-8-2004    38.003
                     159.036—
                     159.038,
                     159.216—
                     159.218,
34-04    3-15-2004   159.351,
                     159.352,
                     159.445—
                     159.452,
                     159.486
                     57.001,
38-04    4-5-2004    57.047,
                     57.049,
                     57.050
41-04    4-19-2004   36.033
55-04    5-3-2004    160.553
66-04    6-14-2004   96.034,
                     96.035
                     57.001,
74-04    7-12-2004   57.045,
                     57.047
                     92.170—
                     92.173,
                     92.175,
81-04    8-9-2004    92.176,
                     92.178,
                     92.179,
                     92.183,
                     92.190
82-04    8-9-2004    92.158
85-04    9-7-2004    160.005 ,
                     160.616
89-04    9-7-2004    160.511
96-04    9-13-2004   131.005
97-04    9-13-2004   75.006
98-04    9-20-2004   96.033
108-04   11-1-2004   160.005 ,
                     160.616
109-04   11-8-2004   96.120
111-04   11-15-2004  95.029
118-04   12-13-2004  41.008
                     39.022,
                     39.057,
4-05     1-10-2005   39.062,
                     39.063,
                     39.128
                     39.220,
                     39.225,
                     39.247,
5-05     1-10-2005   39.268,
                     39.305,
                     39.310,
                     39.324,
                     39.344
12-05    2-14-2005   57.047
                     52.004,
13-05    2-14-2005   53.023,
                     96.087
14-05    2-14-2005   51.089
15-05    2-14-2005   124.082
21-05    3-7-2005    160.005
23-05    3-7-2005    160.756
24-05    3-7-2005    160.758
26-05    3-14-2005   159.015,
                     159.017
27-05    3-21-2005   150.031,
                     150.218
                     37.165—
42-05    4-18-2005   37.167,
                     37.169—
                     37.175
                     50.001,
                     52.004—
                     52.012,
                     110.028,
                     110.036,
43-05    4-18-2005   150.303,
                     150.304,
                     150.306,
                     150.307,
                     150.309,
                     150.312
47-05    5-2-2005    38.003
                     31.001,
50-05    5-9-2005    39.001,
                     39.106
                     160.442,
                     160.447,
56-05    6-6-2005    160.605,
                     160.608—
                     160.610,
                     160.616
57-05    6-13-2005   51.132
64-05    7-7-2005    41.005
82-05    8-5-2005    36.034,
                     37.002
80-05    8-8-2005    39.167
85-05    8-15-2005   37.056,
                     37.057
87-05    8-15-2005   113.999,
                     130.003
102-05   10-11-2005  96.033
                     159.300,
                     159.446,
104-05   10-17-2005  159.447,
                     159.450—
                     159.452
                     41.006,
                     77.061,
105-05   10-17-2005  77.062,
                     77.087,
                     77.088
112-05   11-7-2005   38.003
                     153.001—
                     153.003,
113-05   11-7-2005   153.005—
                     153.007,
                     160.759
120-05   11-14-2005  32.015—
                     32.023
                     160.005 ,
121-05   11-21-2005  160.551 ,
                     160.616
                     150.201,
122-05   12-5-2005   150.206,
                     150.218,
                     150.219
                     160.005 ,
128-05   12-19-2005  160.551 ,
                     160.616
                     154.028,
06-06    1-3-2006    160.630—
                     160.635,
                     160.760
07-06    1-3-2006    37.106,
                     37.111
08-06    1-3-2006    160.616
                     158.001,
                     158.002,
                     158.015—
                     158.021,
                     158.035—
                     158.042,
                     158.055—
                     158.062,
                     158.075—
                     158.082,
                     158.095—
                     158.102,
                     158.115—
                     158.122,
                     158.135—
                     158.142,
                     158.155—
                     158.162,
                     158.175—
                     158.182,
                     158.195—
                     158.202,
                     158.215—
                     158.222,
                     158.235—
10-06    1-23-2006   158.240,
                     158.255—
                     158.259,
                     158.270—
                     158.282,
                     158.295—
                     158.299,
                     158.310—
                     158.318,
                     158.330—
                     158.335,
                     158.350—
                     158.358,
                     158.370—
                     158.382,
                     158.395—
                     158.399,
                     158.410—
                     158.419,
                     158.430—
                     158.438,
                     158.450—
                     158.459,
                     158.470,
                     158.471,
                     158.999
                     51.046—
18-06    2-13-2006   51.050,
                     51.053
23-06    3-6-2006    41.005
                     92.025—
36-06    3-20-2006   92.034,
                     92.045—
                     92.056
37-06    3-20-2006   110.028
38-06    4-3-2006    37.166
40-06    4-3-2006    160.005
48-06    4-3-2006    38.002
                     117.001—
                     117.007,
                     117.020,
49-06    4-17-2006   117.021,
                     117.023—
                     117.030,
                     117.040—
                     117.046
50-06    5-1-2006    160.746 ,
                     160.749
                     160.463 ,
58-06    5-1-2006    160.591 ,
                     160.610
62-06    5-15-2006   95.029
                     57.001—
                     57.006,
                     57.021,
                     57.022,
                     57.029,
                     57.030,
                     57.045—
                     57.047,
                     57.049—
63-06    5-15-2006   57.053,
                     57.065,
                     57.067—
                     57.080,
                     57.082,
                     57.084—
                     57.086,
                     57.100—
                     57.109,
                     57.120—
                     57.123
81-06    7-10-2006   111.022
88-06    7-17-2006   41.005
89-06    7-17-2006   57.047
                     77.009,
91-06    7-24-2006   79.022,
                     96.087
93-06    8-7-2006    38.003
94-06    8-7-2006    39.001,
                     39.106
95-06    8-7-2006    111.003
                     51.010,
                     51.026,
105-06   8-21-2006   51.027—
                     51.030,
                     51.032
106-06   9-5-2006    160.005 ,
                     160.491
123-06   10-2-2006   96.033
                     160.606,
124-06   10-2-2006   160.608,
                     160.611
134-06   10-16-2006  159.036,
                     159.216
135-06   10-16-2006  37.057,
                     37.058
136-06   10-16-2006  37.070—
                     37.073
                     110.026,
                     117.023,
                     117.026,
                     118.007,
                     118.011,
                     118.012,
140-06   10-16-2006  118.018,
                     118.019,
                     124.028,
                     124.031,
                     124.032,
                     124.045,
                     124.046,
                     124.048
141-06   11-6-2006   160.576
152-06   11-20-2006  37.002,
                     37.021
154-06   11-20-2006  51.081
                     111.002,
160-06   12-11-2006  111.003,
                     111.013
                     110.026,
161-06   12-11-2006  110.035,
                     110.037
                     51.046—
162-06   12-18-2006  51.050,
                     51.053
                     160.005 ,
02-07    1-2-2007    160.577 ,
                     160.616
04-07    1-2-2007    160.591
13-07    1-16-2007   160.005,
                     160.605
15-07    1-16-2007   51.100,
                     51.118
26-07    2-12-2007   95.070,
                     95.071
27-07    2-20-2007   160.417
28-07    2-20-2007   150.015,
                     150.017
29-07    2-20-2007   150.060,
                     150.061
                     110.028,
                     150.001,
30-07    2-20-2007   150.002,
                     150.141,
                     150.239,
                     150.317
                     150.030—
                     150.032,
31-07    2-20-2007   150.034,
                     150.035,
                     150.048
32-07    2-20-2007   150.095,
                     150.096
                     91.015,
33-07    2-20-2007   91.016,
                     91.020
34-07    2-20-2007   110.033—
                     110.035
35-07    2-20-2007   96.147
                     30.046,
                     37.174,
43-07    3-5-2007    53.058,
                     95.020,
                     110.004
                     92.071—
58-07    4-16-2007   92.074,
                     150.177,
                     150.179
                     90.001,
                     90.003,
                     90.007,
                     90.013,
                     90.015,
                     90.030,
59-07    4-16-2007   90.031,
                     90.033,
                     90.038,
                     90.052,
                     90.053,
                     90.075,
                     90.077
                     37.085,
                     37.105—
                     37.111,
                     37.135—
60-07    5-7-2007    37.138,
                     37.150,
                     37.165—
                     37.167,
                     37.169—
                     37.175
74-07    5-21-2007   124.081,
                     124.082
                     160.005 ,
                     160.418 ,
                     160.419 ,
76-07    6-4-2007    160.421 ,
                     160.423 ,
                     160.424 ,
                     160.672
89-07    6-4-2007    160.442,
                     160.447
91-07    6-18-2007   51.081
                     51.046—
92-07    6-18-2007   51.050,
                     51.053
93-07    6-18-2007   57.047
                     51.026—
94-07    6-18-2007   51.030,
                     51.032
95-07    6-18-2007   96.011
96-07    6-18-2007   96.205,
                     96.206
97-07    6-18-2007   96.034,
                     96.035
98-07    6-18-2007   51.010
99-07    6-18-2007   51.010
100-07   6-18-2007   96.033
102-07   6-18-2007   30.026
107-07   7-2-2007    160.005
                     159.293,
                     159.390,
126-07   7-16-2007   159.469,
                     159.486,
                     159.999
129-07   8-6-2007    160.005,
                     160.491
130-07   8-6-2007    160.005,
                     160.551
                     159.445,
139-07   8-20-2007   159.452,
                     159.466—
                     159.468
142-07   8-20-2007   124.005
151-07   9-10-2007   50.005
152-07   9-17-2007   95.029
163-07   10-15-2007  124.005
176-07   11-13-2007  41.005,
                     77.999
179-07   11-19-2007  30.025
                     38.004—
182-07   11-19-2007  38.010,
                     38.999
                     112.001,
                     112.002,
                     112.004,
183-07   12-3-2007   112.005,
                     112.007,
                     112.010—
                     112.016
187-07   12-3-2007   160.485
01-08    1-7-2008    160.005,
                     160.616
02-08    1-7-2008    160.550,
                     160.553
                     158.431,
13-08    1-28-2008   158.432,
                     158.436—
                     158.438
23-08    2-11-2008   38.003
24-08    2-11-2008   38.003
                     37.058,
32-08    3-3-2008    37.073,
                     37.090
58-08    5-12-2008   38.003
                     50.001,
59-08    5-12-2008   51.130,
                     51.133
60-08    5-12-2008   160.005,
                     160.616
                     51.026—
75-08    6-16-2008   51.030,
                     51.032
76-08    6-16-2008   57.047
77-08    6-16-2008   51.081
                     51.046—
78-08    6-16-2008   51.050,
                     51.053
79-08    6-16-2008   96.033
                     157.001—
                     157.008,
                     157.020—
                     157.023,
                     157.035,
                     157.050—
                     157.054,
                     157.065—
                     157.068,
                     157.080,
                     157.081,
                     157.095—
                     157.098, 157.110—
                     157.117,
                     157.130—
81-08    7-7-2008    157.132,
                     157.145—
                     157.147,
                     157.160—
                     157.162,
                     157.175,
                     157.176,
                     157.190,
                     157.191,
                     157.205—
                     157.210,
                     157.225,
                     157.999,
                     ch. 157, app. A,
                     ch. 157, app. B,
                     ch. 157, app. C
                     92.170,
                     92.172,
91-08    7-14-2008   92.180—
                     92.190,
                     92.192
93-08    7-21-2008   160.005
                     94.001,
                     94.015—
                     94.018,
                     94.030—
                     94.047,
94-08    7-21-2008   94.060,
                     94.062,
                     94.063,
                     94.065,
                     94.067,
                     94.068
104-08   8-18-2008   159.286
                     110.028,
                     150.002,
                     150.017,
                     150.031,
                     150.042,
                     150.044,
                     150.047,
                     150.061,
                     150.096,
                     150.125,
                     150.127,
                     150.129,
                     150.130,
105-08   8-18-2008   150.131,
                     150.133,
                     150.137,
                     150.140,
                     150.160,
                     150.211,
                     150.218,
                     150.230,
                     150.235,
                     150.236,
                     150.238,
                     150.311,
                     150.313,
                     150.316
                     111.002,
                     111.003,
106-08   8-18-2008   111.013,
                     111.020,
                     111.022
                     150.201,
                     150.206,
107-08   8-18-2008   150.222,
                     150.223,
                     150.229
108-08   9-2-2008    160.552
113-08   9-15-2008   41.005
114-08   9-15-2008   51.065
115-08   9-15-2008   96.220
116-08   9-15-2008   37.002,
                     37.021
124-08   10-14-2008  110.029
125-08   10-20-2008  38.005
126-08   10-20-2008  38.003
139-08   12-1-2008   124.028
                     111.001,
                     111.004—
153-08   12-15-2008  111.011,
                     111.013,
                     111.014
1-09     1-5-2009    30.013
10-09    1-12-2009   96.034,
                     96.035
                     157.065,
11-09    1-12-2009   157.113,
                     ch. 157, app. B
23-09    3-9-2009    111.002
                     35.001—
                     35.012,
                     35.025,
                     35.026,
24-09    3-16-2009   35.028—
                     35.036,
                     35.050,
                     35.051,
                     35.053—
                     35.058
34-09    5-4-2009    41.010
46-09    5-18-2009   76.082
49-09    6-1-2009    160.507
50-09    6-1-2009    160.650
                     110.029—
57-09    6-15-2009   110.031,
                     112.001,
                     112.003
60-09    6-15-2009   51.081
                     51.046—
61-09    6-15-2009   51.050,
                     51.053
                     51.026—
62-09    6-15-2009   51.030,
                     51.032
65-09    7-6-2009    37.037,
                     37.038
67-09    7-13-2009   124.005
                     111.001,
                     111.002,
68-09    7-13-2009   111.005,
                     111.006,
                     111.021
                     156.001—
                     156.004,
                     156.015,
                     156.030—
                     156.037,
70-09    8-3-2009    156.050—
                     156.054,
                     156.065—
                     156.068,
                     156.080,
                     156.081,
                     156.999
71-09    8-3-2009    160.418 —
                     160.424
74-09    8-3-2009    38.003
                     159.038,
                     159.178,
                     159.198,
76-09    8-17-2009   159.218,
                     159.292,
                     159.298,
                     159.299,
                     159.486
77-09    9-8-2009    124.005
91-09    11-2-2009   38.005,
                     38.999
103-09   11-16-2009  160.616
                     123.001,
                     123.015,
                     123.030—
                     123.038,
                     123.050,
                     123.065—
                     123.069,
                     123.080,
                     123.081,
                     123.095,
                     123.110,
                     123.125—
                     123.127,
                     123.140—
                     123.155,
                     123.170,
                     123.171,
                     123.185,
                     123.186,
                     123.200,
                     123.201,
                     123.215—
104-09   11-16-2009  123.226,
                     123.240,
                     123.255—
                     123.257,
                     123.270,
                     123.285,
                     123.300—
                     123.307,
                     123.320—
                     123.323,
                     123.335,
                     123.336,
                     123.350,
                     123.351,
                     123.365—
                     123.375,
                     123.390—
                     123.395,
                     123.410—
                     123.414,
                     123.430,
                     ch. 123, app. A,
                     ch. 123, app. B,
                     ch. 123, app. C
105-09   12-7-2009   39.332
106-09   12-7-2009   39.255
109-09   12-7-2009   160.005 ,
                     160.445
111-09   12-21-2009  37.038
112-09   12-21-2009  160.005,
                     160.616
                     117.041—
                     117.046,
                     117.060—
                     117.077,
2-10     2-8-2010    117.079,
                     117.090—
                     117.098,
                     117.110,
                     117.112,
                     117.999
3-10     2-8-2010    110.026,
                     110.035
5-10     2-8-2010    38.003
                     93.001—
6-10     2-10-2010   93.009,
                     93.011
8-10     2-16-2010   160.551,
                     160.556
16-10    3-1-2010    150.015,
                     150.017
17-10    3-1-2010    150.060,
                     150.061
18-10    3-1-2010    150.001,
                     150.002
19-10    3-1-2010    150.030—
                     150.032
20-10    3-1-2010    150.095,
                     150.096
21-10    3-1-2010    91.015,
                     91.016
24-10    3-8-2010    95.070,
                     95.071
25-10    3-15-2010   159.318
26-10    3-15-2010   159.301,
                     159.486
28-10    4-5-2010    160.673
33-10    4-5-2010    41.007
                     124.013,
                     124.028,
                     124.031,
36-10    4-12-2010   124.032,
                     124.045,
                     124.046,
                     124.048
37-10    5-3-2010    160.005
47-10    5-3-2010    124.012
51-10    6-7-2010    36.030,
                     36.033
52-10    6-21-2010   110.029—
                     110.031
53-10    6-21-2010   51.026—
                     51.030
54-10    6-21-2010   57.047
55-10    6-21-2010   51.081
                     51.009,
                     51.010,
56-10    6-21-2010   51.046—
                     51.050,
                     51.053
57-10    6-21-2010   95.071
67-10    8-16-2010   90.014,
                     133.003
71-10    10-4-2010   39.051
                     32.016,
74-10    10-12-2010  32.019,
                     32.021
75-10    11-1-2010   37.038
                     37.190—
78-10    11-15-2010  37.201,
                     37.999
79-10    12-13-2010  37.003
2-11     1-10-2011   150.301
                     35.002,
                     35.004,
                     35.008,
03-11    1-18-2011   35.010—
                     35.012,
                     35.035,
                     35.051,
                     35.058
                     77.009,
9-11     3-7-2011    160.005,
                     160.553
10-11    3-7-2011    160.553
13-11    3-7-2011    92.176,
                     92.189
                     160.609,
                     160.610,
                     160.633,
                     160.634,
18-11    4-4-2011    160.653 ,
                     160.654 ,
                     160.746 ,
                     160.751 ,
                     160.760
21-11    4-8-2011    51.081
19-11    4-11-2011   31.002,
                     31.003
22-11    4-18-2011   51.081
27-11    5-2-2011    37.038
32-11    5-16-2011   111.002,
                     111.022
43-11    6-20-2011   95.071
44-11    6-20-2011   110.029—
                     110.031
45-11    6-20-2011   51.026—
                     51.030
46-11    6-20-2011   57.047
                     51.010,
47-11    6-20-2011   51.046—
                     51.050,
                     51.053
49-11    7-5-2011    150.177—
                     150.181
50-11    7-5-2011    124.012
                     30.001—
                     30.004,
                     30.006—
52-11    7-11-2011   30.010,
                     30.014—
                     30.022,
                     30.024,
                     30.027
53-11    7-11-2011   30.040—
                     30.046
                     110.026,
                     116.001—
54-11    7-18-2011   116.005,
                     116.020—
                     116.030
57-11    8-8-2011    92.074
                     36.020—
75-11    10-3-2011   36.024,
                     36.030,
                     36.031
                     57.001,
                     57.021,
                     57.022,
                     57.028—
                     57.033,
                     57.047,
76-11    10-3-2011   57.050,
                     57.078,
                     57.080—
                     57.082,
                     57.084,
                     57.105,
                     57.121,
                     57.123
                     90.033,
                     90.054,
79-11    10-11-2011  90.061,
                     90.075—
                     90.077,
                     110.032
                     37.106,
80-11    10-11-2011  37.109—
                     37.112
                     150.201,
                     150.206—
82-11    10-17-2011  150.208,
                     150.212,
                     150.218,
                     150.232
                     156.031,
                     156.032,
85-11    11-14-2011  156.051,
                     156.066,
                     156.068
86-11    11-21-2011  159.270—
                     159.273
                     152.003,
                     152.015,
                     152.030,
87-11    11-21-2011  152.031,
                     152.045,
                     152.085—
                     152.089
88-11    11-21-2011  38.003
94-11    12-12-2011  38.010
95-11    12-19-2011  37.038
96-11    12-19-2011  39.180,
                     39.183
2-12     1-3-2012    160.447
3-12     1-3-2012    160.005
5-12     1-9-2012    57.047,
                     57.048
7-12     2-6-2012    160.670
8-12     2-6-2012    38.005—
                     38.008
13-12    2-21-2012   30.004
                     30.001,
                     30.003,
                     30.006—
                     30.008,
24-12    4-2-2012    30.013—
                     30.015,
                     30.022,
                     30.024,
                     31.002
                     92.170,
                     92.172—
                     92.174,
                     92.177,
28-12    4-9-2012    92.182,
                     92.184,
                     92.185,
                     92.188—
                     92.191
                     37.107,
30-12    4-16-2012   37.113—
                     37.120,
                     37.999
35-12    6-5-2012    160.005
37-12    6-12-2012   150.096
                     96.180—
39-12    6-19-2012   96.189,
                     96.191
                     70.001,
                     72.002,
                     72.004,
46-12    7-10-2012   72.008,
                     72.011,
                     72.012,
                     76.043,
                     81.019
                     51.026—
49-12    7-10-2012   51.030,
                     51.032
50-12    7-10-2012   51.081
51-12    7-10-2012   57.047
                     51.010,
52-12    7-10-2012   51.046—
                     51.050,
                     51.053
                     57.001,
                     57.022,
53-12    7-17-2012   57.029,
                     57.030,
                     57.067,
                     57.074
54-12    7-17-2012   130.011,
                     130.999
                     53.001,
56-12    8-7-2012    53.042,
                     53.043
                     35.007—
                     35.012,
                     35.025,
                     35.031,
57-12    8-7-2012    35.033—
                     35.035,
                     35.051,
                     35.054,
                     35.057,
                     35.058
58-12    8-7-2012    160.616
68-12    8-21-2012   30.003
                     110.032,
72-12    9-4-2012    119.001—
                     119.013,
                     119.999
                     70.001,
73-12    9-4-2012    76.002,
                     76.091,
                     76.092
77-12    10-2-2012   41.005
78-12    10-16-2012  130.007
85-12    11-13-2012  57.047
86-12    11-20-2012  133.001
                     160.005,
91-12    12-4-2012   160.551,
                     160.616
                     157.008,
92-12    12-4-2012   157.067,
                     157.225;
                     ch. 157, app. C
93-12    12-4-2012   Adopting ordinance;
                     10.999
                     90.003,
95-12    12-4-2012   90.003.3,
                     90.003.4
                     10.999,
                     95.008,
                     95.012,
96-12    12-4-2012   95.021,
                     95.023,
                     95.024,
                     95.032
99-12    12-18-2012  150.015,
                     150.017 
100-12   12-18-2012  91.015,
                     91.016 
101-12   12-18-2012  150.001,
                     150.002
102-12   12-18-2012  150.060,
                     150.061
103-12   12-18-2012  150.030—
                     150.032
104-12   12-18-2012  150.095,
                     150.096 
4-13     2-19-2013   32.022
6-13     3-5-2013    53.023
8-13     3-5-2013    157.098,
                     157.113
                     160.001 ,
                     160.002 ,
                     160.005 ,
                     160.010 —
                     160.044 ,
                     160.050 ,
                     160.060 —
                     160.065 ,
                     160.070 —
                     160.075 ,
                     160.080 —
                     160.085 ,
                     160.090 —
                     160.095 ,
                     160.100 —
                     160.105 ,
                     160.110 —
                     160.115 ,
                     160.120 —
                     160.125 ,
                     160.130 —
                     160.135 ,
                     160.140 —
                     160.145 ,
                     160.150 —
                     160.155 ,
                     160.160 —
                     160.165 ,
                     160.170 —
                     160.175 ,
                     160.180 —
                     160.185 ,
                     160.190 —
                     160.195 ,
                     160.200 —
                     160.205 ,
                     160.210 —
                     160.215 ,
                     160.220 —
                     160.225 ,
                     160.230 —
                     160.235 ,
                     160.240 —
                     160.245 ,
                     160.250 —
                     160.255 ,
                     160.260 —
                     160.265 ,
                     160.270 —
                     160.275 ,
                     160.280 —
                     160.285 ,
                     160.290 —
9-13     3-19-2013   160.295 ,
                     160.300 —
                     160.305 ,
                     160.310 —
                     160.317 ,
                     160.320 —
                     160.325 ,
                     160.350 —
                     160.355 ,
                     160.380 —
                     160.385 ,
                     160.410 —
                     160.424 ,
                     160.440 —
                     160.452 ,
                     160.460 —
                     160.468 ,
                     160.480 ,
                     160.485 ,
                     160.488 ,
                     160.491 ,
                     160.505 —
                     160.518 ,
                     160.550 —
                     160.556 ,
                     160.570 —
                     160.583 ,
                     160.587 ,
                     160.591 ,
                     160.592 ,
                     160.594 —
                     160.603 ,
                     160.605 —
                     160.616 ,
                     160.630 —
                     160.635 ,
                     160.650 —
                     160.655 ,
                     160.660 ,
                     160.665 —
                     160.675 ,
                     160.690 —
                     160.694 ,
                     160.705 —
                     160.712 ,
                     160.725 —
                     160.730 ,
                     160.745,
                     160.746,
                     160.748—
                     160.751,
                     160.753—
                     160.760 ,
                     160.775 —
                     160.783
10-13    3-19-2013   51.118
11-13    3-19-2013   51.065
12-13    3-19-2013   96.220
13-13    4-2-2013    37.111
                     90.001,
16-13    4-2-2013    90.008,
                     90.078,
                     92.071
22-13    4-9-2013    30.061—
                     30.071
                     50.001,
                     52.003,
23-13    4-16-2013   52.003.1,
                     52.011,
                     52.012
                     39.222,
                     39.223,
                     39.248,
                     39.258,
24-13    5-7-2013    39.258.1,
                     39.307,
                     39.308,
                     39.325,
                     39.342,
                     39.345
28-13    5-14-2013   95.029
                     92.026,
                     92.046,
34-13    6-18-2013   92.047,
                     92.050,
                     92.052,
                     92.054
                     50.001,
                     50.016,
35-13    6-18-2013   51.009,
                     51.081—
                     51.082,
                     53.064
                     91.016,
50-13    8-20-2013   110.028,
                     150.017,
                     150.211
51-13    8-20-2013   131.007
64-13    10-15-2013  37.216—
                     37.219
66-13    11-5-2013   77.105,
                     77.106
77-13    12-3-2013   38.006,
                     38.007
12-14    1-28-2014   159.058,
                     159.486
22-14    4-1-2014    ch. 157, app. A ,
                     B
IM01-14  4-8-2014    96.127
23-14    4-15-2014   111.013
                     124.001,
                     124.003,
                     124.005,
                     124.006,
                     124.008—
                     124.015,
                     124.028,
24-14    4-15-2014   124.029,
                     124.031,
                     124.032,
                     124.034,
                     124.045,
                     124.046,
                     124.060—
                     124.063,
                     124.067
25-14    5-13-2014   50.020
33-14    6-17-2014   57.047
34-14    6-17-2014   51.100,
                     51.118
                     51.010,
35-14    6-17-2014   51.081,
                     51.081.01
                     159.038,
                     159.158,
                     159.178,
37-14    6-24-2014   159.198,
                     159.217,
                     159.302,
                     159.486
39-14    7-1-2014    110.033 —
                     110.035
52-14    8-5-2014    95.071
                     41.010,
                     41.011,
54-14    8-5-2014    152.045,
                     160.754,
                     160.756,
                     160.757
                     160.746,
                     160.748—
55-14    8-5-2014    160.751,
                     160.753,
                     160.758—
                     160.760
60-14    8-12-2014   95.058
61-14    9-2-2014    32.019
67-14    9-9-2014    95.029
                     124.005,
                     124.009,
74-14    10-14-2014  124.029,
                     124.070,
                     124.071
                     150.201—
                     150.230,
75-14    10-14-2014  150.232,
                     150.233,
                     150.235—
                     150.239
                     160.005,
                     160.084,
                     160.191,
                     160.203,
                     160.204,
79-14    10-14-2014  160.242,
                     160.323,
                     160.488,
                     160.571,
                     160.599,
                     160.672
80-14    11-4-2014   90.001,
                     90.016
82-14    11-4-2014   150.129
                     39.001,
86-14    11-12-2014  39.131,
                     39.134
98-14    12-16-2014  34.009
                     160.044,
                     160.131,
                     160.174,
                     160.184,
                     160.204,
                     160.214,
                     160.234,
22-15    3-3-2015    160.244,
                     160.274,
                     160.312,
                     160.447,
                     160.448,
                     160.451,
                     160.485,
                     160.488,
                     160.598
26-15    3-17-2015   111.002
36-15    4-14-2015   30.025,
                     30.026
46-15    5-12-2015   51.081,
                     51.081.01
56-15    6-9-2015    40.999
59-15    7-7-2015    160.746,
                     160.751
66-15    7-14-2015   41.008
67-15    7-14-2015   41.007
74-15    8-4-2015    124.012
81-15    8-18-2015   30.022
                     160.425,
88-15    9-1-2015    160.587,
                     160.588,
                     160.591
89-15    9-1-2015    160.005,
                     160.392
90-15    9-8-2015    57.121
96-15    10-13-2015  113.999
98-15    10-19-2015  95.070,
                     95.071
                     38.001—
100-15   11-2-2015   38.010,
                     38.999
                     124.001,
                     124.003,
                     124.006,
                     124.016,
                     124.028—
                     124.034,
108-15   11-2-2015   124.045,
                     124.046,
                     124.049,
                     124.060,
                     124.066,
                     124.067,
                     124.070
111-15   11-17-2015  51.081,
                     51.081.01
                     77.009,
                     77.011,
118-15   12-1-2015   117.001,
                     117.040,
                     117.120 -
                     117.140
121-15   12-15-2015  41.005,
                     41.006
122-15   12-15-2015  77.999
125-15   12-15-2015  150.015,
                     150.017
126-15   12-15-2015  150.001,
                     150.002
127-15   12-15-2015  150.060,
                     150.061
128-15   12-15-2015  150.030 -
                     150.032
129-15   12-15-2015  150.095,
                     150.096
                     150.042,
                     150.043,
                     150.129,
                     150.131,
130-15   12-15-2015  150.216,
                     150.230,
                     150.233,
                     150.311,
                     150.312
                     117.002,
131-15   12-15-2015  117.004,
                     117.020 -
                     117.030
133-15   12-15-2015  39.036
6-16     2-1-2016    38.003
8-16     2-1-2016    30.014
14-16    2-16-2016   124.012
21-16    4-5-2016    91.015,
                     91.016
                     96.010,
22-16    4-5-2016    150.096,
                     160.517,
                     160.518
                     160.005,
                     160.031,
                     160.055,
                     160.272,
                     160.284,
23-16    4-5-2016    160.485,
                     160.488,
                     160.506,
                     160.517,
                     160.552,
                     160.594,
                     160.599
30-16    4-5-2016    51.065
31-16    4-5-2016    96.220
35-16    4-5-2016    124.012
38-16    4-19-2016   117.030
41-16    5-3-2016    50.007
42-16    5-3-2016    51.089
                     51.026 -
44-16    5-3-2016    51.028,
                     51.030,
                     51.032
45-16    5-3-2016    51.100
                     51.046 -
46-16    5-3-2016    51.050,
                     51.053
47-16    5-3-2016    51.081,
                     51.081.01
48-16    5-3-2016    160.551
60-16    5-17-2016   111.021
61-16    6-7-2016    160.517,
                     160.518
80-16    7-5-2016    37.038
                     156.015,
                     156.031 -
                     156.033,
                     156.050 -
                     156.052,
94-16    8-2-2016    156.054,
                     156.055,
                     156.060,
                     156.065 -
                     156.067,
                     156.069,
                     157.052
                     39.001,
                     39.005,
                     39.035,
                     39.047,
                     39.048,
                     39.059,
                     39.060,
97-16    8-9-2016    39.069,
                     39.070,
                     39.121,
                     39.123,
                     39.158,
                     39.165,
                     39.180,
                     39.182
                     155.015,
104-16   10-4-2016   155.032 -
                     155.034
                     57.001,
                     57.065,
                     57.067 -
107-16   10-17-2016  57.070,
                     57.072 -
                     57.074,
                     57.108,
                     110.036
112-16   11-01-2016  160.392
115-16   12-6-2016   92.210 -
                     92.212
116-16   12-20-2016  124.012
                     39.006,
                     39.220 -
                     39.225,
                     39.227,
                     39.230 -
                     39.233,
                     39.235,
                     39.236,
                     39.245 -
                     39.258.1,
                     39.261,
                     39.263 -
                     39.266,
                     39.280,
                     39.281,
                     39.283,
                     39.285,
118-16   12-20-2016  39.292,
                     39.294,
                     39.305 -
                     39.310,
                     39.312 -
                     39.317,
                     39.319,
                     39.320,
                     39.322,
                     39.324 -
                     39.328,
                     39.330 -
                     39.342,
                     39.345,
                     39.355,
                     39.356,
                     39.364 -
                     39.367
07-17    1-3-2017    157.115
                     157.008,
08-17    1-3-2017    157.225;
                     ch. 157, app. C
09-17    1-10-2017   55.001 -
                     55.006
10-17    1-10-2017   41.007
11-17    1-10-2017   150.301 -
                     150.317
12-17    1-17-2017   91.016
13-17    1-17-2017   36.028,
                     36.033
18-17    2-21-2017   95.058
26-17    3-14-2017   95.070,
                     95.071
28-17    3-21-2017   96.051 -
                     96.054
43-17    5-2-2017    92.210 -
                     92.212
                     160.746,
                     160.748,
59-17    7-18-2017   160.749,
                     160.758,
                     160.759
60-17    7-18-2017   32.017,
                     32.018
                     150.201,
62-17    7-18-2017   150.201.1,
                     150.206,
                     150.230
                     150.176,
74-17    8-8-2017    150.177,
                     150.179,
                     150.180
76-17    8-15-2017   111.002
77-17    8-15-2017   38.003
                     156.015,
                     156.031,
78-17    8-15-2017   156.054,
                     156.055,
                     156.066,
                     156.067
                     38.001,
87-17    9-12-2017   38.005 -
                     38.010,
                     38.999
                     90.002 -
                     90.003.4,
                     90.006,
90-17    9-19-2017   90.008,
                     90.011,
                     90.017,
                     90.051
                     158.001,
93-17    9-26-2017   158.002,
                     158.015
                     159.001,
94-17    9-26-2017   159.002,
                     159.015
106-17   10-3-2017   160.449
111-17   11-21-2017  37.038
4-18     1-23-2018   159.291
11-18    2-13-2018   32.002
14-18    2-20-2018   36.021
21-18    3-6-2018    30.029
31-18    4-17-2018   51.010,
                     51.028
32-18    5-2-2018    156.015,
                     156.054
                     160.005,
33-18    5-2-2018    160.572 -
                     160.577
                     160.005,
                     160.272,
                     160.274,
                     160.282,
                     160.284,
34-18    5-2-2018    160.292,
                     160.294,
                     160.302,
                     160.550 -
                     160.553,
                     150.556,
                     160.616
42-18    5-8-2018    51.054
44-18    5-8-2018    124.016
45-18    5-8-2018    124.001
51-18    6-5-2018    160.448 -
                     160.452
                     111.001,
                     111.002,
                     111.010,
53-18    6-19-2018   111.011,
                     111.020,
                     111.022,
                     111.025,
                     111.030
55-18    7-3-2018    30.015
73-18    8-21-2018   161.001 -
                     161.008
83-18    9-18-2018   94.038
84-18    9-18-2018   94.019
85-18    9-18-2018   110.027
                     157.001,
                     157.003,
                     157.004,
                     157.007,
                     157.008,
                     157.021,
                     157.022,
                     157.035,
                     157.051 -
                     157.054,
                     157.065,
87-18    10-2-2018   157.067,
                     157.068,
                     157.080,
                     157.081,
                     157.095 -
                     157.099,
                     157.112,
                     157.113,
                     157.115 -
                     157.117,
                     157.206,
                     ch. 157, app. B
96-18    10-23-2018  159.240
107-18   11-13-2018  117.060 -
                     117.079
112-18   12-4-2018   51.026 -
                     51.030
                     51.100,
113-18   12-4-2018   51.102,
                     51.116,
                     51.118
114-18   12-4-2018   51.081,
                     51.081.01
115-18   12-4-2018   30.015
                     57.001 -
                     57.006,
                     57.022,
                     57.029,
                     57.030,
                     57.033,
                     57.045 -
                     57.051,
                     57.053,
                     57.065,
                     57.067,
                     57.069,
117-18   12-11-2018  57.075,
                     57.077,
                     57.078,
                     57.080 -
                     57.082,
                     57.084 -
                     57.086,
                     57.100,
                     57.101,
                     57.104 -
                     57.108,
                     57.121 -
                     57.123
                     70.001,
                     70.009,
                     75.006,
                     76.003,
118-18   12-18-2018  76.082,
                     80.006,
                     81.022,
                     95.001,
                     95.031
7-19     1-15-2019   95.012
                     32.010,
16-19    2-4-2019    32.015 -
                     32.025
18-19    2-26-2019   159.240
26-19    3-19-2019   150.060,
                     150.061
                     150.030 -
                     150.036,
                     150.038,
27-19    3-19-2019   150.041,
                     150.042,
                     150.044,
                     150.047
28-19    3-19-2019   150.015,
                     150.017
29-19    3-19-2019   150.001,
                     150.002
30-19    3-19-2019   156.050,
                     156.055
31-19    3-19-2019   150.076,
                     150.078
32-19    3-19-2019   110.028
33-19    3-19-2019   150.302
                     150.127,
                     150.129 -
                     150.131,
35-19    3-19-2019   150.133,
                     150.135,
                     150.137,
                     150.140
                     160.002,
                     160.005,
                     160.016 -
                     160.044,
                     160.063,
                     160.073,
                     160.083,
                     160.093,
                     160.114,
                     160.134,
                     160.144,
                     160.161,
                     160.173,
                     160.183,
                     160.193,
                     160.194,
                     160.204,
37-19    4-2-2019    160.234,
                     160.264,
                     160.273,
                     160.283,
                     160.293,
                     160.303,
                     160.312,
                     160.485,
                     160.488,
                     160.512 -
                     160.514,
                     160.555,
                     160.572,
                     160.599,
                     160.600,
                     160.616,
                     160.660,
                     160.672
41-19    4-2-2019    160.184,
                     160.598
43-19    4-9-2019    91.015,
                     91.016
45-19    4-9-2019    30.008
59-19    5-21-2019   51.010
                     70.001,
                     70.003,
                     70.009,
                     72.002,
                     72.004,
                     72.011,
                     72.012,
                     72.016,
                     74.004,
                     76.022,
66-19    6-18-2019   76.041,
                     76.043,
                     76.082,
                     81.001,
                     81.002,
                     81.015 -
                     81.023,
                     95.001,
                     95.008,
                     95.031,
                     95.031.1
                     116.001,
                     116.003,
67-19    6-18-2019   116.020,
                     116.022 -
                     116.027,
                     116.029
68-19    6-25-2019   159.240
69-19    7-2-2019    110.026
85-19    8-20-2019   111.021,
                     111.023
101-19   10-15-2019  111.021
109-19   11-12-2019  51.081
110-19   11-12-2019  150.211
111-19   11-12-2019  32.004
                     90.001,
106-19   11-5-2019   90.100 -
                     90.107
124-19   12-3-2019   38.003
                     111.002,
126-19   12-10-2019  111.009 -
                     111.011
                     122.001,
                     122.013,
128-19   12-17-2019  122.042,
                     122.055,
                     122.056,
                     122.073
7-20     1-21-2020   160.576
9-20     2-3-2020    37.038
11-20    2-3-2020    38.005
13-20    2-11-2020   95.071
25-20    3-10-2020   51.055
40-20    4-15-2020   98.085 -
                     98.092
43-20    4-21-2020   30.008
                     37.058,
64-20    8-4-2020    37.073,
                     37.085,
                     37.090
                     30.002,
66-20    8-11-2020   30.014,
                     30.022
                     150.201,
                     150.201.1,
                     150.206 -
                     150.208,
                     150.213,
                     150.218,
                     150.219,
68-20    9-1-2020    150.222,
                     150.223,
                     150.226,
                     150.228,
                     150.230,
                     150.233 -
                     150.235,
                     150.238
85-20    10-6-2020   30.004
86-20    10-6-2020   39.036
98-20    11-10-2020  30.001
99-20    11-10-2020  30.013,
                     30.015
103-20   12-1-2020   39.183
14-21    2-2-2021    110.028
15-21    2-2-2021    155.032
                     160.005,
                     160.021,
                     160.134,
                     160.144,
                     160.154,
                     160.164,
                     160.222,
                     160.316,
16-21    2-2-2021    160.444,
                     160.485,
                     160.488,
                     160.517,
                     160.518,
                     160.550,
                     160.551,
                     160.572,
                     160.576,
                     160.670
18-21    2-9-2021    30.060 -
                     30.071
                     53.001,
                     53.002,
                     53.016,
                     53.018,
                     53.020,
                     53.023,
                     53.024,
19-21    2-16-2021   53.026,
                     53.040,
                     53.041,
                     53.043,
                     53.045,
                     53.046,
                     53.057,
                     53.064,
                     53.065
20-21    2-16-2021   51.011,
                     51.050
21-21    2-16-2021   59.001 -
                     59.013
                     50.001,
                     50.004,
                     50.006 -
22-21    2-16-2021   50.009,
                     50.011 -
                     50.013,
                     50.015 -
                     50.022
                     160.005,
38-21    4-6-2021    160.560 -
                     160.562,
                     160.578
                     77.025 -
53-21    5-4-2021    77.028,
                     77.030 -
                     77.033
69-21    6-15-2021   30.004
74-21    7-6-2021    150.031
75-21    7-6-2021    150.302
76-21    7-6-2021    150.218
                     156.003,
                     156.015,
                     156.030 -
                     156.032,
                     156.051,
77-21    7-6-2021    156.052,
                     156.054,
                     156.055,
                     156.060 -
                     156.063,
                     156.065 -
                     156.074
93-21    8-17-2021   39.156
94-21    8-17-2021   51.054
98-21    8-24-2021   158.156,
                     158.471
99-21    9-7-2021    37.038
                     160.005,
                     160.272,
                     160.282,
104-21   9-7-2021    160.292,
                     160.302,
                     160.322,
                     160.332,
                     160.616
105-21   9-7-2021    121.001 -
                     121.005
106-21   9-7-2021    40.999
                     159.157,
114-21   9-28-2021   159.177,
                     159.486
137-21   11-9-2021   150.158
138-21   11-16-2021  150.015,
                     150.017
139-21   11-16-2021  150.060,
                     150.061
140-21   11-16-2021  150.030 -
                     150.032
141-21   11-16-2021  150.001,
                     150.002
142-21   11-16-2021  150.401,
                     150.402
143-21   11-16-2021  91.015,
                     91.016
146-21   11-16-2021  160.005
                     57.020 -
147-21   11-16-2021  57.024,
                     57.030 -
                     57.032
148-21   12-7-2021   111.002
158-21   12-14-2021  38.003
6-22     1-11-2022   39.036
18-22    1-31-2022   41.007
19-22    2-8-2022    32.035 -
                     32.042
29-22    3-1-2022    153.003,
                     153.008
30-22    3-1-2022    53.016
31-22    3-1-2022    59.013
32-22    3-1-2022    39.180
                     111.001,
                     111.003,
46-22    4-13-2022   111.012.1,
                     111.014.1,
                     111.014.2,
                     111.015.1
50-22    5-4-2022    96.055 -
                     96.058
56-22    5-24-2022   158.156
                     121.001,
68-22    6-14-2022   121.002,
                     121.004
71-22    6-28-2022   159.240
                     37.004,
72-22    7-5-2022    37.190 -
                     37.201,
                     37.999
80-22    8-2-2022    30.022
81-22    8-2-2022    124.012
88-22    8-9-2022    157.035
                     153.001,
89-22    8-9-2022    153.002,
                     153.004—
                     153.008
91-22    8-9-2022    150.031
92-22    8-9-2022    150.218
93-22    8-9-2022    150.302
94-22    8-9-2022    150.136
95-22    8-9-2022    150.002
96-22    8-9-2022    150.017
                     157.008,
97-22    8-16-2022   157.099,
                     157.114,
                     157.117
                     90.001,
99-22    8-16-2022   90.100—
                     90.102
                     160.005,
                     160.104,
                     160.113,
                     160.114,
                     160.194,
                     160.262,
                     160.402,
                     160.480,
114-22   10-4-2022   160.485,
                     160.488,
                     160.517,
                     160.518,
                     160.551,
                     160.572 -
                     160.575,
                     160.591,
                     160.598
127-22   11-8-2022   41.008
134-22   11-15-2022  111.031 -
                     111.034
135-22   11-15-2022  111.021
140-22   12-6-2022   150.095,
                     150.096
141-22   12-13-2022  154.060 -
                     154.074
142-22   12-20-2022  37.105,
                     37.110
143-22   12-20-2022  53.001
16-23    3-21-2023   37.038
                     117.061 -
                     117.068,
                     117.070,
                     117.072,
22-23    4-11-2023   117.078,
                     117.079,
                     117.090 -
                     117.095,
                     117.098,
                     117.099
                     160.005,
                     160.045 -
                     160.047,
                     160.050,
                     160.320 -
                     160.325,
                     160.327 -
                     160.332,
                     160.335 -
                     160.340,
                     160.342 -
                     160.347,
                     160.350 -
                     160.355,
                     160.358 -
                     160.369,
30-23    5-2-2023    160.372 -
                     160.377,
                     160.380 -
                     160.385,
                     160.388 -
                     160.393,
                     160.396 -
                     160.401,
                     160.404 -
                     160.409,
                     160.480,
                     160.488,
                     160.551,
                     160.552,
                     160.572 -
                     160.576,
                     160.600,
                     160.602
                     30.004,
33-23    5-9-2023    30.008,
                     32.017,
                     32.019
                     32.016,
37-23    6-13-2023   32.022 -
                     32.024
38-23    6-20-2023   50.001
39-23    6-20-2023   51.009,
                     51.010
                     51.006,
40-23    6-20-2023   51.026 -
                     51.030
41-23    6-20-2023   51.032
                     51.046 -
42-23    6-20-2023   51.050,
                     51.052,
                     51.053
43-23    6-20-2023   51.081,
                     51.081.01
44-23    6-20-2023   51.100
45-23    6-20-2023   57.047,
                     57.048
46-23    6-20-2023   110.036
51-23    6-27-2023   159.240
                     111.002,
52-23    7-5-2023    111.012.1,
                     111.014.1,
                     111.015.1
53-23    7-5-2023    150.158
54-23    7-5-2023    30.014,
                     30.022
64-23    7-25-2023   159.218
71-23    8-2-2023    160.591,
                     160.592
82-23    9-12-2023   154.050 -
                     154.057
                     37.107,
84-23    9-12-2023   37.113,
                     37.119
97-23    10-10-2023  36.020,
                     36.021
                     159.038,
                     159.058,
                     159.078,
                     159.098,
98-23    10-24-2023  159.118,
                     159.138,
                     159.218,
                     159.303,
                     159.486
                     160.005,
                     160.025,
                     160.029,
                     160.212,
106-23   11-7-2023   160.232,
                     160.242,
                     160.312,
                     160.551,
                     160.616
107-23   11-14-2023  94.002
                     124.005,
                     124.006,
108-23   11-21-2023  124.011,
                     124.013,
                     124.028,
                     124.032
                     150.176 -
109-23   11-21-2023  150.180,
                     150.182
                     150.125 -
110-23   11-21-2023  150.127,
                     150.129 -
                     150.137
111-23   11-21-2023  110.028
                     39.001,
                     39.066,
                     39.067,
                     39.129,
                     39.132,
                     39.156,
115-23   12-55-2023  39.159,
                     39.164,
                     39.165,
                     39.168,
                     39.180,
                     39.196,
                     39.204,
                     39.206
                     34.009,
                     35.000,
                     35.002,
                     35.009,
                     35.010,
                     35.025,
                     35.028,
116-23   12-5-2023   35.029,
                     35.034,
                     35.035,
                     35.053—
                     35.055,
                     35.057—
                     35.059,
                     35.999
117-23   12-19-2023  38.003
                     160.588,
5-24     1-2-2024    160.591,
                     160.593,
                     160.616
6-24     1-9-2024    41.002,
                     41.003
11-24    2-13-2024   38.003
                     70.001,
                     70.009,
                     76.003,
18-24    3-5-2024    76.082,
                     95.008,
                     95.031,
                     95.031.1
19-24    3-5-2024    70.001,
                     80.009
20-24    3-5-2024    110.026
                     159.291,
24-24    3-26-2024   159.300,
                     159.486
32-24    4-2-2024    160.587,
                     160.588
34-24    4-16-2024   37.038
40-24    5-14-2024   37.085—
                     37.088
41-24    5-14-2024   37.080—
                     37.084
44-24    5-14-2024   36.026
46-24    5-14-2024   110.026
48-24    5-14-2024   35.029,
                     35.053
55-24    6-25-2024   159.304
56-24    7-2-2024    121.001
62-24    7-16-2024   51.065
63-24    7-16-2024   96.220
64-24    7-16-2024   51.118
67-24    8-13-2024   110.026
68-24    8-13-2024   30.015
69-24    8-13-2024   95.070,
                     95.071
73-24    8-20-2024   90.100,
                     90.101
85-24    9-10-2024   32.022,
                     32.023
88-24    10-1-2024   131.001
89-24    10-1-2024   111.035
91-24    10-8-2024   96.087
92-24    10-16-2024  160.480
95-24    11-19-2024  95.029
96-24    11-19-2024  95.070,
                     95.071
                     117.001,
                     117.021,
                     117.022,
                     117.042,
                     117.061,
                     117.067,
                     117.110,
101-24   12-3-2024   117.112,
                     117.120,
                     117.123,
                     117.126,
                     117.128—
                     117.131,
                     117.137,
                     117.139
102-24   12-3-2024   110.026
103-24   12-3-2024   77.003
                     90.001,
105-24   12-17-2024  90.003—
                     90.003.2
                     90.001,
                     90.002,
106-24   12-17-2024  90.006,
                     90.010,
                     90.018,
                     90.019
10-25    2-18-2025   41.005
                     76.077,
                     93.002,
                     93.006,
                     93.008,
15-25    3-11-2025   96.180,
                     96.183,
                     96.185,
                     96.186,
                     96.189,
                     96.191
16-25    4-1-2025    51.081.03,
                     51.082
                     159.038,
                     159.058,
                     159.078,
                     159.098,
18-25    4-22-2025   159.118,
                     159.138,
                     159.218,
                     159.305,
                     159.486
19-25    4-22-2025   159.038,
                     159.218
20-25    5-6-2025    37.038
39-25    7-15-2025   36.002.1
40-25    7-15-2025   95.029
41-25    7-15-2025   111.023
49-25    8-19-2025   136.001—
                     136.003
                     150.201,
58-25    10-7-2025   150.201.1,
                     150.204,
                     150.206
                     37.165,
                     37.166,
65-25    10-15-2025  37.167,
                     37.169—
                     37.173
67-25    10-28-2025  158.015
                    
 
 
FEE INDEX
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL PROCESSING FEE   
30.040
AIR CONDITIONERS; WATER-COOLED
Permit fee   
54.002
Units over five tons   
54.004
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSES
Alcoholic beverages dealers classifications and fees   
111.002
Full-service restaurant license fees; resident   
111.009
   Off-sale liquor license lottery application fee   
111.012.1
   On-sale liquor license lottery application fee   
111.015.1
   Video lottery machine license fee   
111.030
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Animal license tag replacement fee   
90.076
Guard dog license fee   
90.091
   Impounding fees
   Boarding fee   
90.054(a)
   Impounding fees   
90.054(a)
License fees   
90.077
ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Special event application fees   
96.184
BICYCLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Bicycle duplicate tag fee   
81.021
Bicycle registration fee   
81.017
Bicycle tag transfer fee   
81.023
BUILDINGS
Fuel code administrative fee   
150.032
Mechanical administrative and permit fees   
150.031
Moving houses and structures fees   
150.017
Property maintenance administrative fee for correction of work   
150.096
Residential and commercial building permit and inspection fee schedules   
150.017
Residential building permit and inspection fee schedules   
150.002
Vacant building fee   
150.158
CARNEGIE CHAMBERS USE FEE   
30.027
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
City-served streetlighting rate   
51.030
Commercial/industrial primary service rate   
51.027
Large commercial/industrial service rate   
51.028
Night watch flood service rate   
51.032
Residential service rate   
51.026
Small commercial service rate   
51.029
Standby electric service; water purification plant standby facilities rate   
51.031
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
Electrical permit investigation fee   55.013
   Inspection fees
   Apartment buildings   55.018(a)(5)A., 55.018(b)(5)A.
   Circuit installation or alterations   55.018(a)(3)A., 55.018(b)(3)A.
   Energy saver switch equipment   55.018(a)(13), 55.018(b)(13)
   Homeowner's permit fee   55.018(a)(11), 55.018(b)(11)
   Minimum inspection fee   55.018(a)(12), 55.018(b)(12)
   Mobile home service and feeders   55.018(a)(7)A., 55.018(b)(7)A.
   New residential installations   55.018(a)(1)A., 55.018(b)(1)A.
   Nonpower limited fire alarm systems   55.018(a)(10), 55.018(b)(10)
   Other inspections and fees   55.018(a)(15), 55.018(b)(15)
   Outdoor signs or area lighting   55.018(a)(6), 55.018(b)(6)
   Recreational vehicle service   55.018(a)(8)A., 55.018(b)(8)A.
   Remodeling work   55.018(a)(4), 55.018(b)(4)
   Service connections on other installations   55.018(a)(2)A., 55.018(b)(2)A.
   Swimming pools   55.018(a)(9), 55.018(b)(9)
   Transient and migratory events   55.018(a)(14), 55.018(b)(14)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Installation, operation and surcharge   
58.003
ESCORT SERVICES
Investigation fee   
118.011
Permit replacement fee   
118.019
Permit transfer fee   
118.017
EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES   
41.007
FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES
Registration fee   
92.172
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
Floodplain development application   
156.055
Variance requests   
41.011
GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
Additional fee for solid waste   
57.047(i)
   Construction and demolition debris waste, wood waste and appliances
generated in Minnehaha, McCook,
Lincoln, Turner and Lake Counties, South Dakota, deposited at the city
landfill   
57.047(b)
   Deer or elk carcasses
   Generated outside the state   
57.047(m)
   Generated within the state   
57.047(l)
   Electronics
   Hand-held electronics   
57.047(h)
   Large electronics   
57.047(g)
Licensed garbage haulers that exceed the recycling goal   
57.047(o)
Loads that are not properly tarped or secured   
57.047(j)
   Municipal solid waste, sludge or solid waste generated from the treatment of
regulated medical waste, and
    other solid waste material not defined within this section generated in
Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln,
Turner and Lake Counties, South Dakota, deposited at Sioux Falls landfill   
57.047(a)
   Special waste
   Generated in Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner and Lake Counties   
57.047(e)
   Generated outside Minnehaha, McCook, Lincoln, Turner and Lake Counties   
57.047(f)
Tier 1 surcharge   
57.047(p)
Tier 2 surcharge   
57.047(q)
Tires   
57.047(d)
Wood waste   
57.047(n)
Yard waste   
57.047(c)
LIBRARY FEES
Siouxland Libraries nonresident user fee   
41.009
LICENSES
Annual licenses issued by fire department   
110.033
Fire department inspection for licenses issued by other city departments   
110.035
Health department follow-up inspection fee   
110.030
Health department inspections for licenses issued by other city departments   
110.037
Health department temporary event fee   
110.031
Licenses issued by city attorney’s office   
110.026
Licenses issued by parks, recreation and forestry department   
110.027
Licenses issued by planning and building services   
110.028
Licenses issued by police department   
110.032
Licenses issued by public health director   
110.029
Licenses issued by the public works department   
110.036
One-time permits issued by fire department   
110.034
LIGHT DEPARTMENT FEES   
51.010(a)(7)
LOADING PERMITS; TEMPORARY   
41.006
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; LICENSED
Manufactured home placement permit fee   
152.045
PARADES
Special event application fees   
96.184
PARKING
Appeal of ticket or citation, processing fee   
77.106
Fees   
41.005
   Regulations
   Parking of commercial vehicles or materials   
77.009
PARKS AND RECREATION
Aquatic fees   
95.071(a)
Concession fees   
95.071(g)
Ice rink fees   
95.071(b)
League/Tournament fees—city-sponsored   
95.071(c)
Participant fees   
95.071(f)
Rental fee   
95.071(e)
Scheduled games/practices and tournaments fees (non-city-sponsored)    
95.071(d)
PEDDLERS AND VENDORS
   Furniture zone
   Limited lease fee   
117.065
   Use permit fee   
117.063
Peddler permit fee   
117.026
PLUMBING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE   
121.002
POLICE, FIRE AND METRO COMMUNICATIONS FEES   
41.002
PRODUCTION OF RECORDS FEES   
41.003
RETURNED CHECKS FEES   
41.004
SEWER SERVICE
Operation and maintenance account   
51.082
Use charges   
51.081
SIGN PERMIT FEES   
41.010
SOUND PERMIT FEES   
93.011
SPECIAL EVENTS
Application fees   
96.184
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COST RECOVERY
Recovery of cost of storm water drainage system   
51.118
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Arterial street platting fee   
96.220
Front foot street maintenance assessment   
96.033
   Plan review fees
   Construction plan review fee   
96.205
   Final plan review fee   
96.206
Right-of-way vacation petition   
96.011
Street/sidewalk construction permit fee schedule   
96.087
SUBDIVISION
   Construction plan   
157.022
   Development engineering plan   
157.022
   Plats   
157.022
   Preliminary subdivision plan   
157.022
TATTOOING
Change of location of establishment fee   
122.009
TICKETS FEES, PUBLIC FACILITY   
41.008
TRUCK ROUTES, SETS AXLE AND TIRE LOAD LIMITS
Administrative fees for operation of overweight vehicles   
79.014
Overweight livestock truck permit fee   
79.012
Overweight vehicle permits   
79.022
UTILITY PAYMENT LATE FEES   
51.009
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Weight and size of vehicles and loads   
73.005
WATER CONSERVATION REIMBURSEMENT
Rain sensor reimbursement   
51.132
Programmable timer reimbursement   
51.133
Water conservation toilet reimbursement   
51.130
WATER DISTRIBUTION PLATTING FEE   
51.065
WATER SERVICE
   Water department charges
   Account charges   
51.010(a)(5)
   Service charges   
51.010(a)(4)
   Smith taps   
51.010(a)(1)
   Water service connection and meter charges   
51.010(a)(3)
   Water reclamation charges
   Water and water reclamation charges for laboratory fees   
51.010(a)(6)
   Water reclamation charges for sewer taps   
51.010(a)(2)
   Water service charges
   Commercial; inside city limits   
51.048
   Commercial; outside city limits   
51.049
   Fire protection rate   
51.051
   John Morrell & Company rates   
51.050
   Rates outside city limits   
51.054
   Residential; inside city limits   
51.046
   Residential; outside city limits   
51.047
   Skyline Heights rates   
51.053
ZONING
Annexation petition fee   
160.759
Appeal fee   
160.754
Change of zoning fee   
160.746
Change of zoning fee with exhibits   
160.746
Conditional use permit fee   
160.751
Design review fee   
160.753
Fence permit fee   
160.756
Final development plan fee   
160.749
Initial development plan fee   
160.748
Land use plan amendment fee   
160.760
Permitted special use fee   
160.752
Planned unit development amendments   
160.750
Planned unit development district fee; change   
160.747
Preliminary subdivision plan fees   
160.758
Zoning permit fee   
160.756
Zoning verification letter fees   
160.757
ZONING REGULATIONS (COMPREHENSIVE EXTRATERRITORIAL REGULATIONS)
Appeal fee   
159.451
Change of zoning fee   
159.446
Conditional use extraction fee   
159.297
Conditional use fee   
159.450
Major amendment fee   
159.448
Minor amendment fee   
159.449
Planned development district fee; subarea change fee   
159.447
Temporary use permit   
159.300
Zoning permit use fee   
159.452
ZONING REGULATIONS (2006 JOINT REGULATIONS FOR LINCOLN COUNTY AND
SIOUX FALLS)
Appeal fee   
158.437
Change of zoning fee   
158.431
Conditional use extraction fee   
158.280
Conditional use fee   
158.436
Major amendment fee   
158.433
Minimal amendment fee   
158.435
Minor amendment fee   
158.434
Planned development district fee; subarea change fee   
158.432
Temporary use permit fee   
158.282
Zoning permit use fee   
158.438
 
