STURGIS, SOUTH DAKOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-7-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ROSTER OF OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF STURGIS, SOUTH DAKOTA
Elected Officials
Elected Officials
Kevin Forrester, Mayor
Nick Jones, Ward 1, Councilman
Alex Usera, Ward 1, Councilman
Tony Dargatz, Ward 2, Councilman
Ruth Kopp, Ward 2, Councilwoman
Jim Thompson, Ward 3, Councilman
Mark Chaplin, Ward 3, Councilman
Jesse Blakeman, Ward 4, Councilman
Terry Jensen, Ward 4, Councilman
Departments
Departments
Aaron Jordan     City Administrator
Ann Bertolotto   Finance Director
Rick Bush        Public Works Director
Geody VanDewater Public Safety Director
Chris Hahn       Library Director
Rod Heikes       Community Center Director
Travis Parker    Municipal Liquor Store Director
Vacant           Human Resources Director
Lance Sherer     Sponsorship Director
Eric Davis       City Attorney - Contracted Legal Counsel
Vacant           Planning and Permitting Director
Deb Holland      Communications and Outreach Director
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Severability
   
10.06   Reference to other sections
   
10.07   Reference to offices
   
10.08   Errors and omissions
   
10.09   Powers to enact, amend or repeal ordinances and resolutions; generally
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.13   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.14   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters
and sections, shall be known and designated as the “City of Sturgis Code,” for
which designation “code of ordinances” or “codified ordinances” may be
substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant
to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
      (1)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (2)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (3)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding or thing shall have
reference to a municipality concerned or affected.
Statutory reference:
   General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding and the like, see
SDCL § 9-1-1
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CITY. The City of Sturgis, Meade County, South Dakota.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Sturgis. The words COMMON
COUNCIL and COUNCIL are synonymous with the words CITY COUNCIL.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which any act provided by this code or
other ordinance is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the last is a holiday and then it also is excluded.
Fractions of a day are to be disregarded in computations which include more
than one day and involve no questions of priority.
   COUNTY. The County of Meade, South Dakota.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   DAY. A period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
   DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME. DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise and
sunset; NIGHTTIME is the period between sunset and sunrise.
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the city begins on January 1 of each year.
   GOVERNING BODY. The board of trustees, the board of commissioners or the
common council of a municipality.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   HIGHWAYS or ROADS. Includes the whole of all public ways, roads, alleys,
courts and streets and sidewalks between the property lines forming the
exterior lateral boundaries thereof, and those parts of public squares and
places which form traveled parts of highways or roads.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   LOT. Includes PARCEL or TRACT OF LAND.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Any city or town that is organized
pursuant to SDCL Title 9.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code, or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Whenever certain hours are named herein they mean mountain
standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city.
   OPERATOR. The person who oversees any operation, business or profession.
   ORDINANCE. A permanent legislative act within the limits of its powers of
the governing body of a municipality.
(SDCL § 9-19-1)
   OWNER. The grantee in the last deed of conveyance of any lot or parcel of
land recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county or counties
in which the municipality is located, or the heirs or successors to the
grantee.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   PERSON. Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROCESS. Includes a writ or summons issued during judicial proceedings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   PUBLISH. Publication in an official newspaper of the municipality as
designated by the governing body pursuant to SDCL § 9-12-6.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, is understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   RESOLUTION. Any determination, decision or direction of the governing body
of a municipality of a temporary or special character for the purpose of
initiating effecting or carrying out its administrative duties and functions.
(SDCL § 9-19-1)
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. Includes a mark when the signer or
subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near
the mark by a witness who signs his or her own name near the signer’s or
subscriber’s name.
   STATE. The State of South Dakota.
   STREET. Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   SDCL. South Dakota Codified Laws.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, includes any person
holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
   WEEK. A week consists of seven consecutive days.
   WHOLESALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, relates to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who buy for the purpose of
resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it is the handwriting of such
person, or if such person is unable to write, by the person’s proper mark.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1.01.05) (Ord. 2024-07, passed 10-3-2024)
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.06 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this local government exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer
of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.09 POWERS TO ENACT, AMEND OR REPEAL ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; GENERALLY.
   Every municipality may enact, make, amend, revise or repeal all such
ordinances, resolutions and regulations as may be proper and necessary to carry
into effect the powers granted thereto.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF AN ORDINANCE.
   (A)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoined and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.14 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of provisions. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this code or failing to comply with any of the provisions hereof may, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation of the provisions of this
code constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Application of provisions.
      (1)   The penalty provided in this chapter applies to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each separate section. Any
person convicted of a violation if any section of this code where any duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor. A separate offense is committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
      (2)   In all cases where the same offense is punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery may be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit is not a recovery or penalty to bar any other penalty being enforced.
      (3)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there is no
fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this
chapter apply.
   (C)   Liability of officers. No provision of this code designating the
duties of any officer or employee makes any such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
City Council’s intent to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
(Prior Code, § 1.01.07) (Ord. 2024-07, passed 10-3-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   CITY PERSONNEL
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
35.   PROPRIETARY INFORMATION
      
36.   BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
      
37.   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Aldermanic form of government
   
30.02   Mayor
   
30.03   City Council
   
30.04   City Council meetings
   
30.05   Council procedures
   
30.06   Municipal elections
   
30.07   Boards and commissions appointed by the Mayor
   
30.08   Appointment of Council members to boards and committees
   
30.09   Election of President and Vice President
   
30.10   Vacancies on the Common Council or in the office of Mayor
§ 30.01 ALDERMANIC FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The city is governed under the aldermanic form of government as provided by
the state law, with the governing body being the City Council consisting of a
Mayor and two aldermen from each of the four wards of the city. The conduct of
city government must conform to state law and this code. Whenever any provision
of this code conflicts with state law, the applicable provision of state law
supersedes this code. Unless lodged elsewhere, all the corporate and political
powers of the city are vested in the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.01)
§ 30.02 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor is the chief executive officer of the city and presides over
the meetings of the City Council. The voters of the city elect the Mayor at
large at the general municipal election for a term of three years.
    (B)   Any vacancy in the office of Mayor must be filled as provided by
state law and this code. The Mayor performs such duties and exercise such
powers as provided by state law and this code.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.02)
§ 30.03 CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The City Council is the general legislative body of the city. The City
Council consists of two aldermen elected by the voters of each of the four
election wards of the city and serve a regular term of three years; provided,
that the terms of the aldermen from each ward are staggered so that the regular
terms of the aldermen of a ward do not expire in the same year.
   (B)   Any vacancy in the office of alderman must be filled as provided by
state law and this code. The City Council performs such duties and exercises
such powers as provided by state law and this code.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.03)
§ 30.04 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. The regular meetings of the City Council are held on
the first and third Mondays of each month of the year at 6:30 p.m. unless
otherwise determined by the City Council, such an hour as the City Council may
fix from time to time. Regular meetings are held in the City Hall unless
another site is specified. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday must
be held on the Tuesday immediately following such a Monday holiday.
   (B)   Special meetings. Special City Council meetings may be called by the
Mayor or, in the Mayor’s absence, by the Council President and scheduled as
soon as reasonably possible. Special meetings may also be called by the Finance
Officer at the written request of three members of the City Council and
scheduled as soon as reasonably as possible. Special meetings of the Council
encompass only such matters as are mentioned in the notice for the special
meeting.
      (1)   Notice of special meetings must include a proposed agenda with the
date, time and location of the meeting. The notice must be posted as provided
in state law at least 24 hours prior to the meeting or as far in advance as the
circumstances allow.
      (2)   Notice of special meetings must be provided, as authorized by state
law, to each Council member and to local news outlets requesting notice.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.04)
§ 30.05 COUNCIL PROCEDURES.
   Robert’s Rules of Order: The 11th edition is the standard by which all
regular meetings of the Council are governed. Any suspension of the procedure
of a Council meeting, except as provided by city ordinance, must be as provided
for in those Rules.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.05)
§ 30.06 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Election wards.
      (1)   The city is hereby divided into four wards, each of which consists
of a voting precinct.
         (a)   The First Ward is that portion of the city located within the
following boundary: Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Glencoe
Drive and State Highway 34, then following the city boundary south and west to
the extension of Sherman Street right-of-way, then continuing west along
Sherman Street to its intersection with the DM&E railroad track, then
continuing northwesterly along the railroad track to its intersection with
Interstate 90, then continuing southwesterly along Interstate 90 to the
southern city limits, then westerly along the south city limits to the western
boundary of city limits, then northerly along the western city limits to the
northern boundary of city limits, then following the northern boundary of city
limits east to the intersection of the centerlines of Glencoe Drive and State
Highway 34; excluding all unincorporated areas within the bounded area. This
area must also include that portion of the noncontiguous city boundary to
include the city owned municipal airport property.
         (b)   The Second Ward is that portion of the city located within the
following boundary: Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of
Junction Avenue and Sherman Street, then continuing westerly along Sherman
Street to its intersection with the DM&E railroad track, then continuing
northwesterly along the railroad track to its intersection with Interstate 90,
then continuing southwesterly along the west city limits lying north of
Interstate 90, then continuing southwesterly along the north side of Interstate
90 to its intersection with Vanocker Canyon Road, then continuing north along
Vanocker Canyon Road to its intersection with Junction Avenue, then continuing
northerly along Junction Avenue back to its intersection with Sherman Street.
         (c)   The Third Ward is that portion of the city located within the
following boundary: Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of
Junction Avenue and Sherman Street, then continuing southerly along Junction
Avenue to its intersection with Vanocker Canyon Road, then continuing southerly
along Vanocker Canyon Road to its intersection with 1st Avenue, then continuing
westerly along 1st Avenue to its intersection with Vanocker Drive, then
continuing southerly along Vanocker Drive to its intersection with Pine View
Drive, then continuing westerly along Pine View Drive to its intersection with
the western city limits, then following city limits south and east to its
intersection with Vanocker Canyon Road, then continuing northerly along
Vanocker Canyon Road to its intersection with the DM&E railroad track, then
northerly along the eastern city limits back to its intersection with the
extension of Sherman Street right-of-way, then continuing westerly along
Sherman Street back to its intersection with Junction Avenue.
         (d)   The Fourth Ward is that portion of the city located within the
following boundary: Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of
Vanocker Canyon Road and Interstate 90, then continuing south along Vanocker
Canyon Road to its intersection with 1st Avenue, then continuing westerly along
1st Avenue to its intersection with Vanocker Drive, then continuing southerly
along Vanocker Drive to its intersection with Pine View Drive, then continuing
westerly along Pine View Drive to the western boundary of city limits, then
following the western city boundary north to its intersection with Interstate
90, then southwesterly along Interstate 90 back to its intersection with
Vanocker Canyon Road.
      (2)   This section becomes effective upon the passage and publication
thereof, the same being necessary for the support of the municipal government
and its existing public institutions.
   (B)   Polling hours. The election polls for the annual election of officers
and any special municipal election must be open continuously from 7:00 a.m.
until 7:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.06) (Ord. 2001-29, passed 2-1-2002; Ord. 2011-08, passed
12-27-2011; Ord. 2021-12, passed 1-28-2022)
§ 30.07 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS APPOINTED BY THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor, with the advice and approval of the Common Council, must make
appointments to Council subcommittees. The Mayor may make appointments to all
other city boards and commissions, except as otherwise provided by state law in
the case of Municipal Utility Board members, or this code.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.07) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 30.08 APPOINTMENT OF COUNCIL MEMBERS TO BOARDS AND COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Following the election of officers at the first meeting of the Council
each May, each Council member must have an opportunity to make their request,
identifying the order of importance, for the member to be appointed to any of
the “outside” boards or commissions listed in this section. Following that
meeting, the Mayor, with the advice and approval of the Common Council, may
make Council member appointments for a one-year term to each board or
commission listed below:
      (1)   Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (2)   Library Board;
      (3)   City Chamber of Commerce Board;
      (4)   Parks Board, including Forestry Board responsibilities;
      (5)   Transportation Board;
      (6)   City Motorcycle Museum Board;
      (7)   City Rally Charities;
      (8)   County Senior Citizens Center Board;
      (9)   City Economic Development Corporation;
      (10)   Legal and Finance Council subcommittee (comprised of Mayor,
Council President, Council Vice President and one other Council member);
      (11)   Rally and Events Council subcommittee; and
      (12)   Infrastructure Advisory Council subcommittee.
   (B)   For other ad hoc committees, each Council member must have an
opportunity to make his or her recommendation for the Council members to be
appointed to that committee. Thereafter, the Mayor, with the advice and
approval of the Common Council, may make appointments to such an ad hoc
committee or committees.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.08) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 30.09 ELECTION OF PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT.
   At the first meeting of the Council in May of each year, and after the
qualification of the newly elected Council Members, the Council must elect from
among its own members a President and Vice President of the Council, whose
duties are prescribed by the laws of the state. Nominations for the office of
Council President must be made by members of the Council and when nominations
close then ballots must be cast for that office. If more than two candidates
are nominated, then the vote must be by public vote, to be reviewed and counted
by the Finance Officer and an assistant. After the votes are tabulated, the
Finance Officer must report the ballot tabulation and state the name of the
person elected. Following that election, nominations for the office of Council
Vice President must be made by members of the Council and when nominations
close then voting for that office must take place in the same manner as for
Council President.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.09)
§ 30.10 VACANCIES ON THE COMMON COUNCIL OR IN THE OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   (A)   If a vacancy exists on the Common Council, the remaining members may
appoint a replacement to serve until the next annual municipal election, or by
special election called for that purpose as provided in SDCL § 9-13-14 and this
chapter. The appointee must be a person from the same ward of the municipality.
When electing a person to fill the remainder of the unexpired term at an annual
municipal election, the vacancy must have occurred prior to the publication
required by SDCL § 9-13-6.
   (B)   If there is a vacancy from any cause in the office of the Mayor, the
vacancy may be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the aldermen, as
soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs, to serve until the office is
filled by election for the unexpired term at the next annual municipal election
or by special election called for that purpose, as provided in SDCL § 9-13-14
and this chapter. Until the vacancy is filled or, during the time of temporary
absence or disability of the Mayor, the powers and duties of the Mayor are
executed by the President or Vice President of the Council, as provided in SDCL
§ 9-8-7. When electing a person to fill the remainder of the unexpired term at
an annual municipal election, the vacancy must have occurred prior to the
publication required by SDCL § 9-13-6. No special election may be held less
than 90 days before the annual municipal election.
   (C)   If a vacancy is to be filled by special election, the Finance Officer
must publish a notice in the official newspaper of the municipality stating
that a vacancy exists, that the vacancy will be filled by special election, the
date of the election and the time and place where nominating petitions may be
filed for the office. The notice must be published once each week for two
consecutive weeks beginning at least 60 days before the date of the special
election.
   (D)   Nominating petitions for the vacancy must be prepared and filed as
provided in SDCL § 9-13-7, may not be circulated more than 60 days before the
date of the special election, and must be filed at least 30 days before the
date of the special election. The number of signatures required for a
nominating petition must be calculated as provided in SDCL § 9-13-9. If a
nominating petition is filed before the second Tuesday in January, the prior
year’s calculation of registered voters must be used to determine the number of
needed signatures. The Finance Officer must publish a notice of the special
election as provided in SDCL §§ 9-13-13 and 9-13-14 and must publish a copy of
the official ballot in the official city newspaper the week before the
election.
(Prior Code, § 7.01.10) (Ord. 2024-03, passed - -)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Appointment provisions
   
31.02   General executive chain of command
   
31.03   General appeal procedures
City Administrator
   
31.15   City Administrator appointment
   
31.16   City Administrator qualifications
   
31.17   Powers and duties of the City Administrator
   
31.18   Acting City Administrator and alternative appointment
   
31.19   Authority to approve expenditures and enter into contracts
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Appointive officers and positions. The following named offices and
positions in the city are appointed positions, pursuant to state law and this
code: City Administrator; Finance Officer; Director of Public Works; Chief of
Police; Director of EMS; Director of Community Center; Director of Municipal
Liquor Store; Director of Administrative Services and Human Resources; Director
of Rally and Events; Director of Sponsorship Development; City Attorney;
Director of Planning and Permitting; City Librarian; and Director of
Communications and Outreach.
   (B)   Qualifications and appointments.
      (1)   The qualifying requirements for all appointive officers of the city
must be in accordance with the qualification requirements for appointment to
office as established by state law, or as established by this code.
      (2)   The Mayor appoints each officer with the approval of the City
Council. Appointed officers serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and their
appointment may be terminated by the Mayor, with or without cause, at any time,
pursuant to SDCL § 9-14-13. The Mayor must report the reasons for such
termination to the City Council at the next regular meeting. Such officers must
be appointed or reappointed with each new Mayoral term with Council approval.
   (C)   Oath and undertaking required. Each appointed officer, before entering
upon the discharge of his or her duties, must take and subscribe an oath or
affirmation of office in the form required by the Constitution of the State.
Each appointed officer must furnish an undertaking to the city in the sum as
shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution except for the Finance
Officer and City Administrator who must furnish an undertaking to the city in
the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. Said bond
must be conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their
respective officers and to account for, pay over and deliver all money coming
into their hands by virtue of the office, according to law. Bonds for deputies
must be determined by the appointing officer.
   (D)   Salaries and reimbursements.
      (1)   Generally. The annual salaries of all appointive officers and
employees of the city are as prescribed from time to time by the City Council.
      (2)   Reimbursement for expenses. No officer or employee of the city is
entitled to reimbursement for personal expenses incurred in the discharge of
his or her official duties except as approved by the City Council; requests for
reimbursement must conform to such procedures as adopted by the City Council.
   (E)   General duties. The duties of the various appointive officers of the
city are such as are ordinarily undertaken by such officers and as provided by
state law, this code and the job description, if any, applicable to such
office. Such officers must also perform such further duties as may be assigned
to them by the Mayor or the City Council if the City Council has been
authorized to prescribe such duties.
(Prior Code, § 7.02.01)
§ 31.02 GENERAL EXECUTIVE CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   (A)   The official business and administration of the city is executed and
implemented through a chain of command, with the Mayor as the chief executive
officer of the city and responsible for executing and implementing the
legislative decisions and policies established by the City Council through the
various department heads and departments of the city. The department heads are
directly accountable to the Mayor. No individual alderman, or group of
aldermen, has the authority to direct the actions of a department head or any
subordinate employee within the city. Nothing contained in this code is
intended to impair the ability of the Mayor or any alderman to consult with any
department head or subordinate employee regarding the affairs of the city, nor
does anything contained herein impair the ability of the City Council to call
any employee to testify before the City Council in executive session in respect
to matters properly addressable in executive session as provided by law.
   (B)   Annually during the budget process, the Mayor, with the approval of
the City Council, must establish by resolution a more precise organizational
chart implementing the chain of command described in this chapter, and revise
such organizational chart from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 7.02.02)
§ 31.03 GENERAL APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, any person aggrieved by a decision or other
act of an employee or officer of the city, excluding any employment disputes
and allegations of violation of law resulting in prosecution, has the right to
appeal such act or decision to the City Council.
   (B)   An appeal must be started by filing a written notice of appeal with
the Finance Office within ten business days of the date of the action which is
subject to appeal. The Finance Officer must place the matter for hearing and
consideration by the City Council, excluding personnel matters which must be
addressed in executive session, at the next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least five business days after the notice of appeal is received.
The Finance Officer must notify the aggrieved person and city personnel of the
time and place at which the City Council will decide the appeal.
   (C)   Notice by certified mail to the appellant at the address shown on the
notice of appeal provides good and sufficient notice.
   (D)   The City Council may, in its discretion, continue an appeal hearing to
another time, provided that the continuance is for a reasonable length of time.
Any person aggrieved by the City Council’s decision may appeal such decision as
allowed by state law.
(Prior Code, § 7.02.03)
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.15 CITY ADMINISTRATOR APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor may appoint a City Administrator with the approval of the City
Council. The City Administrator serves at the pleasure of the Mayor and may be
terminated by the Mayor, with or without cause, at any time pursuant to SDCL §
9-14-13. The Mayor must report the reasons for such termination to the City
Council at the next regular meeting. The City Administrator must be appointed
or reappointed with each new Mayoral term with Council approval.
(Prior Code, § 7.03.01) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 31.16 CITY ADMINISTRATOR QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Administrator must be appointed solely based on executive and
administrative qualifications. The City Administrator need not be a resident of
the city or state at the time of appointment but must reside in the city while
in office in conjunction with his or her employment agreement.
(Prior Code, § 7.03.02) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 31.17 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Administrator is the chief administrative officer of the city,
responsible to the Mayor for the administration of all city affairs placed in
the City Administrator’s charge by this code and city resolutions. The City
Administrator’s duties include:
   (A)   Ensuring that all provisions of this code and all acts of the City
Council subject to enforcement are faithfully executed by the City
Administrator or employees subject to the City Administrator’s direction and
supervision;
   (B)   Overseeing and directing the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by state law or
this code;
   (C)   Making recommendations to the City Council concerning city affairs;
   (D)   Preparing and submitting to the City Council an annual budget not
later than September 1 of each year;
   (E)   Ensuring all terms and conditions in any contract or franchise to
which the city is a party are faithfully kept and performed;
   (F)   Directing the hiring, reassignment and promotion of all city
employees;
   (G)   When necessary, suspending or removing any city employee except as
otherwise provided by state law, this code or personnel policies adopted by the
City Council;
   (H)   Serving as the liaison between the Mayor, the City Council and city
staff;
   (I)   Attending all meetings of the City Council, except as excused by the
Mayor;
   (J)   Keeping the City Council advised as to future city needs;
   (K)   Providing staff support services for the Mayor and City Council
members;
   (L)   Submitting updates and reports to the City Council as requested;
   (M)   Delegating authority with specific guidelines as considered
appropriate; and
    (N)   Performing such other duties as are required by the City
Administrator job description, by resolution or as may be required from time to
time by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 7.03.03) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 31.18 ACTING CITY ADMINISTRATOR AND ALTERNATIVE APPOINTMENT.
   In the absence of a City Administrator, the Mayor, with the approval of the
City Council, may appoint a designee or designees to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of the City Administrator during the Administrator’s
temporary absence or disability.
(Prior Code, § 7.03.04) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 31.19 AUTHORITY TO APPROVE EXPENDITURES AND ENTER INTO CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The Mayor, or City Administrator with approval of the City Council,
has the authority to sign and approve any expenditures, contracts or agreements
(unless related to sponsorship of the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally) on behalf of
the city that have appropriations. Such expenditures, contracts or agreements
that exceed the amount set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution must be
countersigned by either the Finance Officer, City Attorney, Director of
Administrative Services or Public Works Director. No claim may be paid until
approved by the City Council, except as may be otherwise provided by this code
or city resolution.
   (B)   The Mayor, or City Administrator with approval of the City Council,
has the authority to sign sponsorship agreements and licensing agreements.
(Prior Code, § 7.03.05) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Organization
   
32.02   Department heads
Departments, Councils and Boards
   
32.15   Finance Office
   
32.16   Public Works Department
   
32.17   Public safety departments
   
32.18   City Community Center
   
32.19   Municipal liquor store
   
32.20   Administrative Services Human Resources Department
   
32.21   Rally and Events Department
   
32.22   Sponsorship Development Department
   
32.23   Legal Department
   
32.24   Planning and Permitting Department
   
32.25   Library Board of Trustees
   
32.26   Office of Communications and Outreach
   
32.27   Planning Commission
   
32.28   Arts Council
   
32.29   Arts Council Public Art Committee
   
32.30   Emergency Response Team
 
   
32.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 ORGANIZATION.
   The operations of the city are organized into departments as provided in
this code. Unless otherwise provided by state law or this code, the Mayor, with
the approval of the City Council, may assign duties to each department. Each
department, as appropriate, may be further organized into divisions consisting
of the areas of responsibility assigned to the department (example: the Public
Works Department may consist of engineering/inspection, streets and sanitation,
water, wastewater and airport, each as a division within the Public Works
Department).
(Prior Code, § 7.04.01) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.02 DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   (A)   (1)   Each department must have an executive who is an appointed
officer of the city and who is known as the department head or department
director of each respective department. If so appointed, one individual may
serve as the director of more than one department.
      (2)   The department head is the senior executive officer of the
department, and exercises the personnel, administrative and coordinating
authority for the department and the divisions therein, and is responsible,
further subordinate delegation of authority notwithstanding, for the
management, administration and execution of the city operations within the
department, subject to the executive and administrative authority of the Mayor
and the City Council as provided by state law and this code.
      (3)   (a)   A department head may delegate to subordinate personnel
within the department the duties and responsibilities of the department head
and the corresponding authority to perform such duties and responsibilities.
         (b)   The term DEPARTMENT includes all the divisions within the
department. The department head is responsible for the actions of any
subordinate within the department, decisions of a subordinate are considered
the action of the department head, notwithstanding that subordinate employees
may be assigned specific duties and responsibilities within this code.
Likewise, each manager or superintendent within any division of a department is
responsible for the official actions of subordinates and the official action of
the subordinate is considered the actions of the superior authority.
   (B)   Each department head must:
      (1)   Be responsible for administration management and operation of the
department;
      (2)   Assign the positions and duties of all full-time and part-time
personnel of the department;
      (3)   Make necessary and proper rules for the operational governance of
the department;
      (4)   Be responsible for the conduct and discipline of the personnel of
the department;
      (5)   Be responsible for the care, maintenance and condition of the
property of the city assigned to the department; and
      (6)   Have command of all employees assigned to the department. Have such
further duties as may be assigned to them by the Mayor or the City Council if
the City Council has been authorized to prescribe such duties.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.01) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
DEPARTMENTS, COUNCILS AND BOARDS
§ 32.15 FINANCE OFFICE.
   (A)   Department established. The Department of the Finance Office is hereby
established.
   (B)   Finance Officer.
      (1)   The Finance Officer is the department head of the Finance
Department and the chief financial officer of the city. The Finance Officer
performs all the duties of a City Auditor and City Treasurer, as such duties
are provided for by state law and this code. Whenever reference is made in
state law, this code or other official document to the term MUNICIPAL AUDITOR,
MUNICIPAL TREASURER MUNICIPAL CLERK or the equivalent thereof, the term has the
same meaning as Finance Officer.
      (2)   The Finance Officer must be bonded in the same amount as is
required by law for a city treasurer.
      (3)   The Finance Officer must keep regular books of account in which
showing all indebtedness of the city, and which at all times show the financial
condition of the city, the amount of bonds, warrants, certificates or other
evidences of indebtedness issued by the city, and the amounts of all bonds,
warrants, certificates or other evidences of indebtedness which have been
redeemed and the amount of each outstanding.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.02) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.16 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department established. The Public Works Department is hereby
established.
   (B)   Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works is the
department head of the Public Works Department. The Director of Public Works
performs all the typical duties of a Public Works Director as such duties are
provided for by state law and this code, and such other duties as assigned by
the Mayor or the City Council or the Mayor and City Council upon such terms may
be agreed upon by the Director of Public and the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.03) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.17 PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   City Police Department.
      (1)   Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is the department head of the
Police Department and performs such duties as may be provided by state law and
this code.
      (2)   Special powers and duties. The Chief of Police, subject to the
administrative supervision of the Mayor, or the committee appointed by Mayor
with the approval of the City Council for such purpose, is responsible for:
         (a)   The enforcement of state and local laws and police ordinances
within the city;
         (b)   The supervision of the Communications Division;
         (c)   The supervision of the city’s code enforcement personnel; and
         (d)   Such other duties which may be provided in the position job
description.
      (3)   Operational powers in absence of Chief. If the Chief of Police is
absent or incapacitated, and in the event of the occurrence of a law
enforcement emergency posing a threat to public safety and order, the on-scene
police officer in command has the same on-scene operational powers as the Chief
of Police.
      (4)   Require aid. In the execution of the duties of any police officer
in arresting any person accused or suspected of any crime or any suppression of
any riot or unlawful assembly, or in the prevention of any offense against the
city or state, said officer has the power, when necessary, to require the aid
of any citizen; and it is unlawful for any person to refuse or willfully
neglect to obey the summons of any police officer in such cases.
   (B)   Department of Emergency Medical Services (EMS).
      (1)   Director of EMS. The Director of EMS is the department head of the
EMS Department and performs all such duties as provided by state law and this
code.
      (2)   Special powers and duties. The Director of EMS, subject to the
administrative supervision of the Mayor, or the committee appointed by Mayor
with the approval of the City Council for such purpose, is responsible for and
may have such other duties which may be provided in the position job
description.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.04) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.18 CITY COMMUNITY CENTER.
   (A)   Department established. The Community Center Department is hereby
established.
   (B)   Director of the Community Center.
      (1)   The Director of the Community Center is the department head of the
Community Center.
      (2)   The Director of the Community Center has such duties as are
prescribed by this code and such other duties which may be provided in the
position job description.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.05) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.19 MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE.
   (A)   Department established. The Municipal Liquor Store Department is
hereby established.
   (B)   Director of the Municipal Liquor Store.
      (1)   The Director of the Municipal Liquor Store is the department head
of the Municipal Liquor Store.
      (2)   The Director of the Municipal Liquor Store has such duties as are
prescribed by this code and such other duties which may be provided in the
position job description.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.06) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.20 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department established. The Department of Administrative Services and
Human Resources Department is hereby established.
   (B)   Director of Administrative Services and Human Resources. The Director
of Administrative Services and Human Resources is the department head of the
Administrative Services and Human Resources Department.
      (1)   The Director of Administrative Services and Human Resources
performs all such duties as provided by state law and this code and such other
duties which may be provided in the position job description.
      (2)   The Director of Administrative Services and Human Resources is also
responsible for the human resources affairs of the city.
      (3)   The Director of Administrative Services and Human Resources is also
responsible for the city’s information technology.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.07) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.21 RALLY AND EVENTS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department established. The Rally and Events Department is hereby
established.
   (B)   Director of Rally and Events.
      (1)   The Director of Rally and Events is the department head of the
Rally and Events Department.
      (2)   The Director of Rally and Events performs such duties as provided
by this code and such other duties which may be provided in the position job
description.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.08) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.22 SPONSORSHIP DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department established. The Department of Sponsorship Development is
hereby established.
   (B)   Director of Sponsorship Development. The Director of Sponsorship
Development is the department head of the Sponsorship Development Department.
      (1)   The Director of the Sponsorship Development Department performs all
such duties as provided by this code and such other duties which may be
provided in the position job description.
      (2)   The Director of Sponsorship Development is also the City Brand
Manager.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.09) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.23 LEGAL DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department established. The Legal Department is hereby established.
   (B)   City Attorney. The City Attorney is the department head of the Legal
Department.
      (1)   Licensure. The City Attorney must be licensed to practice law in
the state.
      (2)   Duties and responsibilities. The City Attorney is responsible for
the legal affairs of the city as provided by state law and this code and such
other duties which may be provided in the position job description. The City
Attorney may also perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor on
such terms as may be agreed to by the Mayor and the City Council.
      (3)   Special duty of the City Attorney. The City Attorney, in addition
to those duties prescribed for him or her by state law, has the special duty to
make or cause to be made proper designations for any ordinance or amendments
thereto, and must see that the organization and numbering of all ordinances is
kept as uniform as possible and in keeping with the organization of this
chapter in revision. To perform this duty, the City Attorney has the power to
change any of the numbering designations of any of the city ordinances without
having to pass an amendment therefor, provided that in so doing, the substance
of any city ordinance are not changed.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.10) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.24 PLANNING AND PERMITTING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Department established. The Planning and Permitting Department is
hereby established.
   (B)   Director of Planning and Permitting.
      (1)   The Director of Planning and Permitting is the department head of
the Planning and Permitting Department.
      (2)   The Director of Planning and Permitting performs all such duties as
provided by state law and this code and such other duties which may be provided
in the position job description.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.11) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.25 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   Department established. The City Public Library is hereby established.
   (B)   Director. The City Librarian is the Director of the City Library and a
member of the Library Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Duties. The City Librarian performs such duties as provided by state
law, this code and such other duties which may be provided in the position job
description and the bylaws of the Library Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees of the City Public Library is
attached to the city’s municipal government for personnel and administrative
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.12) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.26 OFFICE OF COMMUNICATIONS AND OUTREACH.
   (A)   Department established. The Office of Communications and Outreach is
hereby established.
   (B)   Director of the Office of Communications and Outreach. The City
Director of Communications is the department head of the Office of
Communications and Outreach. The Director of Communications performs such
duties as provided by state law, this code and such other duties which may be
provided in the position job description.
(Prior Code, § 7.04.13) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 32.27 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Official name. That the official name of the Planning Commission
created hereunder is the “Sturgis City Planning and Zoning Commission”
hereafter referred to as “Commission.”
(Prior Code, § 7.08.01)
   (B)   Establishment and composition. The City Planning and Zoning Commission
consists of seven members appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Common Council, and to hold office as set forth by state law. The term of
appointment for each Commissioner is three years, and each Commissioner may
serve two consecutive full terms. The membership must choose one of its members
as Chairperson and in addition one member of the City Council must sit as an ex
officio member of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 7.08.02)
   (C)   Commission budget and member qualifications.
      (1)   The annual budget ordinance must include funds necessary for the
conduct of the activities of the Commission.
      (2)   All Commissioners must reside within the city and be registered
voters, or own property within the city, at the time of their appointment and
for the duration of their term. Individuals with expertise in civil
engineering, architecture, real estate, land development, public or private
utilities, law, public education, government, community services, business,
industry, environmental matters, family issues or any other specialty that will
provide a broad, qualified and balanced representation of the community are
encouraged to apply. Members of the Planning Commission must be qualified by
knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development and
administration of a comprehensive plan of development for the city.
      (3)   All Commissioners are entitled to receive free membership to the
City Community Center or a half-price family membership to the City Community
Center. In addition, each Commissioner and a guest must be invited to the
annual city Christmas party.
(Prior Code, § 7.08.03)
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The City Planning and Zoning Commission must execute its functions
in accordance with SDCL Chapter 11-6 and has all the powers, duties and
responsibilities as set forth in said statutes. In addition to the duties under
state law and other applicable duties established in Title XV, the Commission’s
duties include review of design standards and appeals of design denials within
the Downtown Overlay District, review and recommendations to the Common Council
of plats, variances and uses on review. The Commission must conduct their
meetings using Robert’s Rules of Orders.
      (2)   The Commission members do not act as the Board of Adjustment,
because the City Council holds that authority.
(Prior Code, § 7.08.04)
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012; Ord. 2019-05, passed 7-2-2019; Ord. 2023-03,
passed 5-2-2023)
§ 32.28 ARTS COUNCIL.
   (A)   Scope and purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize the
City Area Arts Council and designate it as the organization to assist the city
in promoting and encouraging public programs to further the development and
awareness of and interest in the arts.
(Prior Code, § 22.01.01)
   (B)   Benefits to citizens. The artists and artistic institutions of the
city contribute to and provide cultural, educational, entertainment and
recreational benefits available to and used by the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.01)
   (C)   City Area Arts Council essential to public welfare. The establishment
of the City Area Arts Council has promoted and encouraged public programs to
further the development and public awareness of and interest in the arts which
is essential to the public welfare.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.02)
   (D)   Designation of City Area Arts Council. The City Council does hereby
designate the Area Arts Council as the organization to assist the city in
promoting and encouraging public programs to further the development and
awareness of and interest in the arts and to act in an advisory capacity to the
city in connection with the artistic and cultural development of the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.03)
   (E)   Authority of City Area Arts Council. The Area Arts Council is hereby
authorized to initiate, sponsor and conduct public programs to further the
development and awareness of, and interest in, the arts.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.04)
   (F)   Additional advice and assistance upon request. The Area Arts Council
is to advise and assist the city in connection with such other artistic
activities as may be referred to it by the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.02.05)
(Ord. 2006-12, passed 5-27-2006)
§ 32.29 ARTS COUNCIL PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Establishment.
      (1)   The City Council has determined that it is in the best interests of
the city to establish the Area Arts Council Public Art Committee. The Public
Art Committee acting through the Area Arts Council shall administer the
provisions of this section relating to the selection, display, maintenance,
repair, liability and ownership of public works of art.
      (2)   The Area Arts Council Public Art Committee is a volunteer committee
of the Area Arts Council, and said Committee shall operate in an advisory
capacity to the City Council on art in public places, and its members shall be
appointed by the Area Arts Council President and Board of Directors, subject to
the approval of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.01)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ART IN PUBLIC PLACES. Any visual work of art displayed for three months
or more in an open city owned area, public right-of-way or any exterior or
interior designated as a city owned public area, and any visual work of art on
non-city property if it is installed, financed or maintained, either wholly or
in part, with city funds or grants procured by the city, but not including
museums, art galleries, school class work or any other works submitted to the
Council for display in a city owned facility.
      WORK OF ART. Includes, but is not limited to, sculpture, monument, mural,
fresco, relief, painting, photography, fountain, banner, mosaic, ceramic,
weaving, carving and stained glass. WORK OF ART would normally not include
landscaping, paving, architectural ornamentation or signs.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.02)
   (C)   Administration. The Area Arts Council shall provide administrative
support and assistance to the Public Art Committee as necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this section. The Committee shall submit to the City Council,
not later than March of each year, a report of its activities of the prior
year. The Area Arts Council, in conjunction with the Public Art Committee,
shall prepare a maintenance plan for all art in public places and will include
the costs associated therewith as part of the Area Arts Council’s budget
request to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.03)
   (D)   Committee to adopt guidelines. The Area Arts Council Public Art
Committee shall adopt guidelines as follows:
      (1)   To identify suitable art works for public display;
      (2)   To facilitate the preservation of art works for public display;
      (3)   To prescribe a method or methods and procedures for selection of
art works for public display; and
      (4)   To set forth any other matter appropriate to the administration of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.04)
   (E)   Ownership. Ownership, title and copyright of works of art in public
places acquired by the procedures identified by the Area Arts Council pursuant
to this section shall be clearly identified and contracted between the Area
Arts Council and the artist or donor and approved and held by the city.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.05)
   (F)   Selection, removal and/or alterations. Any proposed art in public
places shall be submitted to the Public Art Committee for its recommendation
and approved by the City Council. No art in public places shall be removed,
altered or changed without the prior review and recommendation of the Committee
and approval by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.06)
   (G)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this
section:
      (1)   All works of art in the collections or on display under the
auspices of the Area Arts Council sponsored gallery and the Public Library; and
      (2)   All works of art on display in private city offices or other areas
of city owned facilities that are not generally frequented by the public.
(Prior Code, § 22.03.07)
(Ord. 2006-12, passed 5-27-2006)
§ 32.30 EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for the establishment
of an Emergency Response Team to assist the Mayor in performing his duties
consistent with the power granted the Mayor under Chapter 96 during a public
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.01)
   (B)   Establishment of emergency response team. There is hereby established
an Emergency Response Team to assist the Mayor of the city during times of
public emergency. The Emergency Response Team shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Mayor;
      (2)   President of the Council;
      (3)   Vice President of the Council;
      (4)   Finance Officer or designee and Secretary;
      (5)   Chief of Police or designee and Secretary;
      (6)   Public Works Director or designee and Secretary;
      (7)   City Attorney or designee;
      (8)   Head of Water Department or designee;
      (9)   Head of Parks Department or designee; and
      (10)   Fire and Emergency Director or designee.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.01)
   (C)   Establishment of Office of Emergency Coordinator.
      (1)   There is hereby established an Office of Emergency Coordinator.
      (2)   The duties of the Emergency Coordinator are to assist the Mayor and
city officials in coordinating all efforts during an emergency. A Coordinator
should be allowed, as it is necessary, to see to it that all efforts of an
emergency are properly executed in cooperation with other city departments,
state, county or federal officials.
      (3)   The Coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. Said
Coordinator shall receive no salary but may be reimbursed such costs and
expenses as the City Council may deem reasonable.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.02)
   (D)   Powers of emergency response team. The Emergency Response Team shall
have such powers as are necessary to organize and coordinate all efforts during
an emergency or in the event of imminent danger to public safety. Further, said
Emergency Response Team may enact such regulations, policy handbooks and
procedure manuals in handling emergencies in the city as it deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.03)
   (E)   Headquarters. The Emergency Response Team may designate one place as
headquarters for city services during an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.04)
   (F)   Official spokesperson. The Mayor may appoint one person as the
official spokesperson for the city during times of imminent danger to public
safety or emergency. Said person shall be responsible for handling all official
news releases, press conferences or information to be disseminated to the media
or public.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.05)
   (G)   Budget. The City Council may set a budget for expenses incurred by the
Emergency Response Team.
(Prior Code, § 29.02.06)
(Ord. 2007-32, passed 9-21-2007) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of §
32.30 is a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth
by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also
include payment of any costs and/or restitution authorized by this code and/or
state law.
(Prior Code, § 29.01.03)
CHAPTER 33: CITY PERSONNEL
Section
   
33.01   Personnel policy
   
33.02   Code of conduct under federal grants
§ 33.01 PERSONNEL POLICY.
   (A)   Definition. All persons performing services for the city and who are
not appointive officers of the city are CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (B)   Employment-at-will. South Dakota is an “employment-at-will” state.
Subject to certain common law limitations and public policy exceptions, an at-
will employment may be terminated at-will, with or without cause at any time.
The intent of the city is to maintain employment at-will status of all
employees.
   (C)   Personnel policy manual.
      (1)   The city may by resolution adopt a personnel policy manual for the
purpose of regulating those matters relating to city employees as the City
Council may approve; provided, that the personnel policy manual does not
contain any provision inconsistent with the employment-at-will status of city
employees; and further provided that the personnel policies are subject to such
provisions as the City Council may approve in any collective bargaining
agreement.
      (2)   The personnel policy manual is not an employment contract. The
policies, procedures, rules and benefits contained in the personnel policy
manual are subject to change upon a majority vote of the City Council. The
policies are provided as a reference to present policies and not a guarantee of
employment or any specific employment benefit.
   (D)   Employee classification; positions authorized. Employees of the city
are classified as salaried, hourly, exempt and nonexempt in conformance with
applicable state and federal law. The employee positions within the city and
its departments to which personnel may be hired, and the compensation
authorized for each such position, are as authorized by the City Council.
   (E)   Employee wages and benefits. Employee wage rates and salaries,
including any step plan or wage or salary gradations or wage and salary
graduations, are determined by resolution of the City Council, or notations in
the minutes of a City Council meeting. Employee benefits supplemental to wages
and salary area also as determined by the City Council. Except as may be
contained in a collective bargaining contract, no such employee wage or benefit
determination or wage and benefit determination is contractual.
   (F)   Employee retirement system. All ordinances establishing retirement
system(s) for city employees within the state retirement system are maintained
and not repealed by the enactment of this code.
(Prior Code, § 7.05.01) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 33.02 CODE OF CONDUCT UNDER FEDERAL GRANTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this code of conduct is to ensure the
efficient, fair and professional administration of federal grant funds in
compliance with the Federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-
102, Attachment O, Paragraph 7 and other applicable federal and state
standards, regulations and laws.
   (B)   Application of provisions. This code of conduct applies to all
officers, employees or agents of the city engaged in the award or
administration of contracts supported by federal grant funds.
   (C)   Requirements.
      (1)   No officer, employee or agent of the city may participate in the
selection, award or administration of a contract supported by federal grant
funds if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, is involved. Such a conflict
arises when any employee, officer or agent, any members of the employees,
officers or agent’s immediate family, a partner or an organization which
employs or is about to employ any of the above has a financial or other
interest in the firm selected for the award.
      (2)   The city’s officers, employees or agents must neither solicit nor
accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from contractors,
potential contractors or subcontractors.
   (D)   Remedies. To the extent allowed by federal, state law, state or this
code, local laws or other regulations, violation of these standards may cause
penalties, sanctions or other disciplinary actions to be taken against the
city’s officers, employees or agents or the contractors, potential contractors,
subcontractors or other agents.
(Prior Code, § 7.05.02) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Finance and Budget
   
34.01   Fiscal year
   
34.02   Introduction of budget, Council action and budget deadlines
   
34.03   Budget message
   
34.04   Budget requirements
   
34.05   Budget amendments after adoption
   
34.06   Lapse of appropriations
   
34.07   Budget administration
   
34.08   Overspending of appropriations prohibited
   
34.09   Financial reporting
   
34.10   Maintenance of inventory records
   
34.11   Maintenance of city fee schedule
Taxes
   
34.25   Scope and purpose
   
34.26   Effective date and enactment of tax
   
34.27   Use tax
   
34.28   Capital improvement and equipment replacement funds
   
34.29   Pledging of sales tax revenue
   
34.30   Collection
   
34.31   Interpretation
   
34.32   Special bed, board, booze and ticket sales tax
Industrial Expansion Revolving Fund
   
34.45   Established
   
34.46   Designation of surplus revenue
   
34.47   Use of funds
   
34.48   Standing committee established
   
34.49   Appointment of members; meetings
   
34.50   Criteria, standards and policies; expenditure of funds
 
   
34.99   Penalty
FINANCE AND BUDGET
§ 34.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city begins on January 1 and ends on December 31.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.01) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.02 INTRODUCTION OF BUDGET, COUNCIL ACTION AND BUDGET DEADLINES.
   (A)   The Mayor must introduce the annual budget for the ensuing year on
such a time line that the City Council may approve its first reading of the
annual budget appropriation ordinance on or before its first regular City
Council meeting in November.
   (B)   At the meeting when the complete budget is introduced by the Mayor or
at a subsequent meeting, the City Council must hold a public hearing for the
purpose of discussing the proposed budget.
   (C)   The second reading of the annual budget appropriation ordinance must
be at least five days after the first reading.
   (D)   The annual budget appropriation ordinance must be adopted and
effective prior to December 31 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.02) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.03 BUDGET MESSAGE.
   The Mayor must provide a budget message explaining the budget in fiscal
terms and in terms of the work programs. The message must outline the proposed
financial policies of the city for the ensuring fiscal year, describe the
important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current
year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with the reasons
for such changes, summarize the city’s debt position and include such other
material as the Mayor deems desirable.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.03) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.04 BUDGET REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The budget must provide a complete financial plan of all city funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law, must
be in such form as the Mayor deems appropriate or the City Council requires.
The budget must begin with a clear general summary of its contents; must show
in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and
all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year;
and must be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated
income and expenditures of the preceding two fiscal years. The budget must also
indicate in separate sections:
      (1)   The proposed goals and objectives and expenditures for current
operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by
department, program, purpose or activity and the method of financing such
expenditures; and
      (2)   Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing five fiscal years,
detailed for each fund by organization unit when practicable and the proposed
method of financing each such capital expenditure.
   (B)   For any fund, the total proposed expenditures must not exceed the
total estimated income plus the fund.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.04) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.05 BUDGET AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION.
   (A)   Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property or the public peace, the City Council may make special
appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency resolution. To the
extent that there are no unappropriated revenues or a sufficient fund balance
to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency resolution
authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to
time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year must be paid not
later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the
emergency special appropriation was made.
   (B)   Supplemental appropriations.
      (1)   If during the fiscal year the Mayor certifies that there are
revenues available for appropriation in excess of those estimated in the budget
ordinance, the City Council may make supplemental appropriations for the year
up to the amount of such in excess.
      (2)   Additionally, if an unforeseen appropriation is required, but it
does not meet the criteria for emergency appropriations, the City Council may
make supplemental appropriations via a supplemental budget ordinance to cover
these unforeseen appropriations. However, these appropriations may only be made
if a funding source exists to cover these appropriations. The Mayor must inform
the City Council of an anticipated unforeseen appropriation prior to incurring
the expense.
   (C)   Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the Mayor that the revenues or fund balances available will
be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been
authorized, the Mayor must report to the City Council without delay, indicating
the estimated amount of the deficit, and any remedial action taken by the
Mayor, and provide recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The City
Council must then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or
reduce any deficit, and for that purpose it may by ordinance or resolution
reduce one or more appropriations.
   (D)   Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the
City Council may by resolution transfer part or all the unencumbered
appropriation balance from one department, governmental fund or enterprise fund
to the appropriation for other departments, governmental fund or enterprise
fund.
   (E)   Limitation; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred. No appropriations may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance. The emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of
appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective upon the
passage and publication thereof, as permitted by SDCL § 9-19-13.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.05) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.06 LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
lapses at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure continues in
force as provided in the ordinance or resolution adopting it. The purpose of
any such continuing capital expenditure appropriation must be confirmed as part
of the annual review of the five-year Capital Improvement Plan.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.06) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.07 BUDGET ADMINISTRATION.
   The Mayor is responsible to the City Council for the administration and
implementation of the adopted budget within the budgetary limits contained in
the annual appropriation ordinance or budget. The Mayor may delegate
administrative responsibilities for the budget to the City Administrator or
other staff, at the Mayor’s discretion.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.07) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.08 OVERSPENDING OF APPROPRIATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council expects that department heads will accurately account
for each line item and not overspend their budget.
   (B)   No payment may be made, or obligation incurred against any allotment
or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless
the Mayor first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in
such allotment or appropriation and that sufficient funds are or will be
available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and
payable.
   (C)   (1)   Any authorization of payment or incurring obligation in
violation of this chapter is void and any payments made are illegal.
      (2)   A violation of this provision is cause for disciplinary action, up
to and including termination, of any officer who knowingly and willfully acted
in violation of this chapter. Such an officer may also be liable to the city
for any amount so paid.
      (3)   Except where prohibited by law, nothing in this chapter will be
construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of
contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the
issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing
for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, but only if such action is made
or approved by City Council action.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.08) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.09 FINANCIAL REPORTING.
   The Mayor must report on the financial condition of the governmental and
enterprise funds and other related information required by the Council monthly.
This report must occur at a regularly scheduled Council meeting. Additionally,
the Finance Officer must provide the Mayor and staff with financial reports as
practicable and as required by the Mayor to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.09) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.10 MAINTENANCE OF INVENTORY RECORDS.
   (A)   The Mayor must direct the City Administrator to ensure that an
inventory appropriate to each department is maintained. This inventory must be
provided to the Mayor and City Council annually.
   (B)   The liquor store must conduct at least one annual inventory of all
products sold in the store, under the direction of the city’s designated audit
firm.
   (C)   The Finance Officer must maintain the list of fixed assets as required
by state law.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.10) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
§ 34.11 MAINTENANCE OF CITY FEE SCHEDULE.
   A master fee schedule must be developed and maintained through the Finance
Office. The information will be available in printed form in the Finance Office
as well as posted on the city’s website.
(Prior Code, § 7.06.11) (Ord. 2012-16, passed 12-5-2012)
TAXES
§ 34.25 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide additional needed revenue for
the municipality by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax pursuant to
the powers granted to the municipality by the state, by SDCL Chapter 10-52,
entitled Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law, and acts amendatory thereto,
and by imposing a municipal gross receipts tax pursuant to the powers granted
to the municipality by the state, by SDCL Chapter 10-52A, and acts amendatory
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20.01.01) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
§ 34.26 EFFECTIVE DATE AND ENACTMENT OF TAX.
   From and after January 1, 2004, there is hereby imposed as a municipal
retail occupational sales and service tax upon the privilege of engaging in
business a tax measured by 2% on the gross receipts of all persons engaged in
business within the jurisdiction of the municipality who are subject to the
State Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL Chapter 10-45, and acts
amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20.02.01) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
§ 34.27 USE TAX.
   In addition, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the privilege of use,
storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the municipality of tangible
personal property or services purchased from and after January 1, 2004, at the
same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all transaction or use,
storage and consumption which are subject to the State Use Tax Act, SDCL
Chapter 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20.02.02) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
§ 34.28 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT AND EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUNDS.
   (A)   At least 40% of the tax levied under this subchapter, pursuant to §§
34.26 and
34.27, shall be used only for capital improvements, public improvement repairs,
land acquisition, debt reduction, increase committed fund balance (reserve
accumulation) and/or the purchase of machinery and equipment.
   (B)   This revenue shall be accounted for in separate funds as established
in the annual budget.
(Prior Code, § 20.02.03) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005; Ord. 2018-05, passed
5-15-2018)
§ 34.29 PLEDGING OF SALES TAX REVENUE.
   The City Council by resolution or ordinance may make a pledge of all or a
specific portion of the revenue to be received in accordance with §
34.28, to secure indebtedness, including leases, installment sales contracts or
other obligations, incurred for the purposes stated in said section.
(Prior Code, § 20.02.04) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
§ 34.30 COLLECTION.
   Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL Chapter 10-52,
and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the State Department of
Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules and regulations
applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and
regulations as the State Secretary of Revenue and Regulation shall lawfully
prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 20.02.05) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
§ 34.31 INTERPRETATION.
   It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied
hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner
as all sections of the State Retail Occupation Sales and Service Act, SDCL
Chapter 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and the State Use Tax, SDCL Chapter
10-46, and acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall be considered a similar
tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
(Prior Code, § 20.02.06) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
§ 34.32 SPECIAL BED, BOARD, BOOZE AND TICKET SALES TAX.
   (A)   Effective date and enactment of tax. 
      (1)   From and after January 1, 2004, there is hereby imposed as a
municipal gross receipts tax of 1% upon the gross receipts from the sale of
leases or rentals of hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations
within the municipality for period of less than 28 consecutive days, the sale
of alcoholic beverages, as defined in SDCL § 35-1-1, establishments where the
public is invited to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared food for
immediate consumption and ticket sales or admissions to places of amusement,
athletic and cultural events.
      (2)   The tax applies to the gross receipts of all persons engaged in
business within the jurisdiction of the municipality, who are subject to the
State Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL Chapter 10-45, and acts
amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20.03.01)
   (B)   Collection. Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by
SDCL Chapter 10-52A, and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the
State Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules
and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional
rules and regulations as the State Secretary of Revenue and Regulation shall
lawfully prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 20.03.02)
   (C)   Interpretation. It is declared to be the intention of this section and
the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in
the same manner as all sections of the State Retail Occupation Sales and
Service Act, SDCL Chapter 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and that this
shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
(Prior Code, § 20.03.03)
   (D)   Use of revenue. Any revenues received under this section may be used
only for the purpose of land acquisition, architectural fees, construction
costs, payment for civic center, auditoriums or athletic facility buildings,
including the maintenance, staffing and operations of such facilities and the
promotion and advertising of the municipality, its facilities, attractions and
activities.
(Prior Code, § 20.03.04)
(Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
INDUSTRIAL EXPANSION REVOLVING FUND
§ 34.45 ESTABLISHED.
   There is established in the City Treasury a special revenue fund to be known
as the city’s Economic Development Revolving Fund (SEDRF) for the purpose of
making loans for the promotion of the city.
(Prior Code, § 24.01) (Ord. 2007-30, passed 9-21-2007; Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-
21-2010)
§ 34.46 DESIGNATION OF SURPLUS REVENUE.
   Previous contributions to the SIECRF fund had been made by the city, private
individuals and the State Community Foundation. Additional contributions may be
made to the fund by the city, at the discretion of the Common Council and the
city is authorized to accept donations to the fund from any private or public
source.
(Prior Code, § 24.02) (Ord. 2007-30, passed 9-21-2007)
§ 34.47 USE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Funds from SIECRF may be used for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   Loans and grants to organization and entities to which a
municipality may appropriate monies under the provisions of SDCL § 9-12-11;
      (2)   Loans and grants to the West River Revolving Loan Fund as
constituted and administered by the West River Foundation;
      (3)   Any other lawful public purpose as determined by the Common
Council, from time to time, for the promotion of the city; and
      (4)   For loans to private persons and entities according to the criteria
established pursuant to §
34.50.
   (B)   Any repayment of loans made and any interest earned shall be receipted
into the SIECRF and all money in the fund is hereby appropriated for the
purposes of making loans and expenditures as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24.03) (Ord. 2007-30, passed 9-21-2007)
§ 34.48 STANDING COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a standing committee to be known as the city’s
Industrial Expansion Corporation Revolving Fund (SIECRF) Committee for the
purpose of:
   (A)   Providing technical assistance in the completion of application
documents to applicants for a SIECRF loan;
   (B)   Providing consultation and recommendations to the Common Council
regarding individual SIECRF loan applications and requests for loan services
for use by the Common Council in the review, evaluation and decision-making
thereon; and
   (C)   To monitor outstanding SIECRF loans.
(Prior Code, § 24.04) (Ord. 2007-30, passed 9-21-2007)
§ 34.49 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; MEETINGS.
   (A)   Appointment of members. Appointment of members of the SEDRF Committee
and establishment of the terms of service of members of the SEDRF Committee
shall be made by the Mayor and ratified by the Common Council. The Committee
shall consist of six members, as follows:
      (1)   The Mayor or a designee of the Mayor;
      (2)   One representative from the City Council;
      (3)   Two representatives from city’s Economic Development Corporation;
      (4)   Two representatives from city banks or credit unions. No more than
one representative from one bank shall be allowed to serve upon the Committee
at any one time; and
      (5)   A city official.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   The SEDRF Committee shall meet on an as needed basis.
      (2)   Following each meeting, a written record of said meeting shall be
prepared and forwarded to the Common Council for review and comment.
(Prior Code, § 24.05) (Ord. 2007-30, passed 9-21-2007; Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-
21-2010)
§ 34.50 CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND POLICIES; EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Eligibility requirements. Any for profit and nonprofit business that
is a commercial or light industrial business creating new and/or additional
jobs, which will result in more employment opportunities in the city area, will
be eligible to apply for a loan from SEDRF.
   (B)   Use of funds. Proceeds from a SEDRF loan shall be used only for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Business and industrial acquisitions when the loan will keep the
business from closing, prevent the loss of employment opportunities or provide
expanded job opportunities;
      (2)   Business construction, conversion, enlargement, repair,
modernization or development;
      (3)   Purchase and development of land, easements, rights-of-way,
buildings, facilities, leases or materials;
      (4)   Purchase of equipment, leasehold improvements, furniture, fixtures,
machinery or supplies;
      (5)   Working capital or the purchase of inventory;
      (6)   Pollution control and abatement;
      (7)   Transportation services;
      (8)   Start-up operating costs and working capital;
      (9)   Interest (including interest on interim financing) during the
period before the facility becomes income producing, but not to exceed three
years; and
      (10)   Feasibility studies.
   (C)   Targeting criteria. The SEDRF Committee will review, evaluate and make
decisions on each SEDRF application. The Committee shall consider the following
targeting criteria along with other factors deemed by the Committee appropriate
with each application.
      (1)   First priority shall be given to eligible applicants who are
existing commercial or light industrial businesses located in the city or
county, which propose to either expand or relocate to a more appropriate
location in the city or county.
      (2)   Second priority shall be given to eligible applicants that propose
to relocate an existing commercial or light industrial business to the city or
county from an area outside the Northern Black Hills of South Dakota.
      (3)   Third priority shall be given to eligible applicants who propose a
start-up commercial or light industrial business in the city or county.
   (D)   Financing policies. The following financing policies shall direct the
SEDRF Committee in its review, evaluation and decision making process on SEDRF
applications:
   (E)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Loan requests that meet the criteria as identified in §
34.47, that are creating employment opportunities and/or saving existing jobs
will be eligible to receive consideration for SEDRF loan funds. To be eligible,
at least one job must be saved or created for every amount as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution of SEDRF loan proceeds used for real
estate purposes. For non-real estate purposes, at least one job must be saved
or created for every amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution in SEDRF loan proceeds. This standard may be waived by the SEDRF
Committee at the time of application approval, if the project presents an
unusual opportunity or set of unique circumstances for promotion of the city.
      (2)   Applicants shall demonstrate through appropriate documentation that
a SEDRF loan is justified on the basis of either a financing gap that precludes
the project form moving forward to completion without such a loan, or that
there exists an unacceptable rate of return on investment based upon market
investment interest rates.
      (3)   Subject to the limit continued in division (E)(1) above, the
maximum amount of SIEC revolving funds loaned to single applicant shall be the
minimum amount needed to move the project forward to completion in light of
other public and private financing sources available as determined by the SEDRF
Committee.
      (4)   Amortization for repayment of SEDRF loans will be based on the
minimum needs of the applicant, the recapitalization needs of the SEDRF, and
the collateral requirements of the loan. The SEDRF Committee shall have the
discretion to set the loan terms and amortization. Loans may be limited to a
maximum of 20 years for land, buildings and permanent fixtures; 15 years for
machinery or equipment (or the useful life of the machinery and equipment,
whichever is less); and seven years for working capital. All loans shall have a
balloon payment as determined by the SEDRF Committee.
   (5)   The interest rate of a SEDRF loan shall be structured on a case by
case basis and will be determined by the SEDRF Committee based upon the minimum
needs of the applicant and the recapitalization needs of the SEDRF.
      (6)   Applicant equity shall be based upon a combination of the total
financial position of the applicant and the equity in the funded project.
      (7)   SEDRF loans shall be collateralized by fixed assets of the
applicant as determined by the SEDRF Committee. The valuation of such assets
shall be of reasonable documented value as determined by the SEDRF Committee
and by such additional collateral as may be required by the SEDRF. The
preferred minimum security position for a SEDRF loan shall be a second mortgage
or security interest, as the case may be, upon the loan collateral. In the
event the SEDRF applicant cannot provide a minimum second position security
position due to factors, such as S.B.A. financing or other financing, the SEDRF
loan application may be approved with a security position inferior to a second
position; provided, however, that the SEDRF applicant shall provide such
additional collateral (including, but not limited to, assignment of life
insurance proceeds) and/or such co-signatures and/or such personal guaranties
as may be required by the SEDRF Committee to provide for a reasonable credit
risk.
      (8)   A SEDRF loan origination fee may be levied in a maximum amount
equal to 1% of the loan amount plus the actual amount of any and all settlement
costs and fees incurred by the SEDRF for the processing, approval and closing
of the loan.
      (9)   Subject to the provisions of division (E)(5) above, restructuring
or modification of the terms of a SEDRF loan shall be considered on a case by
case basis by the SEDRF Committee as needed.
   (F)   Application and review process. Application for a SEDRF loan shall be
made on forms available from the SEDRF Committee. Applicants will submit a
completed application and all supporting financial documentation to the SEDRF
Committee, who shall review the application for completeness and shall notify
the applicant what further or additional information is required from the
applicant, if any, before the Committee will declare the application complete.
Upon the Committee declaring the application complete, the Committee shall
review the application and shall, within 45 days thereafter, make a
recommendation to the City Council for approval or denial of the application or
request additional information from the applicant. The City Council shall,
within 15 days of the date of the Committee recommendation to the City Council,
either approve or deny the application. No application shall be declared
complete unless it includes the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Names, addresses, resumes and references of owner, investors and
management of the business;
      (3)   Articles of incorporation and bylaws or other agreements that
describe the legal operation or structure of the business;
      (4)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the business during
the term of the loan;
      (5)   A business plan which contains information regarding the products
or services to be offered by the applicant; new jobs to be created; job
descriptions with attendant salary or wage information by job category;
educational requirements by job category; methods of accounting, financing,
marketing, sales and merchandising; and other disciplines proposed to be used
for business growth and expansion;
      (6)   Letters of commitment from all participating commercial and or
public funding sources;
      (7)   Up to three years of historical balance sheets, cash flow
statements, income statements and federal income tax returns as are applicable
to the individual loan application;
      (8)   Pro forma balance sheets, cash flow statements for the term of the
loan, or for a period of three years, whichever is less;
      (9)   A statement of licensing requirements;
      (10)   Assurance of compliance with local zoning laws and building codes,
and that the necessary public utilities are available or will be available when
needed by the project;
      (11)   Approximate date construction will commence, construction
completion date and the date by which the project will be fully operational;
       (12)   Documentation that the preliminary design stage has been
completed;
      (13)   Any other information as required by the City Council or SEDRF
Committee in order to make a sound loan decision; and
      (14)   All schedules A through M, as defined in the application beginning
on page 20.
   (G)   Approval of applications. In the event an application is approved by
the City Council, the city and the applicant shall execute such agreements and
documents as necessary, which shall provide the rights and responsibilities of
all parties and the terms and conditions of the loan. SEDRF loan documentation
shall be provided by the city’s designated loan servicing agent at that time.
   (H)   Commitment. There shall be no commitment of a SEDRF loan without the
specific resolution of the City Council, notwithstanding any assurance,
guarantee, communication or representation to the contrary.
   (I)   Confidentiality. The application and supporting documents submitted to
the SEDRF Committee and the City Council shall be the property of the city. To
the extent permitted by law, said documents shall be handled by the Committee
and the city in a confidential manner.
   (J)   Servicing SEDRF loans. SEDRF loans shall be repaid in accordance with
loan documentation provided by and serviced by the city’s designated loan
servicing agent at that time.
   (K)   Modifications. In the event that the borrower requests any
modification or change of any loan term or condition, including, without
limitation, variations in security position, insurance requirements, payment
dates or amounts, or the like, or if there arises a need for management of
insurance proceeds in the event of damage or loss or such other insurable
event, the borrower shall notify the then acting Chairperson of the SEDRF
Committee and the loan servicing request shall be handled on an as-needed, case
by case basis by the Committee. Any and all changes in loan terms or conditions
of any kind whatsoever, and any disbursement of insurance proceeds requiring
city approval by the terms of the loan or the insurance policy, shall be
considered by the Committee and submitted to the City Council for action upon
Committee recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 24.06) (Ord. 2007-30, passed 9-21-2007; Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-
21-2010)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed
by §§
34.25 through
34.32 and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and
collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized
by SDCL Chapter 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL Chapter 10-46, and
acts amendatory thereto are hereby authorized for the collection of these
excise taxes by the Department of Revenue and Regulation.
(Prior Code, § 20.01.03) (Ord. 2005-16, passed 11-11-2005)
CHAPTER 35: PROPRIETARY INFORMATION
Section
   
35.01   Proprietary information
§ 35.01 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   The terms of any contract for the lease of city property or space of any
kind, the information contained in the vendor database, and the terms of any
contract for emergency, health or professional services provided by the city
through its employees are hereby determined to be confidential trade secret and
proprietary information, as defined by SDCL §§ 1-27-1.5 and 1-27-1.6. To
protect the public interest in such municipal information, it must not be
disclosed or released without authorization by resolution of the City Council.
Furthermore, the terms of price, rates and/or fees charged, and the allocation
of all expenses contained in any marketing or sponsorship contract of any kind
entered into by the city, are hereby determined to be confidential trade secret
and proprietary information, as defined by SDCL §§ 1-27-1.5 and 1-27-1.6,
respectively, and it must not be disclosed or released without authorization by
resolution of the City Council. This classification of confidential trade
secret and proprietary information ceases 36 months after expiration of the
relationship between the city and the other party(s) to the contract containing
the information.
(Prior Code, § 7.07.01) (Ord. 2010-15, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-16, passed
12-5-2012; Ord. 2014-07, passed 6-4-2014)
CHAPTER 36: BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Purpose and authority
Downtown Improvement District
   
36.15   Establishment
   
36.16   Downtown Business Improvement District Board
   
36.17   Duties of the Board
   
36.18   Boundaries
   
36.19   Special assessments
   
36.20   Exemptions
Hotel and Motel Improvement District
   
36.35   Establishment
   
36.36   Boundaries
   
36.37   Hotel and Motel Business Improvement District Board
   
36.38   Duties of the Board
   
36.39   Vote allocation
   
36.40   Hotel and Motel Business Improvement District occupancy tax
   
36.41   Occupancy tax assessment
   
36.42   Licenses and account charge
   
36.43   Enforcement and remedies
   
36.44   Reporting occupancy tax
 
   
36.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, as allowed by SDCL Chapter 9-55, is authorized to by
resolution to create one or more Business Improvement Districts within the
city. The purpose of the authorizing resolution shall be to create a collective
funding method to provide a portion or all of the funding needed for proposed
future public events, public activities, beautification efforts, economic
development efforts and activities and all other uses for such funding as
permitted by SDCL § 9-55-3. Each such resolution leading to the establishment
of a district shall state the purpose and funding mechanism, if any, and other
required elements to fully establish the district.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.01) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
DOWNTOWN IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 36.15 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Downtown Business Improvement District is created for the purpose
of a collective contribution funding for a portion or all of the future
proposed public events, public activities, beautification efforts and promotion
of the District as allowed by SDCL Chapter 9-55 which encourages economic
development within the District.
   (B)   All expenditures of the Downtown Business Improvement District funds
shall be for events, public activities, beautification efforts, unique economic
development activities and promotions of the District that occur within the
Downtown Business Improvement District. The Downtown Business Improvement
District funds shall be collected by the city, deposited into a separate fund
and distributed to a qualified I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) which will complete the
activities described in the annual adopted city budget to carry out the
purposes described within this chapter. Funds collected from this assessment
may not be used to host, promote or staff the annual Motorcycle Rally, nor may
they be used for the benefit of an individual business.
(Prior Code, § 26.02.01) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017; Ord. 2021-01, passed
7-5-2021)
§ 36.16 DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOARD.
   There is hereby established a Downtown Business Improvement District Board.
   (A)   Composition. The Board consists of at least five but not more than
seven owners of property within the Business Improvement District. The Mayor
appoints to the Board with the advice and consent of the Common Council. For
the purpose of this section, a PROPERTY OWNER includes:
      (1)   An officer or director of a corporate property owner;
      (2)   A manager or member of a limited liability company that owns
property;
      (3)   A partner of a partnership that owns property; and
      (4)   A representative appointed by a property owner.
   (B)   Terms. Upon initial appointment, three members must be appointed for
two-year terms, and two members must be appointed for one-year terms.
Thereafter, all members of the Board must be appointed to serve a two-year
term. A member of the Board may serve more than one term.
   (C)   Vacancies. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Common
Council may appoint a qualified individual to fill any vacancy for the
remainder of the term vacated.
   (D)   Officers. The Board shall annually select from its members a Chair and
Secretary.
   (E)   Compensation. All members of the Board shall serve without
compensation, except for actual expenses, which is subject to approval of the
Common Council.
(Prior Code, § 26.02.02) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017; Ord. 2023-03, passed
5-2-2023)
§ 36.17 DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Downtown Business Improvement Board shall review the activities funded
through the assessment and make annual recommendations to the City Council for
use of the funds. The Board’s recommendation shall be made no later than May 15
of each year. The Board shall meet at least twice per year after January to
discuss previous years’ expenditures and to recommend a budget for the
following year. Should a property owner wish to call for a special meeting, the
property owner must submit a written request to the City Finance Officer at
least seven days in advance of the proposed date of the special meeting.
Thereafter, the City Finance Officer shall give notice to other Board members
of the date, time and location of the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 26.02.03) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.18 BOUNDARIES.
   The Downtown Business Improvement District shall include all business
property within the area located north of Sherman Street and south of Dudley
Street to and including properties fronting Lazelle Street, all business
properties located west of Middle Street and east of Fourth Street, and all
business properties fronting on Middle Street or on Fourth Street.
(Prior Code, § 26.02.04) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.19 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   The real property in the district shall be subject to an annual
special assessment based upon the special benefit to the property within the
district as authorized by SDCL § 9-55-2.
   (B)   The special assessment shall be fair and equitable as required by SDCL
§ 9-55-7. The rate of each special assessment shall be determined pursuant to
SDCL § 9-55-13 based upon the following formula.
      (1)   For property located within the Business Improvement District, the
property shall be assessed an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution per linear foot of the property’s street frontage (it shall not
include frontage along alleyways).
      (2)   The assessments shall be subject to adjustment by the City Common
Council by resolution as provided in SDCL Chapter 9-55.
(Prior Code, § 26.02.05) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017; Ord. 2021-01, passed
7-5-2021)
§ 36.20 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following real property is exempt from taxation or assessment under this
chapter:
   (A)   All real property which is exempt from taxation under SDCL Chapter 10-
4, except those properties identified under §
36.36;
   (B)   Owner occupied residential property;
   (C)   Property used solely for residential uses;
   (D)   Property used as a place of worship;
   (E)   Property used by a school district and/or the county;
   (F)   Hospital property; and
   (G)   City property located within the District boundaries shall not be
exempt. The city shall pay an assessment consistent with the linear calculation
of each property located within the Business Improvement District.
(Prior Code, § 26.02.06) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017; Ord. 2021-01, passed
7-5-2021)
HOTEL AND MOTEL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 36.35 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Hotel and Motel Business Improvement District is established for the
purpose of providing funding for a portion or all of the cost of future
proposed public events, public activities, promotion of the District or other
permitted uses as allowed by SDCL Chapter 9-55. Any expenditures of the Hotel
and Motel Business Improvement District funds shall be for events, public
activities, beautification efforts, promotion of the District, economic
development and other uses approved by SDCL § 9-55-3. Funds collected from this
assessment may not be used to directly promote or staff the annual Motorcycle
Rally, nor may they be used solely for the benefit of an individual business
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.01) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.36 BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The boundaries of the District shall consist of the following Zoning
Districts, as shown on the official zoning map of the city on file in the City
Finance Office:
      (1)   General Commercial District (GC-1);
      (2)   Retail Commercial District (GC-2);
      (3)   Single Family Residential/Office Commercial District (GC-3); and
      (4)   Highway Service (HS-1).
   (B)   Any bed and breakfast or similar use, as described in §
36.40, shall be exempt from any occupancy tax established by this subchapter.
Included within the District at the date of enactment are:
      (1)   Best Western, 2431 South Junction Avenue;
      (2)   Holiday Inn Express, 2721 Lazelle Street;
      (3)   Days Inn, 2630 Lazelle Street;
      (4)   Super 8, 2600 Whitewood Service Road;
      (5)   Junction Inn, 1802 Junction Avenue; and
      (6)   South Pine Motel, 1051 Park Street.
   (C)   Any hotel, motel or lodging establishment which are built, constructed
or established within the defined boundaries of the District after the date of
passage of this subchapter shall automatically become subject to the occupancy
tax established herein.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.02) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.37 HOTEL AND MOTEL BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOARD.
   There is hereby created a Hotel and Motel Business Improvement District
Board. The Board shall consist of all qualified owners or managers of hotel or
motel property within the boundaries of the Hotel and Motel Business
Improvement District. The bylaws of the Board shall be provided by the city and
maintained on file at the City Finance Office. To qualify as a hotel or motel
property, the subject property must meet the definition of SDCL § 10-45D-1(1)
as a lodging establishment, and shall be located within the boundaries of the
District, or, if outside the District, a property operated in compliance with
all city ordinances as a legal non-conforming pre-existing use.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term QUALIFIED OWNER
shall be defined as the following:
      (1)   An officer or director of a corporate property owner, as designated
by a written corporate resolution;
      (2)   A manager or member of a limited liability company that owns
property, as allowed by the bylaws or management agreement of that company;
      (3)   A partner of a partnership that owns property, as designated by
written action of the partnership; or
      (4)   A representative appointed by a written grant of agency by a
qualified property owner.
   (B)   Officers. The Board shall annually select from its members a Chair and
Secretary.
   (C)    Compensation. All members of the Board shall serve as such without
compensation, except for actual expenses. Any reimbursement may only be as
allowed by Board bylaws and requires approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.03) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.38 DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The Hotel and Motel Business Improvement Board shall meet at least
once per calendar quarter, and more frequently as necessary to fulfill its
duties. The Board shall review any past activities, events or improvements
which have received municipal funding and make an annual recommendation to the
City Council for use of funds through an appropriation in the upcoming annual
city budget. The Board shall meet at least twice between January 1 and May 31
of each calendar year to develop and prepare, in a format acceptable to the
City Finance Office, its budget recommendation for the following year. The
Board’s recommendation shall be made no later than July 15 of each year. Any
recommendations received after that time will be considered for the next
following annual city budget.
   (B)   Should a qualified hotel or motel property owner within the District
boundaries wish to call for a special meeting of the Board, the property owner
must submit a written request to the City Finance Officer at least seven days
in advance of the proposed date of the special meeting. Thereafter, the City
Finance Office shall give notice to other Board members of the date, time and
locations of the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.04) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.39 VOTE ALLOCATION.
   The proportionate vote of a Board member shall be established at one vote
for the first 25 lease rooms available to the public, and an additional vote
for each portion of 25 additional available lease rooms at the qualified
property. The vote allocation of the Board members shall be as follows.
Baymont Inn      84 (4 votes)
Best Western     55 (3 votes)
Days Inn         53 (3 votes)
Hotel Sturgis    22 (1 votes)
South Pine Motel 9 (1 votes)
Sturgis Motel    29 (1 votes)
Super 8          58 (3 votes)
TOTAL:           310 (16 votes)
 
(Prior Code, § 26.03.05) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017; Ord. 2021-01, passed
7-5-2021)
§ 36.40 HOTEL AND MOTEL BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT OCCUPANCY TAX.
   (A)   An occupational tax in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution per night shall be imposed upon transient guests based
upon rooms rented or providing any revenue or consideration to any of the above
hotels, motels or lodging establishments. This occupation tax shall be fair,
equitable and uniform as to class. This tax rate shall be subject to
establishment and adjustment by the City Council during its annual approval and
passage of the Budget Ordinance, upon consideration of the recommendation by
the Hotel and Motel Business Improvement District Board.
   (B)   The tax shall not apply to bed and breakfast facilities serving nine
or fewer guests, state licensed campgrounds, other legal campgrounds within the
city or private residences leased for guest sleeping accommodations for 15 or
fewer days annually.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.06) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.41 OCCUPANCY TAX ASSESSMENT.
   The City Finance Officer is authorized and directed to determine and compute
the tax in accordance with this subchapter. The occupancy tax assessed pursuant
to the terms of this subchapter shall be remitted by the twentieth day of each
month to the City Finance Office for the occupancy tax assessed and owning from
the previous calendar month. Each hotel, motel or lodging establishment subject
to this subchapter shall keep accurate records of amounts collected from
transient guests for review by the City Finance Office or its designee,
pursuant to this subchapter. The City Finance Office or its designee shall be
authorized and entitled to audit the books, ledgers, daily sales and/or
occupancy reports, or franchise reports of any hotel, motel or lodging
establishment subject to the terms of this subchapter so as to ensure that the
occupancy tax to be collected by said hotels, motels and lodging establishments
are properly remitted to the city. In addition to all penalties described
herein for a violation of this subchapter, the city shall be entitled to seek
injunctive relief and/or any legal remedy available to it against any hotel,
motel or lodging establishment which does not remit the properly remit all tax
monies when due, pursuant to this subchapter and the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.07) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.42 LICENSES AND ACCOUNT CHARGE.
   All remittances of the occupancy tax collected pursuant to this subchapter
shall be paid to the City Finance Office on or before the twentieth day of the
month following the month for which the occupancy tax was to be collected. All
amounts that are not received on or before the twentieth day of the month will
be charged a late fee in the amount of 1% of the total amount due with a
minimum fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. Failure
to pay such tax shall also constitute a violation of this subchapter for each
day for which it is unpaid, which may be punishable by a fine as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. In the event of any civil or
criminal action being filed seeking collection of any delinquent assessments,
the offending hotel, motel or lodging establishment shall be responsible for
and shall pay all attorneys’ fees and costs incurred by the city in seeking
enforcement under the terms of this subchapter. Any unpaid balance under this
subchapter shall constitute a lien upon the property upon which the hotel,
motel or lodging establishment is operated, and shall become a lien against and
shall run with the property and may be enforced and collected in the same
manner as other unpaid real property taxes and assessments. The City Finance
Office shall certify all unpaid amounts or balances to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. In
addition, the city may deny the issuance of any permit or license applicable to
that property, or any renewals thereof, to any such establishment or operator
that fails to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, including, but not
limited to, building permits, malt beverage licenses and/or liquor licenses.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.08) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.43 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   Nothing within this chapter of this subchapter shall be construed as
limiting of any other rights which the city has, or may pursue in seeking
collection of monies received but not paid under the terms of this subchapter.
All potential penalties as set forth in §
36.99 shall be applicable to any violation of this chapter. In the event that
this tax becomes subject to supervision by the state through the State
Department of Revenue, any right of enforcement on behalf of the city shall be
deemed cumulative to any powers which inure to the benefit of the state.
(Prior Code, § 26.03.09) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.44 REPORTING OCCUPANCY TAX.
   Any business governed by this subchapter shall include in its monthly
report, in a format approved by the City Finance Office, a signed and sworn
statement to verify the accuracy and truthfulness of the calculation and
remittance of all tax imposed by this subchapter on or before the twentieth day
of each month. Said statement shall include the following:
 
I declare, under penalty of perjury, that I have knowledge of the business income, revenue and
accounting of this property, subject to the Sturgis Hotel Motel Occupancy Tax, that the above
accounting of rooms leased or rented is accurate and complete and the tax payment made herein is
accurate and complete according to the business records of the hotel or motel providing this tax
report.
 
Signed                    Date                            
 
Title                         
 
(Prior Code, § 26.03.10) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the general
penalty provision of SDCL § 22-6-2, for a violation of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
In addition, the city may seek to enjoin the actions of any person or operation
which violate the provisions of this chapter. Each day for which a person is in
violation of any provision of this chapter may constitute a separate offense.
The city may also impose and enforce any penalty for a violation of this
chapter under the provision of
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 26.01.02) (Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-31-2017)
CHAPTER 37: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Scope and purpose
   
37.02   Definitions
Authority
   
37.15   General enforcement authority
   
37.16   Authority to inspect
Citations
   
37.30   Administrative citations
   
37.31   Administrative citations procedure
   
37.32   Administrative citations penalties assessed
   
37.33   Failure to appeal or pay administrative citation penalties
   
37.34   Civil penalties; list
   
37.35   Civil penalties; amount
   
37.36   Remedies not exclusive
   
37.37   Filing a complaint for enforcement
   
37.38   Courtesy letter/notice of violation
   
37.39   Notice of complaint
   
37.40   Abatement or filing of review required within 15 days
   
37.41   Immediate abatement required in certain cases
   
37.42   Issuance of summons and complaint for violation
   
37.43   Landowner responsible for any costs
Appeal
   
37.55   Appeal permitted
   
37.56   Time of hearing and notice
   
37.57   Hearing procedures
   
37.58   Rights of parties at hearing
   
37.59   Decision
   
37.60   Report, costs
   
37.61   Subject to judicial review
 
   
37.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The enforcement of this code is an important public service and is vital to
the protection of the public’s health, safety and welfare. The city has
determined that there is a need for alternative methods of comprehensive code
enforcement using both administrative and judicial remedies, and because life-
safety issues may be regulated through an administrative enforcement process,
penalties for any violation should be enhanced. The purpose of this chapter is
to establish administrative regulations for the enforcement of this code in
order to properly protect the public’s health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 36.01.01) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES. Administrative citations and civil
penalties as contained in this chapter.
   CIVIL PENALTY. The administrative civil penalty assessed and all costs
incurred by the city from the first discovery of the violations until
compliance is achieved. It includes, but is not limited to, staff time and
expense in inspecting the property, sending notices and preparing reports and
files.
   CODE. The City of Sturgis Code of Ordinances.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any city employee or agent of the city designated
by the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this chapter and
issue notice of violations or administrative citations.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any person or persons in charge of the premises or
location, or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident, and
includes any of the following:
       (1)   The person or persons who own the property where the violation
exists;
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the premises where the violation
exists;
      (3)   The person or persons using or renting the premises when the
violation exists;
      (4)   If any of the above is a minor, a parent or guardian of such minor
shall be the responsible party; and
      (5)   If any of the above is a business entity, the manager or on-site
supervisor where the violation exists.
   ROLLING 12-MONTH PERIOD. Any 12 consecutive months following a violation.
(Prior Code, § 36.01.02) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
AUTHORITY
§ 37.15 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   For the purpose of this chapter, any Code Enforcement Officer may issue
notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private
property and enforce any available administrative and judicial remedies.
(Prior Code, § 36.02.01) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.16 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   Any Code Enforcement Officer may enter upon any property and make any
examination and surveys necessary to perform their enforcement duties.
Inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical
evidence. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to enter to
inspect, the Code Enforcement Officer may seek an administrative inspection
warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for state law.
(Prior Code, § 36.02.02) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
CITATIONS
§ 37.30 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of the code for which a civil
penalty may be assessed may be issued an administrative citation by a Code
Enforcement Officer as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   A continuing violation of the code constitutes a separate and distinct
violation each day that the violation exists.
   (C)   A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative
citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly
to the city.
   (D)   Penalties assessed by an administrative citation shall be collected in
accordance with the schedule of civil penalties.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.01) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.31 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A Code Enforcement Officer may issue an administrative citation to a
responsible party as described in this chapter. The citation shall be on forms
approved by the city.
   (B)   If the responsible party is not an individual, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall attempt to issue the owner an administrative citation. If the
owner cannot be located, the administrative citation may be issued in the name
of the entity and given to a manager or on-site supervisor. A copy of the
administrative citation shall also be mailed to the owner.
   (C)   The responsible party shall sign the administrative citation. If the
responsible party refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the
failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation.
   (D)   If the Code Enforcement Officer cannot locate a responsible party, the
administrative citation may be mailed to the responsible party.
    (E)   If no one can be located at the property, the administrative citation
may be posted in a conspicuous place near the property and a copy subsequently
mailed to the responsible party. In the case of mailing, the city shall mail
the citation by certified mail to the address of the owner of the property at
the address listed in the office of the County Director of Equalization, and
such action by the city shall meet any notice requirement of this chapter.
   (F)   The failure of any responsible party to receive notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.02) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.32 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS PENALTIES ASSESSED.
   (A)   Any civil penalties assessed shall be payable to the city within 20
days from the date of the administrative citation.
   (B)   Payment of the civil penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
   (C)   If the responsible party fails to correct the violation, subsequent
administrative citations may be issued for the same violations. The amount of
the civil penalty shall increase at a rate specified in ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.03) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.33 FAILURE TO APPEAL OR PAY ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PENALTIES.
   The failure of any person to file a timely appeal or pay the civil penalties
within the time specified on the citation shall constitute an irrebuttable
presumption that a violation has occurred. It may result in the City Attorney
filing legal proceedings in magistrate or circuit court. Alternatively, the
city may pursue any other legal remedy available to collect the civil penalty
or correct the violation.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.04) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.34 CIVIL PENALTIES; LIST.
   The following schedule lists the code provisions for which civil penalties
may be cited under this chapter, although criminal enforcement is not
prohibited:
   (A)   
Chapter 150, Building Regulations;
   (B)   
Chapter 50, Health and Sanitation;
   (C)   
Chapter 91, Temporary Camping at a Residence Within the City;
   (D)   
Chapter 94, Nuisances;
   (E)   
Chapter 151, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways;
   (F)   Title VII, Traffic Code, specifically those provisions in regard to
parking and storage of and within vehicles;
   (G)   
Chapter 156, Zoning;
   (H)   
Chapter 154, Subdivision;
   (I)   
Chapter 152, City Beautification and Regulation of Advertising;
   (J)   
Chapter 113, Licensing of Temporary Businesses; and
   (K)   
Chapter 92, Animals; and
   (L)   
Chapter 93, Hobby Beekeeping.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.05) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.35 CIVIL PENALTIES; AMOUNT.
   The civil penalties within any rolling 12-month period shall be as set forth
in the city’s annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.06) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.36 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to other legal
remedies established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the
code. The use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.07) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.37 FILING A COMPLAINT FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, in the event any city
representative receives a complaint, either orally or in writing, of a city
ordinance violation, he or she shall forward the complaint to the Code
Enforcement Officer. As part of the investigation, the person making the
complaint shall provide the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the person making said complaint;
      (2)   Address of the property for which the complaint is being filed; and
      (3)   Nature of the complaint.
   (B)   After obtaining the necessary information from the complainant, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall investigate as necessary based upon the nature
of the complaint.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.08) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.38 COURTESY LETTER/NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, in the event the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that any violation exists, the city shall send a courtesy letter/
notice of violation to the property owner. The letter shall state the
following:
   (A)   Name and address of the property owner;
   (B)   Address and legal description of the property in violation;
   (C)   Nature of the violation;
   (D)   Title, chapter and section violated;
   (E)   Demand that the property owner become compliant; and
   (F)   The date upon which the representative will inspect the property for
compliance.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.09) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.39 NOTICE OF COMPLAINT.
   In the event the Code Enforcement Officer concludes that a violation does
not exist, the Code Enforcement Officer shall send a letter to the complainant
within 15 days of advising him or her of said determination.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.10) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.40 ABATEMENT OR FILING OF REVIEW REQUIRED WITHIN 15 DAYS.
   Any person who has received written notification of an existing violation
shall either abate said nuisance or file a written notice of review with the
Code Enforcement Officer within 15 days of receipt of the courtesy letter/
notice of violation. A complaint of a second or subsequent ordinance violation
subject to this chapter at the same property shall reduce the notice period
established herein to seven days. Thereafter, the administrative citation may
be immediately issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.11) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.41 IMMEDIATE ABATEMENT REQUIRED IN CERTAIN CASES.
   (A)   Ordinance violations involving subjects, such as, but not limited to,
bonfires, campfires, dead animals, undressed hides, fireworks, depositing
filth, spoiled foods or similar circumstances which are determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be an immediate threat to public health and safety,
shall be abated immediately, unless otherwise directed by the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to interfere with the city’s
authority to immediately abate a nuisance that has been determined by the city
to be an immediate threat to public health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.12) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.42 ISSUANCE OF SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT FOR VIOLATION.
   If the landowner fails to abate the nuisance or request a review from the
city within the given time, the city may issue a complaint and summons to the
landowner ordering the landowner to appear in court to answer said violation.
Each violation may also be prosecuted as a Class 2 misdemeanor for each day of
violation until the nuisance is abated.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.13) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.43 LANDOWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY COSTS.
   Any related expenses, receipts and administrative, legal and/or
investigative fees shall be billed to the landowner. The Code Enforcement
Officer that conducted the investigation shall have the authority to employ a
contractor to assist with said abatement. In the event the landowner fails to
pay said bill within 30 days of notice sent of those costs, the City Finance
Officer shall add those costs to any utility, sewer or garbage service bill
owed by the property owner. In addition, the City Finance Officer may file a
special assessment as a lien on the property with the County Auditor’s Office.
(Prior Code, § 36.03.14) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
APPEAL
§ 37.55 APPEAL PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a citation issued by any Code Enforcement
Officer under this chapter may appeal said citation to the City Council. Before
filing an appeal, the aggrieved person is strongly encouraged to meet with the
city to discuss why the person believes the citation was issued in error. If
unresolved, the appeal may be commenced.
   (B)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the city.
There shall be a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution
assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the city at the time of
filing the notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall include a statement of
the action complained of, why the same should be modified or rescinded, an
address where the appellant can be mailed notice of hearings and a copy of the
citation issued. Upon receipt of the appeal documents, the Finance Officer
shall deliver a copy of the appeal to the City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.01) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.56 TIME OF HEARING AND NOTICE.
   A public hearing shall be held on all appeals within 45 working days after
the filing of the appeal, unless a later date is agreed upon by the aggrieved
person and the city. The city shall cause written notice of the date, time and
place of such hearing to be served upon the aggrieved person by personal
service or certified mail to the address set forth in the appeal documents at
least ten days prior to the hearing. The appeal shall be scheduled on the
agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council for a period of at
least 30 minutes unless otherwise directed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.02) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.57 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The following rules shall govern the procedures for an administrative
hearing.
   (A)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according to
the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (B)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted, if it is the type of evidence
upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely, in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission for such evidence after objection in civil
actions in courts or competent jurisdiction in this state.
   (C)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence that lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.03) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.58 RIGHTS OF PARTIES AT HEARING.
   The aggrieved person and the city shall have these rights among others:
   (A)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue of
the hearing;
   (B)   To introduce documentary, physical and oral evidence;
   (C)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
   (D)   To rebut evidence.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.04) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.59 DECISION.
   After each appeal hearing, the Council shall consider the evidence in
executive session and may state its decision when it has concluded the
executive session. In addition, the Council shall provide written findings
stating the following:
   (A)   The evidence the City Council relied upon in reaching its decision;
and
   (B)   Based upon such written findings, the Council may sustain or dismiss
the citation or decision. In sustaining citation, the Council may in its
discretion reduce or waive the payment of any civil penalty, permit,
reinstatement or late penalty fee.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.05) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.60 REPORT, COSTS.
   A written report of the decision, including the findings, shall be furnished
to the aggrieved person and the city within 20 working days from the date the
appeal hearing is closed. The city and the aggrieved person shall bear their
own respective cost of the appeal proceeding. The decision of the City Council
shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.06) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010; Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-19-2014)
§ 37.61 SUBJECT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The decision of the Council may be subject to judicial review as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 36.04.07) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the authorized civil penalty is set forth
at §
37.35.
(Prior Code, § 36.01.03) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 7-1-2010)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; SEWERS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 50: HEALTH AND SANITATION; SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Scope and purpose
   
50.002   Definitions
   
50.003   Health Officer
Rubble Site and Dumping
   
50.015   Creation of rubble site
   
50.016   Duties and powers of Rubble Site Supervisor
   
50.017   Unlawful to dump certain materials
   
50.018   Removal restrictions
   
50.019   Fires at rubble site
   
50.020   Prohibited dumping
   
50.021   Rates for use of rubble site
   
50.022   Disposal of syringes or medical waste prohibited
   
50.023   Disposal of tires
Collection and Disposal of Garbage and Rubbish
   
50.035   Council may adopt system for collection and disposal
   
50.036   City collection system
   
50.037   Rates
   
50.038   Council authority over rates
   
50.039   Billing and failure to pay
   
50.040   Container regulations
   
50.041   Illegal disposal of waste
   
50.042   Placement of garbage cans and rubbish
   
50.043   Accumulation of garbage and rubbish
   
50.044   Compulsory and universal system
   
50.045   Hazardous or toxic waste not to be placed in any container for
collection
   
50.046   Special event sanitation fee
   
50.047   Billing and failure to pay
   
50.048   Appeal process
Disposal of Waste Materials Generated by Vendors
   
50.060   Application
   
50.061   Responsibility for disposal of cooking grease
   
50.062   Responsibility for disposal of graywater
   
50.063   Responsibility for disposal of leaking water supply lines
   
50.064   Medical and biohazardous waste
   
50.065   Responsibility for disposal of used motor oil
   
50.066   Application to oil changing operations
   
50.067   Used oil storage
Tattoo Artists
   
50.080   Definitions
   
50.081   License required for all tattoo and body piercing artists
   
50.082   Adoption of state statutes and regulations
   
50.083   Application for tattoo and body piercing license
   
50.084   Fee for tattoo and body piercing license and inspection
   
50.085   Duration of tattoo and body piercing license
   
50.086   Health inspection of the proposed premises of a tattoo and body
piercing licensee
   
50.087   Change of location of tattoo and body piercing license
   
50.088   Issuance, denial, suspension and/or revocation of tattoo and body
piercing licenses
   
50.089   Injunctive relief
   
50.090   Transfer prohibited of tattoo and body piercing license
   
50.091   Posting of tattoo and body piercing license
   
50.092   Refund of license fee
   
50.093   Required documentation of activities
Sewers
   
50.105   Unsanitary deposit prohibited
   
50.106   Discharge of wastewater in natural outlet prohibited
   
50.107   Prohibited construction and maintenance
   
50.108   Required installation and connection
   
50.109   Required capping of lines
   
50.110   On-site wastewater disposal
   
50.111   On-site wastewater disposal permit required
   
50.112   Application for on-site wastewater disposal permit
   
50.113   Fee for on-site wastewater disposal permit
   
50.114   Approval and inspection of on-site wastewater facility required
   
50.115   Required compliance
   
50.116   Public connection required when available
   
50.117   Sanitary maintenance required
   
50.118   Sewer tap permit required
   
50.119   Application for sewer tap permit
   
50.120   Fee for sewer tap permit
   
50.121   Costs and expenses incidental to connection
   
50.122   Separate sewer required for each building
   
50.123   Required building sewer specifications
   
50.124   Inspection and connection
   
50.125   Groundwater drainage prohibited
   
50.126   Unpolluted water drainage
   
50.127   Discharge of prohibited materials
   
50.128   Discharge allowed with limitation
   
50.129   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
50.130   Maintenance of pretreatment facilities
   
50.131   Structure required for industrial waste
   
50.132   Adoption of standard methods for the examination of water and
wastewater
   
50.133   Agreements for special circumstances
   
50.134   Powers and authority of Public Works Director
   
50.135   Sewer use charges
   
50.136   Billing and delinquent accounts
   
50.137   Protection from damage
   
50.138   Sump pump usage
   
50.139   Appeal process
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain materials and actions
within the city that raise an issue of health and sanitation. Said actions
include, but are not limited to, the dumping, disposal and collection of waste
materials, regulation of sewers and regulation of persons, businesses and
establishments that may pose a health and sanitation issue.
(Prior Code, § 11.01.01)
§ 50.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BODY PIERCING. Placement of a permanent or temporary foreign object in a
person’s body, such as ears, nose, lips, genitals, nipples or parts thereof for
decorative or other non-medical purpose by a person not directly under the
supervision of a licensed physician.
   BODY PIERCING AREA. Within a body piercing establishment, the immediate
vicinity where body piercing is performed.
   BODY PIERCING ARTIST. An adult (not a minor) who engages in the practice of
body piercing.
    BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT. The building or structure where body piercing
is practiced.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the interface of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also, commonly called the HOUSE CONNECTION.
   COLLECTOR OF REFUSE. Any person holding a license from the city to collect
garbage and rubbish as provided in this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USER. Any nonresident user who introduces only
sanitary sewage or primarily segregated domestic wastes into a building sewer.
Each multi-family or apartment house that contains 24 units or more shall be
considered a COMMERCIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USER.
   COMMUNICABLE DISEASE. A disease which is capable of being transmitted from
person to person.
   COOKING GREASE. The substance created by the melting of the fat of animals
and other waste that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change of
temperature conditions.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered FLOATABLE FAT if it is properly
pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
   GARBAGE. Cans, bottles, ashes, kitchen refuse and/or an accumulation of
animal and vegetable matter which attends the preparation, cooking and eating
of food, cans, bottles and ashes.
   GRAYWATER. Any water generated by a vendor that contains no human waste.
   HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC WASTE. Any pesticides, herbicides, insecticides or any
narcotic, drug, barbiturate or stimulant drug which is not permitted under
state law to be sold over the counter without prescription.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. The recovery by the city from the industrial users
of the city’s wastewater treatment system of the amount of federal grant money
used for the purpose of constructing wastewater facilities allocable to the
transportation and treatment of waste from such users.
    INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD. A period of 20 years starting at the time
of receipt of federal grant money used for the purpose of constructing
wastewater facilities during which the grant amount allocable to the treatment
of waste from industrial sewers is recovered from the industrial users of such
facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Any non-federal governmental users of the sewage works
under the following divisions and which contribute waste other than primarily
segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences:
      (1)   Division A: Agricultural, forestry and fishing;
      (2)   Division B: Mining;
      (3)   Division C: Manufacturing;
      (4)   Division D: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
      (5)   Division E: Services.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.   Any water-carried waste from industrial manufacturing or
industrial processing, including, but not limited to, any food processing and
bottling plant, food manufacturing plant, slaughtering plant, tallow works,
platting works, disposal services, industrial cleaning plant, fertilizer plant,
car and truck washing operation, laundry, cleaning establishment, cooling
plant, industrial plant and factories and chemical treatment installations.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE is distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MAJOR INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user that contributes greater than
50,000 gallons per day or contributes greater than 10% of the sewage flow on
any one given day.
   MINOR. A person who is under the age of 18 years.
   MINOR INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user not classified as a major
industrial user.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body or surface of
groundwater.
   OWNER or OCCUPANT. Any person using the lot, parcel of land, building or
premises connected to the discharging sewer into the sewage of the city, who
pays, or is legally responsible, for the payment of water rates or charges made
against said lot, parcel of land, building or premises if connected to the
sewage system.
   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has pH value of seven and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of ten to seven.
   PERMANENT BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT. A building where body piercing is
practiced on a year-round basis exceeding 30 consecutive days in a calendar
year.
   PRIMARILY SEGREGATED WASTE. Any sewage which is introduced into a building
sewer and which contains no more than 50% industrial waste, prior to any
intentional dilution.
    PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has shredded to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (one and twenty-seven
hundredths cm) in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
   RUBBISH. Any household and/or commercial unit waste other than garbage,
including paper, boxes, cartons, wastes from gardens and lawns, including
trimmings of trees, dead trees and tree branches not exceeding four feet in
length or six feet in diameter and all non-putrescible wastes, except any
material not considered to be rubbish by the Environmental Protection Agency
regulations.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried waste from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface waters that are
not admitted intentionally.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of the community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWER USE CHARGE. The monthly charge to all users of the wastewater
facilities which is based upon sewage volume, strength and/or flow.
   SHARPS. Needles, punches or any other single use item for piercing skin.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in connection of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer
than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows
during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   SPECIAL SEWER. Any sewer or storm drain constructed under the authority of
the city. The cost of which was not directly assessed as such SPECIAL SEWER by
resolution of the City Council.
   SPECIAL SEWER FEE. The fee established by resolution of the City Council to
be paid by any person upon issuance of a permit to be connected to a special
sewer.
   STORM DRAIN/STORM SEWER. A drain or sewer from conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Any total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater. Said substance is commonly referred to as
NON-FILTERABLE RESIDUE.
    TEMPORARY BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT. A building or structure where body
piercing is practiced for not more than 30 consecutive days in a calendar year.
   UNIT. Any single independent family unit, including individual apartments,
individual mobile homes and any type of business unit which has a permanent
location. Each separate office and/or business shall be deemed one separate
UNIT regardless of the number of units included in the same building. Each
motel, hotel, tourist court, church, school building and hospital shall be
deemed to be one separate UNIT, and any applicable charges shall be determined
by the rates herein set forth.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Any water of quality equal to or better than the affluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USED OIL. Any oil that has been refined from crude oil, or any synthetic
oil, that has been used and as a result of such use is contaminated by physical
or chemical impurities.
   USED OIL GENERATOR. Any person whose act or process produces used oil or
whose acts first causes used oil to become subject to regulation.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of the community. It may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried waste from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water and/or stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial waste and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devises and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge. Often used synonymously with
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or WASTE POLLUTION PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 11.01.02)
§ 50.003 HEALTH OFFICER.
   At the first meeting of the Council in the month of June of each year, there
may be recommended for appointment, by the city, a Health Officer. If
appointed, said officer shall hold office for a term of one year and perform
the duties of the office, subject to the supervision of the State Department of
Health and consistent with the ordinances and policies of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.02.01) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013)
RUBBLE SITE AND DUMPING
§ 50.015 CREATION OF RUBBLE SITE.
   The city shall provide a place or places, known as the rubble site, for the
deposit of rubbish materials as defined in this chapter. Any rubble material
shall be taken to and deposited in such place, in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter and any rules and regulations approved by the
City Council in accordance with the rules, regulations and statutes of the
state and the United States of America.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.01) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013)
§ 50.016 DUTIES AND POWERS OF RUBBLE SITE SUPERVISOR.
   The Public Works Director shall be the supervisor of operations at the
rubble site. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to direct the
disposal of the material hauled on or to said rubble site, and the Rubble Site
Supervisor shall generally be in charge of the rubble site. No material shall
be deposited in the rubble site without the approval and direction of the
Rubble Site Supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.02) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013)
§ 50.017 UNLAWFUL TO DUMP CERTAIN MATERIALS.
   The rubble site shall be used exclusively for the dumping or depositing of
materials, such as automobile bodies, appliances, building materials, grass,
iron, tree branches and other permitted materials. No domestic waste, hazardous
waste, loose paper or dead animals shall be deposited at the rubble site. It
shall be unlawful to dump any of the aforesaid materials or any materials not
permitted by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and the city’s
permit.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.03) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.018 REMOVAL RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed from
the rubble site, any article or material of any kind after the same has been
deposited therein, except by contract with the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.04) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.019 FIRES AT RUBBLE SITE.
   (A)   No burning shall take place at the rubble site unless approved by the
Rubble Site Supervisor and the City Fire Chief.
   (B)   All burning must be in compliance with the State Department of
Environment and Natural Resources requirements and other state, local and
federal laws and/or standards.
   (C)   To avoid potential false alarms for the Fire Department, the Rubble
Site Supervisor shall, on the day he or she intends to burn, contact the County
Dispatch Center and advice of the following:
      (1)   The name and phone number of the person to contact in case a
complaint is filed;
      (2)   The name and phone number of the person who will be on-site when
open flame is visible; and
      (3)   The duration in days if the burn is intended to last for several
days.
   (D)   Any person found guilty of starting a fire, whether intentional or
accidental at the rubble site without the permission of the Rubble Site
Supervisor and the Fire Chief shall be responsible for all fire suppression
costs and be punished for a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.05) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.020 PROHIBITED DUMPING.
   (A)   No person shall bury, burn or dump petroleum products of any type,
garbage or rubbish upon any street, alley, public or private place within the
city, within one mile of the limits of the city or outside of the rubble site
fence enclosure, unless authorized by city ordinance.
   (B)   No person shall transport within the city or upon the road from the
city to the rubble site any garbage, rubbish or building waste which is not
properly tied down or covered in such a manner as to prevent said materials
from spilling or blowing onto the road or other properties while being
transported.
   (C)   Any compostable materials must be delivered to the rubble site in
compostable bags or debagged and disposed of properly.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.06) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.021 RATES FOR USE OF RUBBLE SITE.
   (A)   Any city resident or water account holder who has paid all current
rates for the hauling of rubbish from within the city as set forth in this
subchapter, shall upon presentation of a copy of the utility bill and proof of
identity, be entitled to access to the rubble site for the purpose of
depositing rubble originating from a residence or a commercial unit within the
city, so long as the quantity of the rubble being hauled to the rubble site is
a pickup load or a smaller trailer containing no more than five yards.
    (B)   The fees for dumping material at the rubble site shall be a base rate
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per yard, and the
rate for containers shall be as follows.
      (1)   Per yard, for general rubble, white goods and asphalt shingles, the
charge shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
      (2)   Should the rubble site be able to charge by mass, the charge per
ton for general rubble, the fee per piece for white goods and the fee per ton
for asphalt shingles shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
   (C)   Starting January 1, 2014, the rubble site fees shall be reviewed
annually by the City Council during the budget ordinance approval process.
After the Council has passed the annual budget ordinance, it shall also adopt a
resolution establishing the changes, if any, in the foregoing rubble site rates
necessary to meet the revenue projections for the annual budget ordinance.
   (D)   The fees set forth above are based on container size, not by the
amount of rubbish in said container. If the size of the container is not listed
above, the size of the container shall be rounded up to the larger size as
determined by City Public Works staff and the appropriate fee shall be paid on
that size.
   (E)   Mobile home disposal may be permitted subject to inspection and
acceptance by Public Works Director or his or her designee. No mobile home or
similar prefabricated unit will be accepted for disposal if it contains
household goods, clothing, trash, garbage or other hazardous or toxic items.
The rate for disposal shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution
per linear foot, including hitch length, tires will be charged separately in
accordance with §
50.023.
   (F)   For convenience, punch cards shall be sold by the city, which shall
allow the owner thereof to dump in quantities equal to the value of the
categories hereinbefore set forth at said rubble site.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, rubble and waste material originates
at the place where it first becomes rubble or waste material.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful to dump any rubble or waste material at the
rubble site without paying the required fee as set forth herein.
   (I)   The rubble site may be unlocked on Sundays or holidays provided the
person requesting this service in writing shall pay to the city a fee to
reimburse the city for its costs, in an amount to be determined by the Public
Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.07) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013; Ord. 2018-07, passed 7-17-2018; Ord. 2019-13, passed 12-31-2019)
Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.022 DISPOSAL OF SYRINGES OR MEDICAL WASTE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit any syringe or other medical waste of any type in
any garbage or trash container provided by the city under the terms of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.08) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.023 DISPOSAL OF TIRES.
   (A)   (1)   Tires accepted for the restricted use of solid waste facility
shall be handled as follows.
 
Type 1 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Bicycle tires
       resolution
                                                             Vehicle and
Type 2 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee motorcycle tires
       resolution                                            for rim size 17
                                                             inches or smaller
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 17 inches inside
Type 3 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             20 inches inside
                                                             diameter
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 20 inches inside
Type 4 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             22.5 inches inside
                                                             diameter
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 22.5 inches inside
Type 5 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             24 inches inside
                                                             diameter
 
      (2)   No tires larger than 24 inches inside diameter shall be accepted.
   (B)   Starting January 1, 2014, the fee shall increase by 3% annually,
unless by resolution following adoption of the budget ordinance the Council
should adopt a different annual rate.
   (C)   Tires must be sorted, paid for at the listed fee and placed in the
proper pile according to the city or its designee.
   (D)   The city may no longer haul or accept tires in the refuse trucks. City
sanitation dump trucks may pick up tires of Type 1, 2 and 3 within the city.
Upon request by the resident, billing for said tire pickup shall be assessed on
the resident’s monthly sanitation utility bill sent by the City Water
Department.
(Prior Code, § 11.03.09) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013; Ord. 2013-16, passed 11-20-2013)
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
§ 50.035 COUNCIL MAY ADOPT SYSTEM FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   The City Council shall have the power and duty to provide for the removal of
garbage and rubbish by the system outlined in §
50.043 or by developing a separate licensing procedure.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.01) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013)
§ 50.036 CITY COLLECTION SYSTEM.
   In lieu of issuing a license or licenses to collectors, the City Council is
hereby authorized to purchase or rent the necessary equipment and employ the
necessary personnel to collect and dispose of the garbage and rubbish found in
the city and collects and retains the collection fees as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.02) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013)
§ 50.037 RATES.
   (A)   It is hereby determined that the following are reasonable and
necessary charges to be levied, imposed and collected for said garbage and
rubbish collection and disposal in order to provide proper sanitary control
within the city.
   (B)   Each new residential property within the city limits shall have a one-
time charge as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for a 90-
gallon garbage tote. Each new commercial property within the city limits shall
have a one-time charge as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution for a 300-gallon tote. This is for the initial garbage container,
after which if the garbage tote gets accidentally damaged the city shall
replace the garbage tote with another container of the same size.
   (C)   Each such garbage container unit in the city, regardless of the amount
of garbage and rubbish placed inside for disposal, there shall be per month fee
charged for the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish provided
pursuant to this subchapter. For each address within the city, there shall be a
separate minimum monthly fee charged for garbage service. In addition, when a
garbage only service account is opened, a deposit fee as shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution shall be paid by the account owner.
   (D)   Additional pickup service beyond the curbside household garbage tote
pickup may be provided by the city. The city reserves the right to charge rates
in excess of the rate classification on an individual basis, depending on the
volume of refuse, the difficulty of collection of the refuse and the containers
used by the commercial unit for storage of refuse prior to collection. A
separate recycling fee may also be charged for a residential account and a
commercial unit for the purpose of providing the recycling units at selected
locations within the city.
   (E)   The service and deposit fees shall be reviewed annually by the City
Council during the budget ordinance approval process. After the Council has
passed the annual budget ordinance, it shall also adopt a resolution
establishing the garbage and rubbish rates required to meet the revenue
projections required for the budget ordinance.
   (F)   Additional pickup service beyond the curbside household garbage tote
pickup may be provided by the city. In the event such service is provided, the
city may charge a fee commensurate to the costs associated with the service.
   (G)   The city reserves the right to charge rates in excess of the rate
classification on an individual basis, depending on the volume of refuse, the
difficulty of collection of the refuse and the containers used by the
commercial unit for storage of refuse prior to collection.
   (H)   Each multi-family unit or apartment house fees will be included in the
yearly rate resolution. The owner of the multi-family unit shall be responsible
for paying the charges for the whole unit.
   (I)   The Council may by resolution annually approve an additional voluntary
recycling fee or reduction to fund a curbside recycling program. Such a fee
would be charged on a voluntary basis to pay for the additional curbside
recycling service if and when the city offers such a program.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.03) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed 7-11-2016)
§ 50.038 COUNCIL AUTHORITY OVER RATES.
   The city shall have the power in the annual budget ordinance to lower or
raise the charges herein set forth.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.04) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013)
§ 50.039 BILLING AND FAILURE TO PAY.
   Any charges for services as provided for in this subchapter shall be paid
with the city utility bill. The city shall not be obligated to collect and
dispose of the garbage and rubbish from that unit until such time that all
charges are paid up-to-date.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.05) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013)
§ 50.040 CONTAINER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Solid waste containers shall be kept closed and all of the contents
shall be protected so that the wind cannot blow out and scatter the contents
over the streets, alleys or property within the city. All refuse shall be
placed in garbage bags and the bags must be securely fastened at the opening,
and all boxes and containers must be sealed in such a fashion that no refuse
can fall, blow away or leak out.
   (B)   In the event that a commercial unit provides a dumpster container at
its own expense, this dumpster shall be compatible with the garbage collection
trucks used by the city. Any person who feels that his or her commercial unit
should not be required to have the sanitation totes as determined by the Public
Works Director, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Public Works
Director to the Council, or other city official designated by the city, as
provided in this §
50.048.
   (C)   (1)   Garbage shall be placed in containers provided by the city, and
no family unit shall place garbage in any city provided container without
having drained off the moisture and placed it in plastic garbage bags or
wrapped it in paper to avoid odor and freezing to the garbage can. Ashes must
be cold before being placed in any garbage container. All rubbish shall be
placed in sufficiently strong containers to adequately hold and confine such
waste materials.
      (2)   Sanitation workers shall not be responsible for picking up garbage
which has been strewn about or not in proper containers.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.06) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013)
§ 50.041 ILLEGAL DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter, and provisions of this code
relating to nuisances, for any person may dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard,
leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing,
discarding or leaving of garbage, solid waste, garbage, litter or other waste
material, as defined in this chapter, upon any public or private property in
the city, or upon or into any river, lake, pond or other stream or body of
water in this city, except as follows:
   (A)   The waste material is placed into a receptacle or other container,
intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property on which
the receptacle/container is located, for the deposit of garbage, solid waste,
litter or other waste material by the person placing it in the container;
   (B)   The owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property on which the
receptacle/container is located has given consent to the person to deposit such
garbage, solid waste or litter or other waste material into the receptacle/
container on the property for that purpose, or has otherwise authorized the
person to deposit or leave said garbage, solid waste litter or other waste
material on the property; or
   (C)   The person leaving the garbage, solid waste litter or other waste
material, as defined in this chapter, has first obtained the consent of the
owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the
personal direction of the owner or tenant and does not create a public health
or safety hazard, a public nuisance or a fire hazard.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.07) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed
4-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed 7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.042 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE CANS AND RUBBISH.
   (A)   All garbage containers and rubbish shall be placed on the premises
adjacent to an alley bordering on said premises so as to be accessible from the
alley adjoining the premises. Where no alley is available, garbage containers
and rubbish shall be placed at any other convenient location where the garbage
collectors can get at it, but in no case shall any garbage truck be required to
use any private driveway in collecting garbage and rubbish.
   (B)   Garbage and rubbish shall be placed for pickup in a location adjacent
to the public right-of-way so as to allow safe operation of city equipment.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.08) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013)
§ 50.043 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.
   No person shall allow garbage and rubbish to accumulate and collect in the
city beyond a period of one week.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.09) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.044 COMPULSORY AND UNIVERSAL SYSTEM.
   The maintenance of health, sanitation and safety require and it is the
intention hereof to make the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and
rubbish within the city compulsory and universal. No private refuse collection
firms shall be allowed to pick up any garbage or trash in the city unless
licensed by or under contract with the city to do so.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.10) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.045 HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC WASTE NOT TO BE PLACED IN ANY CONTAINER FOR
COLLECTION.
   Hazardous or toxic waste shall not be placed in any container for
collection, transport, processing or disposal by the city. For the purpose of
this section, the terms HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC WASTE shall be deemed to mean any
pesticides, herbicides, insecticides or any narcotic, drug, barbiturates or
stimulant drug which is not permitted under state law to be sold over the
counter without prescription.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.11) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013)
§ 50.046 SPECIAL EVENT SANITATION FEE.
   (A)   A sanitation fee in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution shall be imposed and collected for additional garbage and
public collection disposal and for the provision of the temporary sanitation
services to all temporary vendors within the city during any special event of
over four days in duration, unless specifically exempted from payment under the
language of the temporary vendor license requirements set out in Chapter 113.
With exception of any vendor who holds a malt beverage, liquor or wine license,
whose primary income or point of sales is from malt beverage, liquor or wine
sales to be included herein to the following special event sanitation fee
guidelines.
   (B)   The fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution
shall be imposed for access up to five refuse totes. An additional fee as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution shall be imposed for each
additional refuse tote beyond five provided to the account holder at that
property. If any of the provided refuse totes require an additional dump, it
will have an additional charge as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution per tote, per day, per extra dump. A fee as shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution per day, per dump will be charged for a 15-
yard roll-off container.
   (C)   Residents who request an additional tote or pickup at their home will
be subject to an additional fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution per tote, per day, per extra dump.
   (D)   The number of additional refuse totes or extra dumps required for each
property during a special event shall be determined by the Public Works
Director or his or her designee. A property owner may dispute the determination
and request a review of that determination by the Public Works Director within
72 hours of delivery of the additional totes to the property by providing a
written objection and any supporting documentation to the City Finance Office.
The city will review the complaint and provide a written decision to the
property owner within five days. If the property owner still disputes the fee
for the additional refuse totes, the remedy for the property owner is to submit
a formal appeal, as provided for in §
50.048.
   (E)   Material permitted to be disposed of the in these totes does not
include disposal of any tires, inner tubes or similar items. Vendors that have
paid the special sanitation fee set forth above can request disposal of used
tires at the time the vendor permit and special sanitation fee is paid by
paying for one-half of the total expected tire disposal cost, calculated at the
following rate per tire.
 
Type 1 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Bicycle tires
       resolution
                                                             Vehicle and
Type 2 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee motorcycle tires
       resolution                                            for rim size 17
                                                             inches or smaller
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 17 inches inside
Type 3 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             20 inches inside
                                                             diameter
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 20 inches inside
Type 4 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             22.5 inches inside
                                                             diameter
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 22.5 inches inside
Type 5 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             24 inches inside
                                                             diameter
 
   (F)   No tires larger than 24 inches inside diameter shall be accepted.
Tires must be sorted, paid for at the listed fee and placed in the proper pile
according to the directions of the Public Works Director or his or her
designee.
   (G)   Billing for said tire pickup shall be sent to both the vendor and the
property owner. Any tire disposal so arranged but not paid in full within 45
days after the end of the annual Motorcycle Rally shall assessed to the
property owner’s resident’s monthly sanitation/utility bill sent by the City
Water Department and subject to collection by the city by any means authorized
by city ordinance or state law.
   (H)   (1)   Tires which are left on private property and not removed within
seven days of the end of the end of the annual Motorcycle Rally, or for which
full payment for removal as set forth above has not been received, shall be
removed by city personnel and the following fees assessed to the property owner
for such removal.
 
Type 1 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Bicycle tires
       resolution
                                                             Vehicle and
Type 2 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee motorcycle tires
       resolution                                            for rim size 17
                                                             inches or smaller
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 17 inches inside
Type 3 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             20 inches inside
                                                             diameter
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 20 inches inside
Type 4 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             22.5 inches inside
                                                             diameter
                                                             Tires larger than
       The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee 22.5 inches inside
Type 5 resolution                                            diameter and up to
                                                             24 inches inside
                                                             diameter
 
      (2)   For any tire larger than 24 inches left on public or private
property and picked up by public Works or other authorized city personnel to
avoid the existence of a trash nuisance, the handling and disposal fee shall be
as set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution or the actual disposal cost to
the city, whichever is greater. Billing for all tires picked up by city
employees shall be assessed at these rates on the property owner’s resident’s
monthly sanitation/utility bill sent by the City Water Department.
   (I)   In addition to being required to pay the special sanitation fee
provided for herein, trash piled upon or next to a refuse tote may constitute a
nuisance in violation of this code, and the property owner may be subject to
prosecution for any such violation under
Chapter 94, or under the Administrative Code Violation provisions of Chapter
37.
   (J)   (1)   The owner of each establishment set forth below shall pay the
sanitation fee prescribed above for the sanitation provided by the city during
any special event of over four days duration. Said fee shall be added to the
next utility billing following the special event as shown by the records of the
City Water Department.
      (2)   The fee prescribed is for a maximum 12-day period. Said fee shall
be imposed and collected from the following establishments, unless specifically
exempted from payment by the language in
Chapter 113:
         (a)   Food service establishment licensed under the statutes and
regulations of the State Department of Health with a seating capacity of 30
persons or less (License Type 150);
         (b)   Food service establishment licensed under the statutes and
regulations of the State Department of Health with a seating capacity of 31
persons or more (License Type 150);
         (c)   Food service establishment which is not required to be licensed
under the statutes and regulations of the State Department of Health (License
Type 150);
         (d)   Establishments licensed pursuant to SDCL §§ 35-4-2(16) or 35-4-
11, selling on-sale malt beverages (License Type 150);
         (e)   Establishments licensed pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(17) selling
off-sale or packaged malt beverages (License Type 150);
         (f)   On-sale liquor establishment licensed pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2
(4) (License Type 150);
         (g)   Off-sale liquor establishment licensed pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2
(3) (License Type 150);
         (h)   Temporary campground licensed by the state (License Type 150);
         (i)   Business establishment not required to purchase a transient
merchant’s license required under this code where property has been modified
and goods or services are provided in addition to or different from what is
normally sold from property (food service establishment will be regulated under
Section 1, 2 and 3). The fee is for each separate sales or service activity
(License Type 150); and
         (j)   Any nonprofit organization which sells raffle tickets or lottery
tickets except those nonprofit organizations established for religious,
charitable or benevolent purposes as set forth in I.R.C. § 501. An exception
shall only apply to those nonprofit organizations that can prove qualifications
under § 501, compliance with the notice provisions of SDCL § 22-25-25(7), and
which are identified as exempt from this fee by the language in
Chapter 113.
      (3)   This special sanitation fee shall be imposed for any other
activity, including, but not limited to, musical shows, demonstrations or
productions with two or more showings or sessions held during any event of over
four days in duration and not provided for above.
   (K)   The sanitation rates set forth above shall be imposed regardless of
whether the business is operated on a “not for profit” basis or otherwise.
   (L)   Starting January 1, 2015, the special sanitation fee shall be reviewed
annually by the City Council during the budget ordinance approval process.
After the Council has passed the annual budget ordinance, it shall also adopt a
resolution establishing the changes, if any, in the foregoing special
sanitation rates necessary to meet the revenue projections for that annual
budget ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.12) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-16, passed
11-20-2013; Ord. 2018-10, passed 7-30-2018; Ord. 2019-13, passed 12-31-2019)
§ 50.047 BILLING AND FAILURE TO PAY.
   (A)   In the event the payment is not made within the time noted on the
utility bill, any applicable penalties of this chapter shall apply.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other collection provision provided for under this
chapter, the city shall have the power to collect the sanitation fee imposed
herein through any other remedy available to it under the statutes of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.13) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-16, passed
11-20-2013)
§ 50.048 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Public Works Director made
under this subchapter shall be entitled to have said decision reviewed by the
Public Works Director. In the case of an appeal of the decision of the Public
Works Director, the subsequent review shall be by the designated city official.
If, after that review, the appeal is not resolved, the person may appeal the
decision to the City Council, following the procedure established in
Chapter 37.
   (B)   The process shall begin as follows.
      (1)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review
with the city official designated by the city setting forth the basis for which
he or she believes the Public Works Director’s decision to be in error. The
writing shall also include the person’s name and mailing address.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city official
designated by the city shall review the challenged decision and mail a written
response to the aggrieved person within 20 days.
      (3)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the
Public Works Director following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal
following the procedure established in Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 11.04.14) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2013-16, passed
11-20-2013)
DISPOSAL OF WASTE MATERIALS GENERATED BY VENDORS
§ 50.060 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any landowner who rents or leases to any vendor, including, but not
limited to, any temporary food service establishment, motorcycle wash, oil
changer, tattoo artist and/or body piercer, shall be jointly responsible with
the vendor for the disposal of waste as hereinafter set forth. The landowner
and vendor shall be jointly responsible for completion of a waste collection
and disposal form. Said form shall be submitted to the Finance Office before
any vendor may be issued a transient merchants license from the city.
   (B)   The waste collection and disposal form shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the landowner;
      (2)   The location of the property upon which the vendor will be located;
      (3)   The name and address of the vendor;
      (4)   The name of the vendor’s business;
      (5)   The name, address, contact person and phone number of the agency
responsible for collection and disposal of any cooking grease and/or used motor
oil; and
      (6)   The landowner’s signature and date signed.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.01) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013)
§ 50.061 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPOSAL OF COOKING GREASE.
   (A)   Any property owner subject to this subchapter shall be jointly
responsible with the vendor to contract with a license hauler who runs an
approved recycling facility to pick up and dispose of the collected cooking
grease. No person shall dispose of any cooking grease into any port-a-pots,
storm sewer or on any street, alley or upon any public right-of-way, or upon
any private or public land.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, an APPROVED RECYCLING FACILITY shall
be a recycling facility approved by the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.02) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.062 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPOSAL OF GRAYWATER.
   (A)   Any property owner subject to this subchapter shall be jointly
responsible with the vendor to appropriately dispose of any graywater generated
by the vendor into a legal discharge point. Legal discharge points shall be
graywater collection tanks, sanitary sewer clean outs or sanitary sewer
fixtures, including toilets, sinks and tubs. No person shall dump any graywater
into any port-a-pot, storm sewer or on any street, alley or upon any public
right-of-way, or upon any private or public land.
   (B)   All motorcycle washes must have an approved water containment system.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.03) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.063 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPOSAL OF LEAKING WATER SUPPLY LINES.
   (A)   Any property owner subject to this subchapter shall be jointly
responsible with the vendor to appropriately collect and dispose of any water
leaking from a supply lines into a legal discharge point.
   (B)   Legal discharge points shall be graywater collection tanks, sanitary
sewer clean outs or sanitary sewer fixtures, including toilets, sinks and tubs.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.04) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013)
§ 50.064 MEDICAL AND BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE.
   Medical and bio hazardous waste shall be disposed of as set forth in SDCL
Title 34 and ARSD Titles 44 and 74.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.05) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013)
§ 50.065 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPOSAL OF USED MOTOR OIL.
   (A)   Any property owner subject to this subchapter shall be jointly
responsible with the vendor, oil changer, handler and/or any used oil generator
located upon the owner’s property to contract with a used oil transporter or
marketer who runs an approved used oil collection center to pick up and dispose
of the collected used oil.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, an APPROVED USED OIL COLLECTION
CENTER shall mean any site or facility that is registered, licensed, permitted
and/or recognized by the state, the county or the city to manage used oil and
accepts, aggregates and stores used oil collected from used oil generators in
compliance with 40 C.F.R. Chapter 7.
   (C)   The Finance Officer or Public Works Director shall have available to
the public a list of the transporter/marketers available in the area for
collection of used motor oil.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.06) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013)
§ 50.066 APPLICATION TO OIL CHANGING OPERATIONS.
   Any oil changers, handlers and/or used oil generators, whether during the
annual Motorcycle Rally or at any other time of the year shall be subject to
this subchapter. Any oil changers and handlers of used oil shall be subject to
the requirements set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 279, commencing with § 279.1,
which are hereby incorporated herein as though fully set forth and any other
applicable state or federal law, rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 11.07.07) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013)
§ 50.067 USED OIL STORAGE.
   (A)   Any oil changers, handlers and/or used oil generators, including, but
not limited to, those storing containers in above-ground tanks shall only use
receptacles that are in good condition, and said receptacles shall not have any
severe rusting, apparent structural defects, deterioration or any visible
leaks.
   (B)   Containers in above-ground tanks used to store oil at any location
within the city shall be labeled and marked clearly with the words “used oil.”
(Prior Code, § 11.07.08) (Ord. 2004-09, passed 5-14-2004; Ord. 2012-19, passed
1-2-2013)
TATTOO ARTISTS
§ 50.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BODY PIERCING. To place a permanent or temporary foreign object in a
person’s body such as ears, nose, lips, genitals, nipples or parts thereof for
a decorative or other nonmedical purpose.
   TATTOO. To make permanent marks or designs on the skin by puncturing it and
inserting indelible colors.
   TATTOO ARTIST. Any person or individual who performs tattoos, body piercing
and/or any other form of permanent body art. (This definition does not include
physicians and surgeons licensed under the provisions of SDCL § 36-4 from
performing tattoos, body piercing and any other form of permanent body art.)
(Prior Code, § 11.06.01) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.081 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR ALL TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ARTISTS.
   As authorized by SDCL 9-34-17, no person shall engage in, conduct or carry
on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any
premises within the city the performance of tattoo, body piercing and/or other
forms of permanent body art without a valid tattoo and body piercing license
which has been issued by the city in each calendar year. Applications shall be
available at City Hall and shall be completed in full and returned to the
Finance Office accompanied by the appropriate fee.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.02) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.082 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES AND REGULATIONS.
   The standards set forth in SDCL § 9-34-17 and ARSD Article 44-12 shall
constitute the standards for tattooing and body piercing and the conditions for
the premises on which such services are provided within the city. Further, all
artists must comply with all Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recalls
(even those identified as “voluntary” by the FDA). A health inspection provided
by a designated or authorized city employee or agent shall determine compliance
with these standards.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.03) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.083 APPLICATION FOR TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING LICENSE.
   (A)   Each application for a tattoo and body piercing license shall be upon
a form provided by the Finance Office and shall be submitted to the Finance
Office.
   (B)   The application shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
      (1)   Definition of services to be provided by the applicant;
      (2)   The location within city that the applicant will use;
      (3)   The dimension of the space the applicant will use;
      (4)   The current mailing address of the applicant;
      (5)   The current phone number and email address for the applicant;
      (6)   Written affidavit that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;
      (7)   A current picture of the applicant; and
      (8)   The history of the applicant in the performance of tattoos, body
piercing and/or other permanent body art.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.04) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.084 FEE FOR TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING LICENSE AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit payment for licensing and inspection at the
time of application. The licensing fee for each individual operator shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution and the inspection fee shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per annual application or to
reinstate a tattoo and body piercing license after cancellation or termination.
A re-inspection fee within that calendar year for any change in premises shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per premises.
   (B)   This licensing and inspection fee is in place of any special
sanitation fees charged during the annual Motorcycle Rally.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.05) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.085 DURATION OF TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING LICENSE.
   The tattoo and body piercing license is valid for the calendar year. All
tattoo and body piercing license expire on December 31 of the calendar year of
issuance. There is no reduction of the license fee charge regardless of when a
license may be approved. There is no refund of licensing and inspection fees
for terminating business prior to December 31. The city makes no distinction
between license and inspection fees required for tattoo artists and/or body
piercers.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.06) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.086 HEALTH INSPECTION OF THE PROPOSED PREMISES OF A TATTOO AND BODY
PIERCING LICENSEE.
   (A)   Within three business days of application, the city shall make an
inspection of the space proposed to be used by the tattoo artist for compliance
with §
50.082.
   (B)   City officials may also enter the premises from time to time during
regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to
enforce ongoing compliance with health regulations. This shall not restrict or
limit the right of entry vested in any law enforcement agency or the City
Building Inspector.
   (C)   Any inspection may be conducted by the state at the request of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.07) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.087 CHANGE OF LOCATION OF TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING LICENSE.
   A change of location of a licensed tattoo or body piercing licensee (even
within the same building) may be allowed by the city; provided, that the
applicant for the change in location has paid all required license and
inspection fees and the proposed area of operation meets all requirements for a
licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.08) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.088 ISSUANCE, DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND/OR REVOCATION OF TATTOO AND BODY
PIERCING LICENSES.
   (A)   The city shall make a final determination regarding the tattoo or body
piercing artist’s application within two days of inspection.
   (B)   The city shall not issue the tattoo or body piercing artist a license
if, based upon the inspection, it is found that:
      (1)   The premises where the tattoo artist proposes to use would not
comply with all applicable laws; or
      (2)   The applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the permit application or any other document required by
the city in conjunction herewith.
   (C)   Any tattoo and body piercing license is subject to suspension or
revocation by city officials for violation of any provision of this chapter, or
applicable provision of this code, city ordinance, rule or regulation or state
law, or for grounds that should warrant the denial of the issuance of the
tattoo and body piercing license in the first instance, or for the violation of
any law relating to or regulating tattoo or body piercing licensee artists.
   (D)   The remedy for a denial, suspension or revocation of a tattoo and body
piercing license shall follow the appeal process set for in
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.09) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.089 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this chapter and in
Chapter 37, the operation of any tattoo artist in violation of the terms of
this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance as described by
Chapter 94.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.10) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.090 TRANSFER PROHIBITED OF TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING LICENSE.
   No tattoo and body piercing license shall be transferable.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.11) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.091 POSTING OF TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING LICENSE.
   Each tattoo or body piercing licensee shall post, in a conspicuous place
with the premises, the current tattoo and body piercing license and a copy of
the most recent inspection results.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.12) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.092 REFUND OF LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   A tattoo or body piercing applicant that has successfully passed the
inspection of licensed premises and been issued a license under this chapter,
may apply for a refund in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution of the license fee required by §
50.084. To obtain a refund, the licensee shall submit documentation and
information in a manner established by the City Finance Office. To be
considered, the application for license refund shall be submitted to the City
Finance Office between October 1 and October 15 of the year in which the
license was purchased. The application shall include all documentation as
required by the City Finance Office to prove payment of state municipal sales
tax within the city as follows:
      (1)   Copies of applicant’s state sales tax returns and any additional
documents as required by City Finance Office staff verifying that applicant has
paid aggregate municipal sales tax for sales at the licensed premises, between
January 1 and July 31 of the calendar year for which the license was purchased,
of at least the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution on sales of at least the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution; and
      (2)   Verification by applicant that it operates at the licensed premises
in all other respects in compliance with all state and federal laws and local
ordinances.
   (B)   Upon proof satisfactory to City Finance Office staff of compliance
with the foregoing requirements, the refund application will be approved for
consideration by the Council at a later regularly scheduled meeting. Upon
approval of a refund by the Council, it shall be sent to the licensee as the
business address shown on the license documents.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.13) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.093 REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of every licensee under this chapter to
maintain the necessary records to comply with the minimum state requirements
and municipal ordinances for sales tax reporting as applied to any business or
retailer as defined by SDCL § 10-45-1, or any other sales tax licensee.
Evidence and documents to show proof of compliance with these requirements
shall be provided by the retailer, business operator or licensee immediately
upon the request of any authorized representatives of the State Department of
Revenue, any law enforcement officer or any municipal official appointed by the
city for enforcement of this title.
   (B)   The records required to be maintained are the following:
      (1)   Sales receipts that are sequentially numbered with duplicate
copies, recorded during or immediately upon completion of each transaction, in
the form of cash register tape, written or printed credit card receipts, or
handwritten sales receipts that identify the item sold, the sale price, the tax
charged and the time and date of the transaction for a minimum of three years.
The licensee shall provide such receipts for immediate inspection and review to
any representative of the Department of Revenue, law enforcement officer or
authorized agent of the city, upon request.
      (2)   Inventory records, including a statement of beginning inventory of
merchandise value, for a minimum of three years preceding the date of
inspection of the licensee’s transaction record, consistent with the
requirements of SDCL § 10-45-85. The licensee shall provide such records for
immediate inspection and review to any representative of the Department of
Revenue, law enforcement officer or authorized agent of the city, upon request.
      (3)   A written list of suppliers, including names, addresses and phone
numbers of the supplier, for all suppliers used by the licensee for the three
years preceding the date of inspection of the supplier list, consistent with
the requirements of SDCL § 10-45-87. The licensee shall provide such records
for immediate inspection and review to any representative of the Department of
Revenue, law enforcement officer or authorized agent of the city, upon request.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.14) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
SEWERS
§ 50.105 UNSANITARY DEPOSIT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the city any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.01) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.106 DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER IN NATURAL OUTLET PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the city any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except in the case where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.02) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.107 PROHIBITED CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or facility intended to be or actually used for the disposal of
wastewater.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.03) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.108 REQUIRED INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION.
   (A)   Any owner of any building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose which abuts any street, alley or right-
of-way in which there is currently located or may in the future be located a
public sanitary sewer of the city shall, at the owner’s expense, install
suitable toilet facilities and connect said facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter within 90
days of the date of official notice.
   (B)   This requirement shall only apply in the event said public sewer is
located within 400 feet of the property line. No private sanitary sewer service
lines shall exceed 100 feet in length unless approved by the Public Works
Director. Separate service lines shall be provided for each dwelling unit or
parcel, as defined in Chapter 150.
   (C)   (1)   All sanitary sewer lines, including private systems, must run at
right angles to the street and may not run in the ROW parallel to the street.
Service lines shall not cross adjoining property lines and shall connect to
mains fronting the property. Private service lines may not cross adjoining
properties even if located within private easements.
      (2)   Where services lines are being replaced to bring properties into
compliance, the new service line shall connect to a sewer main in the manner
approved by the city.
   (D)   Existing services lines may be used for a new building only if they
are examined by the Public Works Department before the issuance of a building
permit and are found to comply in all respects with city ordinance and design
standards and the State Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.04)
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of building code, see §
150.025
Statutory reference:
   State plumbing code, see ARSD § 20:54:02:01
§ 50.109 REQUIRED CAPPING OF LINES.
   (A)   Any owner of property upon which any structure is removed, demolished
or raised shall be responsible for capping or plugging any sanitary sewer
service lines. Said lines shall be capped at the point where the building sewer
is tapped into the city’s sanitary sewer main.
   (B)   The procedure for capping or plugging the tap shall be approved by the
Public Works Director.
   (C)   All plugs and/or caps shall be inspected by the Public Works Director
or his or her designee prior to any trench being filled and compacted.
   (D)   A minimum 24-hour notice shall be given for inspections.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.05)
§ 50.110 ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   In the event a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
of §
50.108, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system that is in compliance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.06)
§ 50.111 ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any person may commence construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, he or she shall obtain a written permit signed by the Public Works
Director and approved by the State DENR.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.07)
§ 50.112 APPLICATION FOR ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL PERMIT.
   To obtain a permit to construct a private wastewater disposal system, the
applicant shall make application to the Inspection Office in duplicate on forms
to be furnished by the city. The permit application shall include and/or be
accompanied by the following information:
   (A)   The name of the owner of the property on which the system is to be
constructed;
   (B)   The legal description and address of the property on which the system
is to be constructed; and
   (C)   Any plans, specifications or other information deemed necessary and
requested by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.08)
§ 50.113 FEE FOR ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL PERMIT.
   Upon making application for a permit to construct a private wastewater
disposal, any applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established by Chapter
150.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.09)
§ 50.114 APPROVAL AND INSPECTION OF ON-SITE WASTEWATER FACILITY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any permit for the installation or construction of any private
wastewater disposal system shall be conditional upon the installation and
construction being completed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department
and in accordance with State DENR administrative codes.
   (B)   The Public Works Department shall be authorized to inspect the work at
any state of construction. Any applicant shall notify the Public Works
Department when the installation and/or construction work is ready for final
inspection. Said notification and subsequent inspection shall occur before any
underground portions are covered. The Public Works Department shall complete
the requisite inspection within 24 hours of receipt of notice.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.10)
§ 50.115 REQUIRED COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The type, capacities and layout of any private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Water
and Natural Resources.
   (B)   No private wastewater disposal system shall employ subsurface soil
absorption facilities. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.11) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.116 PUBLIC CONNECTION REQUIRED WHEN AVAILABLE.
   In the event a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
50.108, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days in
compliance with this subchapter. Any septic tank, cesspool and similar private
wastewater disposal facility shall be cleaned of any sludge and filled with a
suitable material.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.12)
§ 50.117 SANITARY MAINTENANCE REQUIRED.
   Any owner shall operate and maintain his or her private wastewater disposal
facility in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.13)
§ 50.118 SEWER TAP PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a sewer tap permit from the Public Works Director.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of sewer tap permits. The first class shall
be for residential and commercial service and the second shall be for service
to establishments producing industrial waste.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.14)
§ 50.119 APPLICATION FOR SEWER TAP PERMIT.
   (A)   To obtain either classification of sewer tap permit from the Public
Works Director, the applicant shall make application to the Public Works Office
in duplicate form to be furnished by the city.
   (B)   The permit application shall include and/or be accompanied by the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the owner of the property to which the sewer will be
tapped;
      (2)   The legal description and address of the property from which the
sewer will be tapped; and
      (3)   Any plans, specifications or other information deemed necessary and
requested by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.15)
§ 50.120 FEE FOR SEWER TAP PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon making application for either class of sewer tap permit, any
applicant shall pay a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution. Starting January 1, 2020, the sewer tap fee shall be reviewed
annually by the City Council during the budget approval process.
   (B)   After the Council has passed the annual budget ordinance, it shall
also adopt a resolution establishing the changes, if any, in the foregoing
sewer tap fees necessary to meet the revenue projections for that annual budget
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.16)
§ 50.121 COSTS AND EXPENSES INCIDENTAL TO CONNECTION.
   Any costs and/or expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property to which the
sewer is to be connected. The city shall not be responsible for any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.17)
§ 50.122 SEPARATE SEWER REQUIRED FOR EACH BUILDING.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except in the case where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or capable of being
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway. Under said circumstances, the front building sewer may be extended to
the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city
shall not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection.
   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found by the Public Works Director to meet all requirements of
this subchapter. It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to notify
the Public Works Department and request an inspection.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.18)
§ 50.123 REQUIRED BUILDING SEWER SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction, excavation
methods, placement of pipe, jointing testing and backfilling of a building
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code or other
requirements which may be prescribed by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Unless determined impractical by the Public Works Director, any
building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In any building in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by a means approved by the Public Works Director
and discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   The connection of any building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code or other special
requirements which may be established by the Public Works Director. Any such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper
testing procedures approved by the Public Works Director. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Public Works
Director prior to installation.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.19)
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of building code, see §
150.025
Statutory reference:
   State plumbing code, see ARSD § 20:54:02:01
§ 50.124 INSPECTION AND CONNECTION.
   (A)   Any applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Public
Works Director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer.
   (B)   The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Public Works Director or his or her designee and shall be accomplished by a
licensed plumber or installer in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.20)
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of building code, see §
150.025
Statutory reference:
   State plumbing code, see ARSD § 20:54:02:01
§ 50.125 GROUNDWATER DRAINAGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspout, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff of groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.21) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.126 UNPOLLUTED WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers to a natural outlet
approved by the Public Works Director and other regulatory agencies.
   (B)   Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water may be discharged
to a storm sewer, with approval of the Public Works Director, the State
Department of Energy and Natural Resources and the Environmental Protection
Agency.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.22)
§ 50.127 DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described water or waste to any public sewer:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any water containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either alone or by interaction with other wastes, to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any
waste treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create
a public nuisance or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
wastewater treatment plant;
    (C)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than five and one-half or higher
than nine or having any other chemical property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works; and/or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or sizes capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the wastewater facilities. Said prohibited materials shall
include, but not be limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, milk, whey,
paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.23) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.128 DISCHARGE ALLOWED WITH LIMITATION.
   (A)   The discharge into the municipal system of the substances set forth in
this section shall be limited to concentrations or quantities which will not
harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, constitute a nuisance or otherwise
endanger lives, limb or public property.
   (B)   Said substances subject to the limitations of this subchapter are as
follows:
      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil origin;
      (3)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Building Inspector for such materials;
      (6)   Any water or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits established by the Public Works Director;
      (7)   Any radioactive waste or isotopes or such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Building Inspector in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations or both that constitute a slug;
      (9)   Water or waste containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater plant effluent
cannot meet requirements of the State Department of Environmental Protection,
the Environmental Protection Agency or other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving water; and
      (10)   Any water or waste which, by interaction with other water or waste
in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system, create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes, or contribute to the production of odors,
floating materials or nuisance conditions in the wastewater collection or
treatment system.
   (C)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to set limitations
lower than the limitations established in the regulations of this section if
the Building Inspector determines more severe limitations are necessary to meet
the objectives of this section. In determining whether more severe limitations
are necessary, the Public Works Director shall be guided by the following
factors:
      (1)   The quantity of waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers;
      (2)   The materials of construction of the sewers;
      (3)   The wastewater treatment employed;
      (4)   The capacity of the wastewater treatment plant; and
      (5)   The degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment
plant.
   (D)   In the event any water or waste described in divisions (B)(1) through
(B)(10) above are discharged or are proposed to be discharged into the public
sewers and the Public Works Director determines that said discharge may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving water, or would otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Public Works Director may take any or all of the following
actions:
      (1)   Reject the waste;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover added costs of handling and treating the
waste not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
this subchapter. If the Public Works Director permits the pretreatment of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Public Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.24)
§ 50.129 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided in the event the
Public Works Director determines that they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid waste containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as
specified in this subchapter or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. Any interceptor shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Public Works Director and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (B)   Any owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of said
interceptors. Any owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal. Said records shall be subject to
review by the Public Works Director. Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials shall be performed by a licensee of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.25)
§ 50.130 MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   In the event pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.26)
§ 50.131 STRUCTURE REQUIRED FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   (A)   When required by the Public Works Director, any owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
waste.
   (B)   Said structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Public Works
Director. The structure shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense
and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.27)
§ 50.132 ADOPTION OF STANDARD METHODS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF WATER AND
WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Any measurement, test and/or analysis of the characteristics of water
and waste to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association.
   (B)   Any sampling method, location, time, duration and/or frequency is to
be determined on an individual basis subject to the approval of the Public
Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.28)
§ 50.133 AGREEMENTS FOR SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   No provision contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or contractual arrangement between the city and any
industrial entity whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.29)
§ 50.134 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Public Works Director and any other duly authorized employees of
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge of wastewater to the community
system in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Public Works Director or other duly authorized employees are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry shall establish that the revelation to the public of the information
in question would likely result in an advantage to competitors.
   (C)   While performing necessary work on private properties as set forth in
this section, the Public Works Director or duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees.
   (D)   The Public Works Director and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and other identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the proposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement, shall be done in full compliance with the terms of the fully
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.30)
§ 50.135 SEWER USE CHARGES.
   (A)   Starting January 1, 2020, the sewer use charges shall be reviewed
annually by the City Council during the budget ordinance approval process.
After the Council has passed the annual budget ordinance, it shall also adopt a
resolution establishing the changes, if any, in the foregoing sewer use rates
necessary to meet the revenue projections for that annual budget ordinance.
   (B)   If water service to a property is shut off, the monthly availability
fee will still be charged to that account. This fee shall not be charged to
accounts that are used solely for irrigation purposes. The Council may adjust
the fee during the yearly budgeting process by resolution. The commercial
availability fee shall be determined based on the water line size that feeds
the property.
   (C)   (1)   The sewer charge for commercial and institutional units shall be
billed to the owner or operator of the commercial or institutional property
based upon the size of domestic water lines.
      (2)   In addition, each commercial or institutional account shall be
assessed a usage fee based upon water usage.
   (D)   In addition to the required tap fees described in this subchapter, a
supplemental development sewer tap fee shall be required for all accounts
established within the following described areas located within Section 22, the
Davenport Ranch: The NW quarter of the NW quarter, NE quarter of the NW quarter
and SW quarter of the NW quarter in Section 22, TWP, Range 5 North, Twp 5 East
Black Hills Meridian, in Meade County.
   (E)   The applicant for the building permit shall be responsible to pay an
additional tap fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution
per sewer account. The supplemental development sewer tap fee shall be paid to
the city before the building permit may be issued by the Building Official.
   (F)   Whenever the BOD concentration exceeds 200 mg/l or the suspended
solids concentration exceeds 250 mg/l based on a 24-hour sampling period, flow-
proportioned composite sample the sewage use fee shall be increased. The
incremental charge shall be calculated based on the incremental cost incurred
by the city.
   (G)   The institutional users shall include, but are not limited to,
schools, city, county and state buildings. Sewage use charges shall be
increased as set forth above and consistent with EPA and DENR regulations.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.31) (Ord. 2013-09, passed 7-30-2013; Ord. 2013-16, passed
11-20-2013; Ord. 2015-15, passed 1-27-2016; Ord. 2019-13, passed 12-31-2019)
§ 50.136 BILLING AND DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   The city shall charge payment for use as follows.
   (A)   Sewer use charge. Commencing July 1, 1978, all sewer use charge
billings shall be as set by city policy and shall be based upon the rates
established by the city.
   (B)   Industrial cost recovery charges. The city shall submit an annual
statement to each industry for the industrial cost recovery amount.
   (C)   Due date.
      (1)   All sewer use charges shall be due and payable on the fifteenth day
of each and every month, and if not paid on or before the fifteenth day of each
month, it shall become delinquent. The account holder shall be given notice on
the following month’s bill that said account is delinquent and if not paid by
the fifteenth of the next month, the City Water Department shall promptly
discontinue water service to such account.
      (2)   In the event of the discontinuance of such water service for non-
payment of the sewer use charge, no water shall be turned on until all back
sewer use bills and other charges have been paid.
   (D)   Water bill. Sewer use charges cannot be paid without first paying the
water bill.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.32)
§ 50.137 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.33) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.138 SUMP PUMP USAGE.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters,
including, but not limited to, stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer, with the exception
that basement sump pumps may be discharged to the sanitary sewer between
October 15 and April 1 upon application and receipt of a permit from the Public
Works Director. Any such permit shall be valid as limited herein and subject to
annual renewal.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.34) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.139 APPEAL PROCESS.
   An appeal from any of the provisions of this subchapter shall follow the
process as set forth in §
50.048.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.35) (Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
7-11-2016)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the
state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of
any cost and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
      (2)   In addition, any violation of the provisions of this chapter may
result in the revocation and/or suspension of any license issued pursuant to
any section of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.01.03)
   (B)   A violation of any provisions of §§
50.080 through
50.093 shall be subject to the penalties set for at §
50.082 or, in the alternative to those, penalties as laid out in Chapter 37 for
violation of city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 11.06.15)
   (C)   Any person violating §
50.137 is guilty of disorderly conduct and shall be subject to immediate arrest
therefor.
(Prior Code, § 11.05.33)
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed 7-11-2016)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Scope and purpose
Water Code
   
51.15   Adoption of Municipal Utility Board rules and regulations
   
51.16   Municipal Utility Board powers and authority
   
51.17   Water rates and charges
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to recognize that the Municipal Utility
Board is responsible for the efficient, economic and safe operation of the
Municipal Water Treatment and Distribution System in the city.
   (B)   In accordance with the 2014 Municipal Utility Board Operating
Agreement, between the City Municipal Utility Board and the city, employees
working within the City Water Department are city employees. Their employment
duties and responsibilities will be governed by the negotiated agreement with
the Operating Engineers Union, if any, as well as city personnel policies.
(Prior Code, § 17.01.01) (Ord. 2006-10, passed 5-27-2006; Ord. 2014-12, passed
8-20-2014; Ord. 2014-17, passed 1-14-2015)
WATER CODE
§ 51.15 ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY BOARD RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   There is hereby adopted, by the city, the current and subsequent City
Municipal Utility Board rules and regulations as amended, and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and
from the date of which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.01) (Ord. 2006-10, passed 5-27-2006; Ord. 2014-12, passed
8-20-2014)
§ 51.16 MUNICIPAL UTILITY BOARD POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   The Municipal Utility Board, by virtue of its statutory authority, is
empowered to promulgate rules and regulations for the orderly operation of the
Municipal Water System and to set reasonable water rates and charges for the
sale and distribution of water. The Municipal Utility Board shall have the
authority to amend those regulations by following the statutory procedure of
passage of city ordinances. Those regulations may be enforced in the same
manner as a city ordinance, and a violation of those regulations is punishable
in the same manner as a violation of any city ordinance, and is subject to the
same maximum penalty as set forth at SDCL § 9-19-3.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.02) (Ord. 2006-10, passed 5-27-2006; Ord. 2014-12, passed
8-20-2014; Ord. 2014-17, passed 1-14-2015)
§ 51.17 WATER RATES AND CHARGES.
   Water sold or furnished by the Municipal Utility Board shall be sold at the
rates set forth in the Municipal Utility Board Regulations which are on file at
the City Finance Office at City Hall. The Municipal Utility Board shall present
the city with the proposed rate schedule for the following calendar year by
March 15 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.03) (Ord. 2006-10, passed 5-27-2006; Ord. 2014-12, passed
8-20-2014)
CHAPTER 52: WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Scope and purpose
   
52.002   Definitions
   
52.003   Application
   
52.004   Permitted use
   
52.005   Use of public roads
   
52.006   Local emergency services
   
52.007   Remedies
   
52.008   Variances
Permits
   
52.020   Permit requirement
   
52.021   Permit application
Design and Installation
   
52.035   Design safety certification
   
52.036   Construction Code
   
52.037   Controls and brakes
   
52.038   Electrical components
   
52.039   Visual appearance; power lines
   
52.040   Warnings
   
52.041   Climb prevention/locks
   
52.042   Decommissioning
Setbacks for Commercial Wind Energy System Facilities and Meteorological Towers
   
52.055   Occupied buildings
   
52.056   Property lines
   
52.057   Public roads
   
52.058   Applicable FAA regulations
Rural (Noncommercial) and Small Residential Wind Turbines
   
52.070   Purpose
   
52.071   Permitted use
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the placement, construction
and permitting of any wind energy system (WES) facility that is within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city, is consistent with the city’s land use
policies and is subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the public
health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 35.01.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person filing an application under this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM FACILITY (CWES) (WIND FARM). An electric
generating facility, placed on 80 acres or more, whose main purpose is to
supply electricity; consisting of one or more wind turbines and other accessory
structures and buildings, including substations, meteorological towers,
electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures
and facilities.
    ENGINEERING CERTIFICATION. For all commercial wind generators or
meteorological towers, the manufacturer’s engineer or another qualified
engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation and tower design of the
commercial wind generators or meteorological towers is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
   FACILITY OWNER. The entity or entities having an equity interest in the wind
generator facility, including their respective successors and assigns.
   HUB HEIGHT. The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation
to the height of the wind turbine hub to which the blade is attached.
   METEOROLOGICAL TOWER. Towers which are erected primarily to measure wind
speed and directions plus other data relevant to sitting or proposed WECS.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS do not include towers and equipment used by airports, the
State Department of Transportation, National Weather Service or other similar
applications to monitor weather conditions. METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS, whether
temporary or permanent must meet FAA requirements.
   NON-PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER. Any landowner except those on whose property
all or a portion of a wind generator facility is located pursuant to an
agreement with the facility owner or operator.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING. A residence, school, hospital, church, public library or
other building used for public gathering that is occupied or in use when the
permit application is submitted.
   OPERATOR. The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind generator facility.
   RURAL WIND TURBINES. Small to medium size wind energy systems installed for
on-site use on agricultural zoned property for supplying electricity or other
uses, not to exceed 120 feet in height.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL WIND TURBINE/ SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES). Small wind
energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied
electricity. Tower height for property sizes between more than three acres to
ten acres the tower height shall be limited to 60 feet and property sizes of
greater than ten acres up to 40 acres shall have a maximum tower height of 80
feet.
   TOWER HEIGHT. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind turbine itself.
   TURBINE. The parts of the WES including the blades, generator and tail.
   TURBINE HEIGHT. The distance measured from the surface (grade) of the tower
foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). An electrical generating facility
comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including, but
not limited to, power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological
towers, that operates by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical
energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed into the electrical grid.
The term WECS is synonymous for wind turbine or wind generator.
   WIND TURBINE. A wind generator conversion system that converts wind
generator into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad transformer, if any.
(Prior Code, § 35.01.02) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.003 APPLICATION.
   This chapter applies to all wind generators, wind generator facilities and
temporary or permanent meteorological towers proposed to be constructed or
placed after the effective date of this chapter, and also applies to stand-
alone wind turbines constructed primarily for residential or rural use.
(Prior Code, § 35.01.03) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.004 PERMITTED USE.
   A wind generator facility or meteorological tower shall be considered a
permitted use if approved by the city’s governing board with proper
documentation required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 35.02.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.005 USE OF PUBLIC ROADS.
   (A)   The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be
used within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city to transport equipment
and parts for construction, operation or maintenance of the commercial wind
energy system facility.
   (B)   The City Highway Authority or a qualified third-party engineer
authorized by the city shall document road conditions prior to construction.
The same parties shall document road conditions again 30 days after
construction is complete or as weather permits.
   (C)   The city will require that the road(s) to be used, be bonded by the
applicant.
   (D)   Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors shall be
promptly repaired at the applicant’s expense and repairs must be approved by
the City Highway Authority.
   (E)   The applicant shall demonstrate that it has appropriate financial
assurance to ensure the prompt repair of damaged roads either through a bond or
an irrevocable letter of credit.
(Prior Code, § 35.06.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.006 LOCAL EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (A)   The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and site
plan also to local emergency services, including Volunteer Fire Department(s).
   (B)   Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate with the city and other
emergency services to develop and coordinate implementation of an emergency
response plan for the commercial energy system facility or meteorological
tower.
(Prior Code, § 35.07.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.007 REMEDIES.
   (A)   No person shall violate or fail to comply with or take any action
which is contrary to the terms of this chapter, or any permit issued under this
chapter, or cause another to violate or fail to comply, or to take any action
which is contrary to the terms of this chapter or any permit issued under this
chapter.
   (B)   If the city determines that a violation of this chapter or the permit
has occurred, the city shall provide written notice to any person alleged to be
in violation of this chapter or permit. If the alleged violation does not pose
an immediate threat to public health or safety, the city and the parties shall
engage in good faith negotiations to resolve the alleged violation. Such
negotiations shall be conducted within 30 days of the notice of violation.
   (C)   If after 30 days from the date of the notice of violation the city
determines, in its discretion, that the parties have not resolved the alleged
violation; the city may institute civil enforcement proceedings or any other
remedy at law to ensure compliance with the ordinance or permit.
(Prior Code, § 35.09.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.008 VARIANCES.
   The City Common Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the terms of this chapter. The Council shall base its
determination on technical justifications, and has the right to attach such
conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.
   (A)   Conditions.
      (1)   In granting variances, modifications and approvals for the wind
generator application, the City Common Council may require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives or the standards or
requirements so varied, modified or approved. In granting any variance, the
City Common Council shall prescribe conditions that it deems necessary to, or
desirable for the public interest. These conditions may include, without being
limited to, personal, surety, performance or maintenance bonds, affidavits,
covenants or other legal instruments.
      (2)   In making its findings, as required herein, the City Common Council
shall take into account:
         (a)   The nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of
land in the vicinity;
         (b)   The number of persons to reside or work near the proposed wind
generator facility site and the probable effect of the proposed wind generator
facility upon living conditions in the vicinity;
         (c)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
a substantial property right of the petitioner; and
         (d)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land.
   (B)   Application required.
      (1)   Applications for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by
the facility owner and/or property owner at the time when the wind generator
facility application is filed for consideration by the City Common Council
stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner and shall be
supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the City
Common Council in the analysis of the proposed wind generator project. The
plans for the proposed wind generator or meteorological tower shall include
such covenants, restrictions and other legal provisions necessary to guarantee
the full achievement of the proposed plan.
      (2)   Applications for variance shall be considered with the wind
generator facility application, and the City Common Council will render its
decision at the hearing or no later than 30 days after the hearing at which the
preliminary package and request for a variance was submitted. All variances
must be approved by the City Common Council.
   (C)   Requirements for granting variance. The City Common Council shall have
the authority to give a variance, the person claiming the variance has the
burden of showing:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest;
      (2)   The literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship;
      (3)   By granting the variance contrary to the provisions of the
ordinance, the spirit of the ordinance will be observed; and
      (4)   By granting the variance, justice will be done.
   (D)   Report to the City Common Council. For each application for a
variance, the facility owner and/or property owner will coordinate with the
Director of Community Development and City Common Council to set a date and
time for a public hearing regarding a variance request.
(Prior Code, § 35.10.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
PERMITS
§ 52.020 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No wind generator facility, an addition of a wind turbine to an
existing wind generator facility or meteorological tower shall be constructed
or located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, unless a permit
has been issued to the facility owner or operator approving construction of the
facility under this chapter.
   (B)   The permit application or amended permit application shall be
accompanied with a fee in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution for all commercial wind generator facilities. Small residential
wind turbines are exempt from permit fees; however, all wind generators require
a building permit for the entire structure and equipment, not to exceed the
amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per unit.
   (C)   Any physical modification to an existing and permitted wind energy
system or wind energy system facility, as defined in this chapter, that
materially alters the size, type and number of wind turbines or other equipment
shall require a permit modification under this chapter. Like-kind replacements
shall not require a permit modification.
   (D)   Commercial wind energy system facilities and meteorological towers
shall only be placed on agricultural zoned property of 40 acres or more.
(Prior Code, § 35.03.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.021 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The permit application shall demonstrate that the proposed commercial
wind energy system facility (CWES) or meteorological tower will comply with
this chapter.
   (B)   The application shall contain the following:
      (1)   A narrative describing the proposed commercial wind energy system
facility or wind energy conversion system, including an overview of the
project; the project location; the approximate generating capacity of the
commercial wind energy system facility; the approximate number, representative
types and height or range of heights of wind turbines to be constructed,
including their generating capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers,
and a description of ancillary facilities. The meteorological tower application
must include a decommissioning time table for data collection. Temporary
meteorological towers will be permitted for a maximum duration of five years;
      (2)   An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the property
owner and the facility owner or operator demonstrating that the facility owner
or operator has the permission of the property owner to apply for necessary
permits for construction and operation of the commercial wind energy system
facility or a meteorological tower;
      (3)   Identification of the properties on which the proposed commercial
wind energy system facility or meteorological tower will be located, and the
properties adjacent to and within a 1,000-foot radius where the commercial wind
energy system facility will be located;
      (4)   A site plan showing the planned location of each wind turbine (or
meteorological tower), property lines, setback lines, access road and turnout
locations, substation(s), electrical cabling from the commercial wind energy
system facility to the substation(s), ancillary equipment, buildings and
structures, including meteorological towers, associated transmission lines and
layout of all structures within the geographical boundaries of any applicable
setback;
      (5)   Documents related to decommissioning of all equipment;
      (6)   Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as
may be reasonably requested by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter;
and
      (7)   Provide a copy of the agreement between the facility owner and the
affected local power company (if applicable).
   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a permit application, Director of
Community Development or his or her designee will determine whether the
application is complete and advise the applicant accordingly.
   (D)   The applicant must appear before the City Common Council at the
regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant shall participate in the hearings
and be afforded an opportunity to present the project to the public and the
City Common Council, and answer questions about the project. The public shall
be afforded an opportunity to ask questions and provide comment on the proposed
project.
      (1)   Neighbors within a 1,000 feet of the property of the proposed wind
generator or meteorological tower must be notified by certified mail at least
14 calendar days in advance of any City Common Council meeting, along with a
return receipt requested, of the proposed construction, which notice shall
include a map of the location of the proposed construction and also:
          (a)   Given the telephone number and address of the facility owner or
operator; and
         (b)   Informed of his or her right to participate in the City Common
Council proceedings.
      (2)   A list of the property owners who received the notice, together
with copies of the certified receipts for the notice sent to the listed
property owners.
   (E)   Within 30 days after the close of hearing, or at the hearing, the City
Common Council will make a decision whether to issue or deny the permit
application.
   (F)   Throughout the permit process, the applicant shall promptly notify the
city of any changes to the information contained in the permit application.
   (G)   Changes to the pending application that do not materially alter the
initial site plan may be adopted without a renewed public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 35.03.02) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
DESIGN AND INSTALLATION
§ 52.035 DESIGN SAFETY CERTIFICATION.
   The design of the commercial wind energy system facility shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American National
Standards Institute. The applicant shall submit an engineering certification
for all commercial wind generators or meteorological towers, the manufacturer’s
engineer or another qualified engineer shall certify that the turbine,
foundation and tower design of the commercial wind generators or meteorological
tower is within accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate
conditions.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.036 CONSTRUCTION CODE.
   To the extent applicable, the wind generator facility shall comply with the
2006 International Building Construction Code.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.02) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.037 CONTROLS AND BRAKES.
   All wind generator facilities shall be equipped an electronic shut down or
with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic over-speed
controls (including variable pitch, tip and other similar systems) and/or
mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode.
Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over-
speed protection.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.03) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.038 ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS.
   All electrical components of a commercial wind energy system facility, rural
wind generator and small residential wind turbines shall conform to the
National Electric Code, and to relevant and applicable local, state and
national codes, including the National Electric Code, and relevant and
applicable international standards; along with the standards set forth by the
affected local power company.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.04) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.039 VISUAL APPEARANCE; POWER LINES.
   (A)   Wind turbines shall be a non-obtrusive color, such as white, off-white
or gray.
   (B)   Commercial wind energy system facilities shall not be artificially
lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration
or other applicable authority that regulates air safety, and/or the City Common
Council.
   (C)   Wind turbines shall not display advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility owner and operator.
   (D)   On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines shall, to
the maximum extent practicable, be placed underground.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.05) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.040 WARNINGS.
   (A)   A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at
the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
   (B)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors or
tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy-wires and along the guy-wires
up to a height of ten feet from the ground.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.06) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.041 CLIMB PREVENTION/LOCKS.
   (A)   Wind turbines and meteorological towers shall not be climbable up to
15 feet above ground surface.
   (B)   All access doors to wind turbines and/or meteorological towers and
electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent
entry by non-authorized persons.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.07) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.042 DECOMMISSIONING.
   (A)   Any and all WES (wind energy systems) or meteorological towers which
are not used for 12 successive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be
dismantled, including excavating and removing concrete footings to a depth of
four feet, and all materials must be removed from the property at the expense
of the facility owner or property owner.
   (B)   Facility owners of commercial wind energy system facilities must
provide a copy of financial surety and or an insurance certificate which will
cover the decommissioning of each WECS at the facility or wind farm, to the
City Department of Community Development. For every wind energy system facility
(WECS) and any meteorological tower (including temporary meteorological tower)
that is decommissioned or removed within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
city, the facility or tower operator and/or owner must notify in writing to the
City Director of Community Development their intent to decommission or remove
the system or tower, within 14 calendar days of the date the equipment and/or
tower is to be decommission or removed by certified mail and must include a
copy of the permit along with the written notification.
(Prior Code, § 35.04.08) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
SETBACKS FOR COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM FACILITIES AND
METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS
§ 52.055 OCCUPIED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied building a
distance not less than one and one-tenth times the turbine height. The setback
distance shall be measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the
nearest point on the foundation of the occupied building.
   (B)   Wind turbines or meteorological towers shall be set back from the
nearest occupied building located on a non-participating landowner’s property a
distance of not less than five times the hub height, (or in the case of a
meteorological tower, the entire height) as measured from the center of the
wind turbine base to the nearest point on the foundation of the occupied
building.
(Prior Code, § 35.05.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.056 PROPERTY LINES.
   All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest property line a
distance of not less than the normal setback requirements per Chapter 156 or
one and one-tenth times the turbine height or the total height of the
meteorological tower, whichever is greater. The setback distance shall be
measured to the center of the wind turbine or the meteorological tower base.
(Prior Code, § 35.05.02) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.057 PUBLIC ROADS.
   All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest public road a distance
of not less than one and one-tenths times the turbine height or for
meteorological towers, the total height of the tower, as measured from the
right-of-way line of the nearest public road to the center of the wind turbine
or meteorological tower base or the minimum setbacks stated in Chapter 156,
whichever is greater.
(Prior Code, § 35.05.03) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.058 APPLICABLE FAA REGULATIONS.
   Wind energy system facilities/wind farms and meteorological towers must
comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to commercial or private airports, including the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.05.04) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
RURAL (NONCOMMERCIAL) AND SMALL RESIDENTIAL WIND TURBINES
§ 52.070 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and
efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site
consumption of utility supplied electricity.
(Prior Code, § 35.08.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.071 PERMITTED USE.
   Small wind energy systems shall be a permitted use on any lot consisting of
at least three acres zoned Agricultural, Commercial or Highway Service per
Chapter 156 and where structures are allowed; subject to certain requirements
as set forth below.
   (A)   Tower height. For property sizes between more than three acres to ten
acres the tower height shall be limited to 60 feet and property sizes of
greater than ten acres up to 39 acres shall have a maximum tower height of 80
feet and property from 40 acres or more for rural wind generators, the maximum
tower height is 120 feet.
   (B)   Setback. No part of the wind system structure, including guy-wire
anchors, may extend closer than one and one-tenths times the hub height in feet
to the property boundaries or structures of the installation site.
   (C)   Noise. Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 55 dBA for lot sizes
of more than three plus to nine plus acres, as measured at the closest
neighboring inhabited dwelling. The level, however, may be exceeded during
short-term events, such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.
   (D)   Approved wind turbines. Small wind turbines and rural wind generators
must have been approved under the emerging technologies program recognized by
the American Wind Energy Association.
   (E)   Compliance with 2006 International Building Code. Building permit
applications for small and rural wind energy systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base and
footings.
   (F)   Compliance with National Electric Code. Building permit applications
for small and rural wind energy systems shall meet the National Electrical Code
and the local power companies requirements.
   (G)   Utility notification. No small or rural wind energy system shall be
installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
   (H)   Evidence. The proposed height of the wind turbine tower does not
exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the system.
(Prior Code, § 35.08.02) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be a Class 2 misdemeanor, and each day’s
violation shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty set
forth above, the City Common Council may immediately suspend all of the permits
or the construction activities of a wind generator facility which does not meet
the requirements of this chapter. If a suspension occurs, the reasons for such
suspension shall be clearly stated by the City Common Council. The suspension
on wind generator facility permits or construction activities shall be lifted
by the City Common Council upon satisfactory proof that the reasons which led
to the suspension have been remedied.
(Prior Code, § 35.11.01) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 7-21-2010)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   SIGNS, SIGNALS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
      
74.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Scope and purpose
   
70.02   Definitions
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this title is to set forth certain laws and regulations
applicable to traffic, parking and other areas of public concern and safety.
(Prior Code, § 16.01.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or more of
the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections or any other portion
of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
    CURB. The extreme edge of a roadway.
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   HIGHWAY or STREET. Every way or place of whatever nature opened to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular travel. The
terms HIGHWAY or STREET shall not be deemed to include a roadway or driveway
upon grounds owned by private persons, colleges, universities or other
institutions.
   INTERSECTIONS. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or
highways which join one another at an angle whether or not one such street or
highway crosses the other; but such area in the case of the point where an
alley and a street meet, shall not be deemed an INTERSECTION.
   LANED STREET. Any street, the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicle traffic.
   LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three
wheels in contact with the ground, except any such vehicle as may be included
with the term TRACTOR, as herein defined.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. All signals, not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS. All signs and markings, other than signals, not
inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by a public body or official
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or
regulating traffic.
   OPERATOR or DRIVER. Any person who is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgager
shall be deemed the OWNER for the purpose of this title.
   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle whether attended or unattended, upon a
roadway or street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.
    PEDESTRIAN. Any person who goes or travels on foot or who travels with the
assistance of a wheelchair.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curb lines or that part devoted to vehicular traffic.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set aside within a street or
highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly marked or
indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart
as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in
conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of
its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a highway or street between the curb lines and
adjacent property lines.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device using colored lights or words, or any
combination thereof, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motor power designed for carrying property or
passenger wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
   TRUCK. Any motor vehicle used for carrying goods and/or materials which has
a box or cargo box exceeding six feet in width and/or has a total length of
over 26 feet, including any permanently attached or removable trailers or cargo
boxes.
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   VEHICLE or MOTOR VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks; provided, that for the purposes of this title, a bicycle or a ridden
animal shall be deemed a VEHICLE.
(Prior Code, § 16.01.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this title is a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any
costs and/or restitution authorized by this title and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 16.01.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Operation of Vehicles Generally
   
71.001   Operator must be licensed
   
71.002   Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs
   
71.003   Stop requirements for railroad grade crossing
   
71.004   Drive on right side of highway
   
71.005   Meeting of vehicles
   
71.006   Overtaking a vehicle
   
71.007   Limitation of privilege of overtaking and passing
   
71.008   Driver to give way to overtaking vehicles
   
71.009   Following too closely
   
71.010   Turning at intersections
   
71.011   Right-of-way
   
71.012   Exceptions to right-of-way rule
   
71.013   Requirements on approach of Police or Fire Department vehicle
   
71.014   Driving through safety zone prohibited
   
71.015   Coasting prohibited
   
71.016   Driving on sidewalk and bike path prohibited
   
71.017   Backing around corners or into intersections prohibited
   
71.018   Reckless driving
   
71.019   Careless driving
   
71.020   U-turns
   
71.021   Truck routes and use of streets or highways by trucks
   
71.022   Slow driving
   
71.023   Stealing rides and trailing sleds
   
71.024   Exhibition driving
   
71.025   Commercial advertising vehicles
Condition of Vehicles
   
71.040   Tire equipment
   
71.041   Brakes
   
71.042   Horns and warning devices
   
71.043   Mirrors required
   
71.044   Windshields shall be unobstructed
   
71.045   Prevention of noise, smoke and regulation of muffler cut-outs
   
71.046   Periods during which lamps must be lighted
   
71.047   Obstruction of operator’s view of driving mechanism
Speed Regulations
   
71.060   General provisions
   
71.061   Director of Public Works Authority
   
71.062   Reasonable speed
   
71.063   Posted speed limit violation
   
71.064   Construction zone violation
Accidents
   
71.075   Duty to stop
   
71.076   Striking unattended vehicle
   
71.077   Duty upon striking fixtures
Pedestrians
   
71.090   Pedestrians’ right-of-way
   
71.091   Crossing streets
   
71.092   Pedestrians’ right and duties at controlled intersections
   
71.093   Pedestrians shall obey traffic signals
   
71.094   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
71.095   Crossing at right angles
   
71.096   Skating on sidewalks
OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
§ 71.001 OPERATOR MUST BE LICENSED.
   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a highway or street in this
city unless such person holds a license which legally entitles said person to
use the highways of the state.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.002 PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR NARCOTIC DRUGS.
   No person who is in an intoxicated condition, or under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug, shall drive or operate or attempt to
drive or operate any motor vehicle or other vehicle upon any of the public
highways, streets, alleys or public grounds of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.003 STOP REQUIREMENTS FOR RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   If any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing
and a clearly visible or audible signal gives warning of the immediate approach
of a railway train or car, he or she shall bring such vehicle to a complete
stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such
railroad and may not proceed until he or she can do so safely.
   (B)   If any person driving a vehicle of any kind carrying school children,
passengers for hire, explosives or inflammable liquids approaches a railroad
grade crossing, he or she shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop within 50
feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and may
not proceed until he or she can do so safely. Said requirement to stop shall
apply with or without the presence of a signal giving warning.
   (C)   If any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing
designated by stop signs, he or she shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad
and may not proceed until he or she can do so safely. Said requirement to stop
shall apply with or without the presence of a signal giving warning.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.004 DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF HIGHWAY.
   Upon all highways of sufficient width, except upon one-way streets, the
driver of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the highway and
shall drive a slow-moving vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge
or curb of such highway, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of
the highway and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, subject to
the limitations applicable in overtaking and passing set forth in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.005 MEETING OF VEHICLES.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, each giving the other at least one-half of the main traveled
portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.006 OVERTAKING A VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction on a two-lane street shall pass at a safe distance to the left
thereof or on a four-lane street shall pass at a safe distance in the lane for
traffic going the same direction as the overtaken vehicle but not being used by
the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not deviate from his or her direct line
of travel without ascertaining that such movement can be made with safety to
other vehicles approaching from the rear and about to overtake and pass such
first mentioned vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.06) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.007 LIMITATION OF PRIVILEGE OF OVERTAKING AND PASSING.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the
centerline of a highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and
passing to be made safely.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other
vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any railroad grade crossing not at
any intersection of highways or streets unless permitted to do so by a law
enforcement officer; provided, however, that a driver of a vehicle may overtake
and pass on the right of another vehicle proceeding in the same direction at an
intersection where a traffic holding lane is clearly marked either by signs or
lines on the roadway.
   (C)   The driver of any vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other
vehicle proceeding in the same direction when traveling in a no passing zone on
any highway, street or bridge when either marked by signs or lines on any
highway, street or bridge.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.07) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.008 DRIVER TO GIVE WAY TO OVERTAKING VEHICLES.
   The driver of any vehicle upon a highway or street, about to be overtaken
and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the
right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being
given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed
of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.08) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.009 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicles
and the traffic upon and condition of the highway or street.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.09) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.010 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an
intersection shall approach such intersection in the lane for traffic nearest
to the right-hand side of the highway, and in turning shall keep as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the highway or street, and when
intending to turn to the left shall approach such intersection in the lane for
traffic to the right of and nearest to the centerline of the highway or street
and in turning shall pass beyond the center of the intersection, passing as
closely as practicable to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the
left.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the CENTER OF THE INTERSECTION shall
mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the highways or streets
intersecting one another.
   (C)   The City Council may authorize the Police Chief to modify the
foregoing methods of turning at intersections by clearly indicating by buttons,
markers or other direction signs installed within an intersection the course to
be followed by vehicles turning thereat, and it shall be unlawful for any
driver to fail to turn in a manner as so directed.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.10) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.011 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield right-of-way
to the vehicle on the right except as otherwise specifically provided by this
subchapter. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall
forfeit any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have hereunder.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal when and as required by this title, may make such left turn, and
the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said
opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left
turn.
   (C)   The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway shall yield the
right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such highway or street within any clearly
marked crosswalk or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the
prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end
of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being
regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices.
   (D)   At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control
signals or law enforcement, drivers of vehicles, including those making turns,
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing or those who have started
to cross the roadway on a “Green” or “Go” signal, and in all other cases,
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully proceeding
directly ahead on a “Green” or a “Go” signal.
   (E)   Every pedestrian crossing a highway or street at any point other than
a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or intersection shall yield the right-of-way
to vehicles upon the highway or street.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.11) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.012 EXCEPTIONS TO RIGHT-OF-WAY RULE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle about to enter or cross a public highway or
street from a private road or driveway or alley shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on such public highway or street.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway or street shall yield the
right-of-way to Police and Fire Department vehicles, when the latter are
operated upon official business and ambulances, and the drivers thereof sound
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. The provisions above shall
not operate to relieve the driver of a Police, Fire Department vehicle or
ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the
consequence of an arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way.
   (C)   Highway or street maintainers in the performance of their duties of
maintaining the highway shall have the preference of right-of-way and shall be
permitted to drive upon the left-hand side of the traveled portion of the
highway or street for the purpose of dumping materials, for repairing said
highway or street and also for smoothing the road surface; such highway or
street maintainer shall not indiscriminately block the traffic but shall allow
reasonable room on the traveled portion of the highway for other vehicles to
pass; such highway or street maintainer shall not however, be bound by the
rules herein provided to turn to the right when meeting other vehicles or
allowing them to pass when his or her work requires him or her to remain on the
other side of the traveled portion of the highway; such maintainers shall not
in any way interfere with the traffic on said highway unless absolutely
necessary, and he or she shall take all proper precautions to provide for the
safety and protection of the users of such a highway, including proper warning
of such repair or maintenance work; such maintainers, however, shall be subject
to the rules of travel as herein provided, except when the performance of their
maintenance work requires them to do otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.12) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.013 REQUIREMENTS ON APPROACH OF POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this title and
the laws of the state, or of a law enforcement vehicle properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall
immediately drive to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-
hand edge or curb of the highway or street, or in case of a one-way highway the
nearest edge or curb, clear of any intersection of highways or streets, and
shall stop and remain in such position unless otherwise directed by a law
enforcement officer or until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have
passed.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.13) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.014 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE PROHIBITED.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not at any time drive through or over a
safety zone, as defined in this title.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.14) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.015 COASTING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall when driving a vehicle upon a down grade upon any highway
coast with the gears of said vehicle in neutral.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.15) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.016 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK AND BIKE PATH PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle within any sidewalk or bike path
area except at a permanent or temporary driveway or alley, or except as may be
specifically allowed in this title.
   (B)   Law enforcement, fire personnel, ambulances or other emergency
personnel or municipal vehicles when necessary in the course of completing
their duties may drive on any sidewalk or bike path when necessary in the
performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.16) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.017 BACKING AROUND CORNERS OR INTO INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall back any vehicle around a corner at an intersection, or into
an intersection of public streets.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.17) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.018 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any highway, street or alley in a
careless and/or heedless manner in disregard of the rights or safety of others,
or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as
to endanger or likely endanger any person or property.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.18) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.019 CARELESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any highway, street or alley of this
city carelessly and without due caution, at a speed or in a manner so as to
endanger or likely endanger, any person or property, but not amounting to
reckless driving, as defined in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.19) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.020 U-TURNS.
   (A)   U-turns at intersections.
      (1)   At any intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control
signals or by a law enforcement officer, or where warned by an official traffic
control sign displaying the words “No U-turn” or “No Left Turn,” no person
shall operate turn any vehicle at the intersection so as to proceed in the
opposite direction.
      (2)   Vehicles making a lawful U-turn at any intersection shall grant the
right-of-way to all vehicles and motor vehicles approaching and entering such
intersection for any purpose other than making a U-turn.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.20)
   (B)   U-turn prohibited. No person shall make a U-turn by operating a motor
vehicle in the middle of a block, to change direction of travel, or to obtain
parking on the opposite side of the roadway, or at any other place other than
at an intersection where said U-turns are not prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.21)
(Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.021 TRUCK ROUTES AND USE OF STREETS OR HIGHWAYS BY TRUCKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any truck or truck tractor, as defined in §
70.02, equipped with more than three axles to travel or park upon any street in
the city unless such street is a designated truck route. Trucks or truck
tractors may travel or park outside of the designated truck routes if necessary
to pick up or make delivery of merchandise or material for a legitimate
business purpose. In determining whether a truck is equipped with more than
three axles, the number of axles on the truck and the number of axles on any
trailer which the truck is pulling shall be added together. This section does
not apply to pickups pulling tandem or fifth wheel stock trailers.
   (B)   The designated truck routes in the city shall be all of Lazelle Street
and Highway 14A in the city limits.
   (C)   If a detour should be posted around the streets included in the truck
route, the detour shall constitute a part of the truck route.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.22) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.022 SLOW DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle at an unnecessarily slow rate of speed as
to hinder or retard traffic.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.23) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.023 STEALING RIDES AND TRAILING SLEDS.
   No person shall cause to be attached or to permit any sled of any kind
occupied by children to be trailed behind any vehicle, and no person shall
ride, trespass upon, seize hold of or drag, slide or in any manner trail behind
any vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.24) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.024 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   No person shall drive a vehicle within the limits of the city in such a
manner that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise, or tire squeal, skid or
slide upon acceleration or stopping or that simulates a temporary race; or that
causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.25) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.025 COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate, stand or park a vehicle on any street for the
purpose of commercial advertising. Advertisements relating to the business for
which a vehicle is used may be put upon a motor vehicle when such vehicle is in
use for normal delivery or business purposes, and not merely or mainly for the
purpose of commercial advertising.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the forgoing provision of this section, buses and taxi
cabs operated for transportation of the public for hire or buses operated for
transportation of the elderly or disabled whether for hire or at no charge and
law enforcement and emergency vehicles may display commercial advertisements on
the exterior surface areas of said vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.26) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2007-29, passed
9-21-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
CONDITION OF VEHICLES
§ 71.040 TIRE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   (1)   No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway or street shall have on
its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike, or any protuberances of
any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire except that it shall be permissible to use tire chains of
reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of
snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to operate upon the highways and streets of
this city, motor vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires in which there are
embedded metal studs or wires of tungsten steel, or other similar material.
   (B)   The city may issue special permits authorizing the operation upon the
highways and streets of vehicles or machinery with tire equipment which
otherwise would not comply with this section.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.041 BRAKES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway or street shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle, including two separate means
of applying the brakes, are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the
motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels.
   (B)   Any combination of motor vehicle trailers, semi-trailers or other
vehicle shall be equipped with brakes upon one or more of such vehicles
adequate to stop such combinations of vehicles within the distance specified
for motor vehicles under regulations set forth in this subchapter.
   (C)   Any motorcycle and bicycle with motor attached when operated upon a
highway or street shall be provided with at least one brake which may be
operated by hand or foot.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.042 HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped
with a horn in good working order capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet, and it shall be
unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, for any vehicle to
be equipped with or for any person to use upon a vehicle any siren, or any
compression or spark plug whistle, or any exhaust horn, or whistle which does
not produce a harmonious sound, or for any person at any time to use a horn
otherwise than a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably
loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device.
   (B)   Any Police, Fire Department, fire patrol vehicle and any ambulance
used for emergency calls shall be equipped with a bell, siren or exhaust
whistle.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.043 MIRRORS REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway which vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the highway to the
rear by looking backward from the driver’s position, unless such vehicle is
equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the
highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.044 WINDSHIELDS SHALL BE UNOBSTRUCTED.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway with any sign, poster or
other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, side or
rear windows of such motor vehicle other than a certificate or other paper
required to be so displayed by law or other than temporary driving instructions
placed thereon by the manufacturer. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a
highway or street with any object or gadget dangling between the view of the
driver and the windshield of said vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.045 PREVENTION OF NOISE, SMOKE AND REGULATION OF MUFFLER CUT-OUTS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle on a highway or street unless such
motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.
   (B)   No person shall use a muffler cut-out on any vehicle upon a highway or
street.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle
is so constructed or leaded as to prevent its contents from dripping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.06) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.046 PERIODS DURING WHICH LAMPS MUST BE LIGHTED.
   Any motor vehicle operated in the city shall, during the period from sunset
to sunrise and any other time when there is not sufficient light to render
clearly discernible any person on the highway at a distance of 200 feet ahead,
shall be equipped with lighted front and rear lamps for the different classes
of motor vehicles as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.07) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022)
§ 71.047 OBSTRUCTION OF OPERATOR’S VIEW OF DRIVING MECHANISM.
   No person shall drive any vehicle when there are in the front seat of such
vehicle more than three adult persons or when in any other manner it is so
loaded so as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides or to
interfere with the operator’s control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.08) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   No person shall drive any vehicle on a highway, street or alley located in
this city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing or at speeds in excess of those fixed by this
subchapter or as established by the Director of Public Works as hereinafter set
forth.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2010-08, passed
7-21-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.061 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall consult with the Chief of Police,
or with a city official designated by the city, and the Director, consistent
with the authority of SDCL § 9-31-3, is authorized and empowered to determine
and establish upon any street or highway within the city, or any part thereof,
limited speed zones. The speed limit set by the Director of Public Works for
each speed zone shall be the maximum speed at which any person may drive or
operate any vehicle upon such street, highway or portion thereof so zoned, and
the speed limit for such zone shall be conspicuously posted.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works may establish limited speed zones through
construction work areas. The beginning and end of the speed zone for a
construction work area shall be conspicuously posted with signs showing the
maximum speed permissible. Signs stating that any fine will be doubled shall be
erected in addition to the maximum speed limit signs.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2010-08, passed
7-21-2010; Ord. 2022-06, passed 4-4-2022)
§ 71.062 REASONABLE SPEED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any street, alley or public place
within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing. It shall be prima facie evidence that the speed at
which a driver operates any vehicle or motor vehicle upon any street, alley,
public place or property is not reasonable and prudent, under the conditions
then existing, if the driver operates said vehicle or motor vehicle upon any
such street, alley, public place or property in the city at a speed exceeding
the following:
      (1)   Fifteen mph when approaching within 50 feet of a grade crossing at
any railway, when the driver’s view is obstructed. A driver’s view shall be
deemed obstructed when, at any time during the last 200 feet of his or her
approach to the crossing, he or she does not have a clear and uninterrupted
view of the railway crossing and of any traffic on the railway for a distance
of 400 feet in each direction from the crossing;
      (2)   Fifteen mph on all streets immediately adjacent to school property
while children are present or as established and signed by the City Director of
Public Works;
      (3)   Fifteen mph when passing a school during school recess or while
children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours;
      (4)   Fifteen mph when approaching within 50 feet of and in traversing or
crossing an intersection of highways, when the driver’s view is obstructed. A
driver’s view shall be deemed obstructed when, at any time during the last 50
feet of his or her approach to the intersection, he or she does not have a
clear and uninterrupted view of the intersection and of the traffic upon all of
the highway entering the intersection for a distance of 200 feet from the
intersection;
      (5)   Fifteen mph in traversing or going around curves or traversing a
grade upon a highway when the driver’s view is obstructed within a distance of
100 feet along the highway in the direction in which the driver is proceeding;
      (6)   Twenty mph on any highway in a business district, when traffic on
the highway is controlled at intersections by traffic officers or stop and go
signals;
      (7)   Twenty mph on all other highways in a business district;
      (8)   Twenty-five mph in a residential district unless a different speed
is fixed and duly posted by the Director of Public Works;
      (9)   Thirty mph on all highways and through streets in a residential
district unless a different speed is fixed and duly posted by the Director of
Public Works;
      (10)   Twenty mph in public parks unless a different speed is fixed and
duly posted by the Director of Public Works;
      (11)   Ten mph in public alleys unless a different speed is fixed and
duly posted by the Director of Public Works; and
      (12)   Ten mph within the Bear Butte Cemetery.
   (B)   The reasonable speed limits set out in this section shall not apply to
any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call provided
that the emergency vehicle/driver sounds an audible signal by siren or horn and
two illuminated red lights on the front and one emergency beacon light, visible
360 degrees, are displayed. This provision, however, shall not operate to
relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive
with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street nor shall it
protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless
disregard of the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2010-08, passed
7-21-2010; Ord. 2022-06, passed 4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.063 POSTED SPEED LIMIT VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any street,
alley or public place in the city at a speed greater than the posted limit, or
at a speed that is greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2010-08, passed
7-21-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.064 CONSTRUCTION ZONE VIOLATION.
   Any fine for a violation of the speed limit in a construction work areas
shall be double the standard fine for speeding, but may not exceed the maximum
fine for a violation of this subchapter as set forth herein at §
70.99.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2010-08, passed
7-21-2010)
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.075 DUTY TO STOP.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury or
death to any person or damage to property shall immediately stop and given his
or her name, address and the registration number of his or her vehicle and
exhibit his or her registration receipt to the person struck or the driver or
occupants of any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured
in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person
to a physician or surgeon for medical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.076 STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name
and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking
and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.077 DUTY UPON STRIKING FIXTURES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request
and if available exhibit his or her operator’s license and shall make report of
such accident when and as required by this title.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 71.090 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked
crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of
traffic is being regulated by law enforcement officers or traffic control
signals.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, it shall be unlawful
for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.091 CROSSING STREETS.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any point other than within a marked
or unmarked crosswalk in the business district as defined in this title or on
any federal highway.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.092 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT AND DUTIES AT CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections, any pedestrian shall
have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles, and at such marked places,
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk, and any
pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall
have the right-of-way over any vehicle so stopped.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk
when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk
for a purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 71.093 PEDESTRIANS SHALL OBEY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   At intersections where traffic is directed by a law enforcement officer or
stop and go signals, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the
roadway other than with released traffic and pedestrians shall obey all traffic
signals and directions.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.094 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.095 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.06) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.096 SKATING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall roller skate, roller blade or operate any skateboard, wagon,
scooter or similar device upon any sidewalk on Main Street within the city
between Junction Avenue and Third Street.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.07) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Parking or stopping on streets or highways
   
72.02   Diagonal parking requirements
   
72.03   Parallel parking requirements
   
72.04   Stop; alley or private driveway
   
72.05   Parking and stopping prohibited in certain places
   
72.06   Parking; snow removal
   
72.07   Use of public property; prohibitions and regulations
   
72.08   Police Department authority
   
72.09   Removal of prohibited cars and other personal property
   
72.10   Appeals
   
72.11   Failure to pay enforced by court appearance
   
72.12   Parking spaces for individuals with disabilities provided
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 PARKING OR STOPPING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   Any vehicle parked or stopped in the business district must be diagonally
parked in the lanes designated for parking by appropriate signs on the pavement
or curb, except in area designated for parallel parking or in areas which the
Police Department may designate under authority and direction of the City
Council by proper signs as “No Parking” and, wherever said Police Department
has so designated “No Parking,” it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to
comply therewith. On all other highways or streets in the city not otherwise
designated by this title, or by the Police Department as directed by the City
Council, all vehicles shall be parked parallel with the curb.
   (A)   No person shall park or leave standing any truck, except pick-up
trucks, on Main Street between its intersection with Middle Street and its
intersection with Sixth Street, and no person shall park a truck on any street
or alley in the city in such a manners to impede traffic or so as to be
dangerous or likely to be dangerous to other persons traveling on such street
or alley.
   (B)   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon Main Street
from the intersection of Middle Street to the Main Street intersection with
Sixth Street and to include all side streets one block either side of Main
Street to include both sides of Sherman Street from Fourth Street to Junction
Avenue, and Lazelle Street on the north, and also to include First Street,
Third Street and Fourth Street north of Lazelle Street to Bear Butte Creek,
Middle Street from Lazelle Street to Sherman Street, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Friday, or during anytime, when in the Director of Public
Works opinion, such streets must be cleared of snow for the safe and orderly
flow of traffic, or during such times as the City Council, by resolution, shall
deem it necessary to prohibit parking for the safety, health and welfare of the
general public.
   (C)   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon Junction
Avenue from its intersection with Main Street, South to Sturgis City Limits.
   (D)   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon Cleveland
Street from its intersection with Ninth Street, West to the interstate right-
of-way.
   (E)   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon Moose Drive
from its intersection with Dolan Creek Road to Highway 14A.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 DIAGONAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Any vehicle parked diagonally shall be drawn up to the curb, gutter or
sidewalk on the right-hand side of the street at an angle of 45 degrees with
the curb line thereof, such vehicle to be parked within six inches of the curb,
gutter or sidewalk on and along said street upon which such vehicle is parked,
and no vehicle shall nearer than one foot to any other vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008)
§ 72.03 PARALLEL PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Any vehicle parked parallel shall be drawn up parallel to the curb, gutter
or sidewalk on the right-hand side of the street, the hub of both wheels on the
right-hand side of the vehicle to be within one foot of the curb, gutter or
sidewalk on and along the street upon which such vehicles are parked, and no
vehicle shall be parked nearer than three feet of the front or rear of any
other vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008)
§ 72.04 STOP; ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   Any driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.06) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008)
§ 72.05 PARKING AND STOPPING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   No person operating a vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle
on any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal:
      (1)   Within an intersection;
      (2)   On a crosswalk;
      (3)   In front of a private driveway;
      (4)   On a sidewalk;
      (5)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (6)   Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
      (7)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (8)   Within 15 feet of the point of intersection of curb lines;
      (9)   At a designated loading or passenger zone;
      (10)   At a designated taxicab stand or bus stand;
      (11)   Any “No Parking” zone which may be designated by signs or by a
curb which is painted with a solid yellow stripe;
      (12)   In a public alley within the city limits, except that trucks and
other vehicles may stop in such alleys for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials. The vehicles loading and/or unloading in the alleys
on either side of Main Street from Middle Street to Fourth Street may stop to
load or unload only while the vehicle is attended;
      (13)   On the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street except temporarily engaged in the loading or unloading
of passengers or materials; or
      (14)   On the highways, streets and alleys of the city in such a manner
as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
vehicle in a stall or a space designated for individuals with disabilities, if
such stall or space is posted or marked in a prescribed way, unless the vehicle
displays distinguishing license plates or place cards issued for individuals
with disabilities, including veterans with disabilities. A person convicted of
violating this division (B) shall be punished by a mandatory fine as shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. The Police Department of the
city is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle at the expense of the owner of
the vehicle from a stall or a space designated for individuals with
disabilities, if the vehicle is parked in violation of the above provisions.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
truck, delivery or installation vehicle on the side of or in the median of Main
Street between Middle and Fourth Streets from 7:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. from
July 15 to August 15 each year.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.07) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008; Ord. 2015-03, passed 4-1-2015) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING; SNOW REMOVAL.
   (A)   In order that the Street Department may efficiently clean the streets
and highways in the city, the Police Department or the Public Works Director is
hereby authorized to place signs in any block or blocks within said city
stating that snow removal will be made at a specified time in the near future
in which case it shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle upon any of said
streets or highways upon which said signs have been placed during the specified
time. Such signs shall be placed at the end of each of said blocks to be
cleaned.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
section may be removed by the Police Department or the Public Works Department
and the owner thereof, in addition to the other penalties prescribed for the
violation of this section shall be required to pay the cost of towing and
removal of said vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.08) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008; Ord. 2015-03, passed 4-1-2015) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY; PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Accumulation of personal property or junk on public property
prohibited. No person shall store, deposit, maintain or permit to be maintained
or to accumulate upon any public right-of-way any personal property, including,
but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Garbage, refuse, waste or rubbish;
      (2)   Any vehicle that is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative,
including any vehicle with flat tires, missing wheels and the like;
      (3)   Any vehicle which is non-licensed or because of body damage, or
operating apparatus, including tires and wheels, is in such a condition to
render the start, legal operation or use of said vehicle impossible; or
      (4)   Any dead animal remaining on any public property for a period of
more than 24 hours.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.09)
   (B)   Fires on public property prohibited. No person shall ignite any
bonfire or campfire on public property.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.10)
   (C)   Storage on public property prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall, unless specifically authorized by the City Police
Department, store or permit to be stored any trailer, recreational vehicle,
implement, vehicle or other personal property on any public right-of-way.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the term STORE shall include the
following:
         (a)   Leaving any car, pick up, motorcycle, camper or recreational
vehicle in any public right-of-way for more than five consecutive days;
         (b)   Leaving any farm tractor, implement, trailer, truck or truck
tractor in any public right-of-way for more than 24 hours; or
         (c)   During the period of July 20 through August 15, leaving any
recreational vehicle or camper in any public right-of-way for more than 24
hours.
      (3)   Any trailer, recreational vehicle, implement, vehicle or other
personal property being stored in violation of this section shall be
immediately removed from the right-of-way and may not be continued to be stored
by moving said property to another location in any public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.11)
(Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed 3-22-2008) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 POLICE DEPARTMENT AUTHORITY.
   The City Police Department shall have the power to authorize the storage of
any vehicle or trailer in the public right-of-way upon request of an owner in
the event said owner proves to the Police Department that the storage is
necessary for a specific, temporary period of time at a certain location and
that the vehicle or trailer is being used in connection with a construction,
repair or clean-up project, or another event deemed appropriate by the Police
Department and that said project is associated with real property adjacent to
or closely located to the area of the public right-of-way where the vehicle or
trailer will be temporarily stored.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.12) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008)
§ 72.09 REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED CARS AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any vehicle or trailer located upon public property in violation of
this chapter or any traffic ordinance of the city may be summarily removed by
the Police Department. The owner of the removed vehicle, in addition to any
fines and penalties which may be imposed for such violation, shall pay the
charges for towing and storage of the removed vehicle.
   (B)   Any personal property located on any public property in violation of
this chapter may be summarily removed by the Police Department. The owner or
person responsible for the violation, in addition to any fines and penalties
which may be imposed for such violation, shall pay any costs incurred for the
removal of the personal property.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.13) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal permitted.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a citation issued by any law enforcement
officer under this chapter may appeal said citation to the City Council within
20 days from receipt of citation. Before filing an appeal, the aggrieved person
is strongly encouraged to meet with the Chief of Police or other designated
city official to discuss why the person believes the citation was issued in
error. If unresolved, the appeal may be commenced.
      (2)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the
city, or appointed designee, within 20 days from receipt of citation. There
shall be a filing fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution
assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the city at the time of
filing the notice of appeal. The city, or appointed designee, may waive the
assessed fee if the appellant provides a reasonable basis showing hardship or
lack of ability to pay the fee. Any increase in penalty from failure to pay
within the designated ten days is set aside if the person files a notice of
appeal.
      (3)   The notice of appeal shall include a statement of the action
complained of, why the same should be modified or rescinded, an address,
including an email address, if applicable, where the appellant can be mailed
notice of hearings and a copy of the citation issued. Upon receipt of the
appeal documents from the city, the Finance Officer shall deliver a copy of the
appeal to the City Attorney.
   (B)   Time of hearing and notice. A public hearing shall be held on all
appeals within 45 working days after the filing of the appeal, unless a later
date is agreed upon by the aggrieved person and the city. The city shall cause
written notice of the date, time and place of such hearing to be served upon
the aggrieved person by personal service or certified mail to the address set
forth in the appeal documents at least ten days prior to the hearing. The
appeal shall be scheduled on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council for a period of at least 30 minutes unless otherwise directed by
the City Council.
    (C)   Hearing procedures. The following rules shall govern the procedures
for an administrative hearing.
      (1)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according
to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
      (2)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of
evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory
rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence after objection
in civil or criminal actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
      (3)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence which lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
   (D)   Rights of parties at hearing. The aggrieved person and the city shall
have these rights among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary, physical and oral evidence;
      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
      (4)   To rebut evidence.
   (E)   Decision. After each appeal hearing, the Council shall consider the
evidence in executive session and may state its decision when it has concluded
the executive session. In addition, the Council shall provide written findings
stating the following:
      (1)   The evidence the City Council relied upon in reaching its decision;
      (2)   Based upon such written findings, the Council may sustain or
dismiss the citation or decision; and
      (3)   In sustaining citation, the Council may in its discretion reduce or
waive the payment of any civil penalty, permit, reinstatements, late penalty
fee or repeat offender increase.
   (F)   Report, costs. A written report of the decision, including the
findings, shall be furnished to the aggrieved person and the designated city
official within 20 working days from the date the appeal hearing is closed. The
city and the aggrieved person shall bear their own respective cost of the
appeal proceeding. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If the
violation is affirmed, the ten-day payment time frame begins to run upon the
appellant receiving the written decision.
   (G)   Subject to judicial review.
       (1)   The decision of the Council may be subject to judicial review as
provided by law.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive any person of
his or her constitutional right to a hearing or trial as to any violation
charged.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.15) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008; Ord. 2022-06, passed 4-4-2022)
§ 72.11 FAILURE TO PAY ENFORCED BY COURT APPEARANCE.
   Upon failure of any person to pay any violation fee or fine within the time
periods indicated, the city may request a summons from the magistrate court
requiring said person to appear in court to answer for the violation.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.16) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008)
§ 72.12 PARKING SPACES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES PROVIDED.
   The City Council may by resolution designate certain parking spaces within
the regulated parking district established herein, as parking for individuals
with disabilities only. These spaces shall be clearly designated by posting of
signs designating them as parking spaces for individuals with disabilities
only. Only a vehicle which is operated by a person with a disability, or a
vehicle in which a person with a disability is riding, and which vehicle bears
a sticker issued by the state, certifying that the owner/operator of this
vehicle is a person with a disability, shall be allowed to park in these
designated parking spaces for individuals with disabilities. The fact that the
vehicle bears a sticker issued by the state certifying that the owner/operator
of the vehicle is a person with a disability, shall not exempt the person
operating the vehicle from complying with the parking time limit restrictions
provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.17) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the cost of removal and/or storage and assessment
of any charges related thereto, any person who violates this chapter, except in
the event where the violation involves parking a vehicle in a stall or space
designated for individuals with disabilities, shall within ten days from the
time when the notice of violation was attached to the vehicle, pay to the City
Police Department the sum as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution. If any person fails to pay the sum within ten days, he or she shall
pay to the City Police Department the sum as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution.
      (2)   Any person who parks a vehicle in a stall or space designated for
individuals with disabilities as prohibited by this chapter shall, within ten
days from the time when the notice of violation was attached to the vehicle,
pay to the City Police Department the sum as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution. If any person fails to pay the sum within ten days, he
or she shall pay to the City Police Department the sum as shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution.
      (3)   Any sums of money collected by the City Police Department under the
provisions of this chapter shall be deposited with the Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.14) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008; Ord. 2022-06, passed 4-4-2022)
CHAPTER 73: SIGNS, SIGNALS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
73.01   Stop signs
   
73.02   Yield signs
   
73.01   Signals on starting, stopping or turning
   
73.02   Flag or light at end of load
   
73.03   Unauthorized signs prohibited
   
73.04   Interference with signs and signals prohibited
   
73.05   Traffic control signal legend
   
73.06   Following directions of law enforcement officer
   
73.07   Designation of one-way streets
§ 73.01 STOP SIGNS.
   The City Council shall by authorizing the placement of octagonal shaped stop
signs, determine at what intersections vehicles shall come to a complete stop.
No person shall fail to obey said signs by failing to bring the vehicle to a
complete stop.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   The City Council shall, by authorizing the placement of triangular
shaped “yield right-of-way” signs determine at what intersections certain
vehicles shall have a preferential right-of-way. The driver of a vehicle
approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop, if necessary, and shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which
he or she is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2008-03, passed
3-22-2008)
§ 73.03 SIGNALS ON STARTING, STOPPING OR TURNING.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle upon a highway or street, before starting,
stopping or turning from a direct line, shall first see that such movement can
be made in safety and, if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement,
shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn and, whenever the
operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, shall give a
signal as required in this section plainly visible to the driver of such other
vehicle of the intention to make such movement.
   (B)   The signal herein required shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm in the manner herein specified, or by an approved mechanical or
electrical signal device, such as signal lamp or lamps, except that when a
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent the hand and arm signal from
being visible both to the front and rear, then said signals must be given by
such a lamp or lamps or signal device.
   (C)   Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver
shall indicate his or her intention to start, stop or turn by extending the
hand and arm from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such
signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 73.04 FLAG OR LIGHT AT END OF LOAD.
   Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet beyond the
rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of such
load in such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of
such load a red flag not less than 12 inches both in length and width; except
that, between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise,
there shall be displayed at the end of any such load a red light plainly
visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least 200 feet from the rear of
such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 73.05 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall erect or maintain upon any highway, any
warning or direction sign, marker, signal or light in imitation of any official
sign, marker, signal or light erected under the provisions of this title, and
no person shall erect or maintain upon any highway any traffic or highway sign
or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the erection of
signs, markers or signals bearing thereon the name of an organization
authorized to erect the same by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal as provided in this title.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the
words “Go,” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights successively one
at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and said
terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn; but
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “Stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Steady red alone, or “stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone, except as hereinafter provided.
       (2)   The driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable
at entrance to the crosswalk and to the far right side of the roadway, then at
the entrance to the intersection in obedience to a red or “Stop” signal, may
make a right turn but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other
traffic proceeding as directed by signal at said intersection. This section is
not effective if a sign erected at the intersection expressly prohibits such
turn.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
      (3)   In the event of official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. Whenever an
illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal
it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as provided in divisions (E)
and (F) below.
   (E)   Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk
at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before
entering the intersection, and the light to proceed shall be subject to the
rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (F)   Flashing yellow.
      (1)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal
only with caution.
      (2)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossing shall be governed
elsewhere in this title.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2022-06, passed
4-4-2022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 FOLLOWING DIRECTIONS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Regardless of all traffic signs, any driver of a motor vehicle shall obey
traffic directions personally given by any law enforcement officer who is
clearly identified as a law enforcement officer. Any willful failure to obey
said directions shall constitute a violation of this title.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.06) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.09 DESIGNATION OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The City Council may from time to time designate certain streets within the
city for one-way traffic only. Upon proper designation by the City Council,
said streets shall be signed accordingly. Any failure to obey the designated
directions of travel shall be subject to the penalty provision set forth in §
70.99.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.08) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2007-25, passed
8-31-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
74.01   No interference with pedestrians; no riding in certain areas
   
74.02   Traffic laws shall be obeyed
   
74.03   Lighting required
   
74.04   No hitching rides
Golf Carts
   
74.15   Use of golf carts on city streets
   
74.16   “Golf cart” defined
   
74.17   Application for permit required
   
74.18   Registration decal
   
74.19   Use on state of county highway prohibited
   
74.20   Traffic rules apply
   
74.21   Seating
 
   
74.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 74.01 NO INTERFERENCE WITH PEDESTRIANS; NO RIDING IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   No person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street, highway
or ally in such a manner as to interfere with any pedestrian thereon, and no
person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon the sidewalks on Main Street from
Junction Avenue west to Third Street, on Third Street from Sherman Street north
to Lazelle Street, on Second Street from Sherman Street north to Lazelle
Street, on First Street from Sherman Street north to Lazelle Street and on
Junction Avenue from Sherman Street north to Lazelle Street.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.02 TRAFFIC LAWS SHALL BE OBEYED.
   Any person riding or propelling any bicycle shall observe all traffic laws,
regulations and traffic signs.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 74.03 LIGHTING REQUIRED.
   No bicycle shall be permitted on any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk
or boulevard of the city during the period from one-half hour after sunset to
one-half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when there is not
sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person on said public
street, highway, alley or sidewalk at a distance of 200 feet ahead unless said
bicycle is equipped with a lighted lamp on the front thereof visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet in front of
such bicycle and shall also be equipped with a reflex mirror lamp on the rear
exhibiting a yellow or red light visible under like conditions from a distance
of 200 feet to the rear of said bicycle.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 NO HITCHING RIDES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster wagon, sled, roller
skates or any other similar vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself
to any moving vehicle upon any public street or highway, or to hold on to such
moving vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
74.99
GOLF CARTS
§ 74.15 USE OF GOLF CARTS ON CITY STREETS.
   The city, as authorized by SDCL § 32-14-14, hereby permits the use on the
municipal streets of the city golf carts not otherwise licensed by the state
for use on a public highway, or licensed by another state pursuant to a
comparable licensing provision, by an operator possessing a valid driver’s
license, subject to the restrictions and requirements set forth in this
subchapter and the requirements of state law.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.01) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012)
§ 74.16 “GOLF CART” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. As stated in SDCL § 32-14-13, a four-wheeled vehicle originally
and specifically designed and intended to transport one or more individuals and
golf clubs for the purpose of playing golf on a golf course.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.02) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012)
§ 74.17 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person may operate a golf cart upon the streets or alleys of the city
without obtaining a permit for such operation from the City Finance Office. To
obtain such a permit from the city, the requirements are as follows.
   (A)   The applicant shall provide valid documentation that the golf cart is
insured for liability for the remainder of the calendar year.
   (B)   The applicant shall provide valid documentation that the golf cart
meets the equipment specifications and other requirements of state law.
   (C)   The applicant shall provide valid documentation that the golf cart is
equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem in accordance with SDCL § 32-15-20
or a flashing white or amber warning light in accordance with SDCL § 32-17-46.
   (D)   The applicant shall pay the yearly registration fee (January through
December) to the city in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution at the time the application and supporting documents are
submitted to the City Finance Office. Registration is not transferable with a
change in ownership.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.03) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.18 REGISTRATION DECAL.
   (A)   Upon approval of the application by the Finance Office and payment of
the registration fee, the office shall issue to the applicant a valid
registration decal.
   (B)   The decal shall be affixed in a visible location immediately adjacent
to the slow-moving vehicle emblem or the flashing white or amber warning light
on the rear exterior of the golf cart.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.04) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012)
§ 74.19 USE ON STATE OF COUNTY HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may operate a golf cart on a state or county highway except
for crossing at right angle from one side of the highway to the other.
   (B)   A golf cart shall cross the highway at a right angle, but only after
stopping and yielding the right-of-way to all approaching traffic and crossing
as closely as possible to an intersection or approach.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.05) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.20 TRAFFIC RULES APPLY.
   An operator of a golf cart shall comply with all city, county and state
traffic rules and regulations applying to the operation of motor vehicles
generally, except that a golf cart shall not be required to have a bell, horn
or directional turn signals.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.06) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012)
§ 74.21 SEATING.
   The operator and occupants of a golf cart shall be seated at all times. It
shall be unlawful for more than two people to occupy the front seat while the
golf cart is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.07) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   As provided for at SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2), any person found to
be guilty of violating any of the provisions of §§
74.15 through
74.21 shall be subject to a maximum penalty of a fine as shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding
30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.08) (Ord. 2006-07, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2012-11, passed
7-18-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
91.   TEMPORARY CAMPING AT A RESIDENCE WITHIN THE CITY
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   HOBBY BEEKEEPING
      
94.   NUISANCES
      
95.   CEMETERY
      
96.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 90: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Scope and purpose
   
90.002   Definitions
   
90.003   Hours
   
90.004   Illegal to enter or remain
   
90.005   Deposit required for use of shelters
   
90.006   Pets and animals
   
90.007   Wildlife and vegetation
   
90.008   Metal detectors
   
90.009   Authority of City Park Board to regulate
   
90.010   Appeal process
Park Board
   
90.025   Park Board established
   
90.026   Members, appointment, compensation, bond
   
90.027   President, Vice President, Secretary
   
90.028   Meetings
   
90.029   Powers and duties
   
90.030   Under authority of Common Council
   
90.031   Duties of the President
   
90.032   City Council may prescribe rules
   
90.033   City Council may close park areas
   
90.034   Illegal to enter closed park
Fairgrounds
   
90.045   Lease agreement and liability waiver required
   
90.046   Fees
   
90.047   Ticket sales
   
90.048   Deposit required
   
90.049   Liability waiver and release from liability
   
90.050   Liability insurance
Motor Vehicles in Parks and Recreation Areas
   
90.065   Power and authority
   
90.066   City bike path
   
90.067   Bear Butte Creek
   
90.068   Exemptions
   
90.069   Racing and other competition prohibited
Urban Forestry
   
90.080   Purpose; creation of Board
   
90.081   Urban Forestry Board established
   
90.082   Street trees
   
90.083   Trees on public property
   
90.084   Trees on private property
   
90.085   Storage of wood
   
90.086   Interference with City Parks Department
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth those regulations necessary for
the administration, maintenance, management and operation of the city parks
areas.
(Prior Code, § 14.01.01) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any automobile, motor truck, motorcycle, house trailer,
trailer, moped and any vehicle propelled by power other than muscular.
   PARK TREES. Any trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in any
public park or in any area owned by the city, subject to the sight distance
requirements hereinafter set forth.
   PEST. Any organism, insect, rodent, fungus, virus, bacteria or other agent
that causes damage, abnormal growth or mortality of any shrub, bush or other
woody vegetation.
   PROPERTY LINE. The property as platted.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire area between property boundaries which is:
owned by a government, dedicated to public use or designated as an easement for
public use; primarily used for pedestrian or vehicular travel; and publicly
maintained, in whole or in part, for such use. RIGHT-OF-WAY includes, without
limitation, the public street, shoulder, gutter, curb, sidewalk, sidewalk area,
parking or parking strip and any other public way.
   STREET TREES. Any trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
public land or located within a dedicated public right-of-way or ways within
the city.
   TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than six inches in
diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.
   URBAN FORESTER. The urban forester employed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14.01.02) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2013-24, passed 1-
1-2014)
§ 90.003 HOURS.
   The city parks areas shall be open to the public from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. each day.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.01) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.004 ILLEGAL TO ENTER OR REMAIN.
   No person other than law enforcement officers or other individuals
participating in activities authorized by the city may enter, be present in or
remain within any city park area, including restrooms, parking areas or other
support facility areas within park area boundaries, during the time that such
park area is not open to the public. This prohibition does not apply to traffic
moving though such park area on a designated and developed public right-of-way.
Any person found in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth at §
90.999.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.02) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 DEPOSIT REQUIRED FOR USE OF SHELTERS.
   Any person desiring to use any shelter located in any city park area shall
pay a deposit as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution to
secure cleanup of the shelter and return of the key. The deposit shall be paid
to the Finance Office and shall be returned to the person having paid said
deposit upon return of the key and proper cleanup of the shelter.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.03) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.006 PETS AND ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any pet allowed by §
92.032 and present within any city park, bike path or cemetery shall be on a
leash no longer than ten feet. Any person bringing a pet within any city park,
bike path or cemetery shall clean up after the pet, consistent with §
94.015.
   (B)   No horses shall be allowed within any city park or bike path except as
authorized by the designated city official or by resolution of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.04) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.007 WILDLIFE AND VEGETATION.
   Any wildlife and/or vegetation, living or dead, located within any city park
area shall not be disturbed by any person or any person’s pet. All wildlife and
vegetation shall be left where found.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.05) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.008 METAL DETECTORS.
   The use of metal detectors or other such devises used to locate buried
materials shall be prohibited within any city park area unless specifically
authorized by the city or a designated official.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.06) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.009 AUTHORITY OF CITY PARK BOARD TO REGULATE.
   (A)   The city shall be authorized to establish any additional rules and/or
regulations found by the Board to be necessary to assure the public safety,
protection and enjoyment of the city parks and to maintain the parks.
   (B)   Any additional rules and/or regulations established by the city shall
be posted in the parks in a manner sufficient to inform the public.
(Prior Code, § 14.06.07) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.010 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision made under this chapter shall
be entitled to have said decision reviewed by the city.
      (2)   If, after review, the person is unsatisfied, he or she may appeal
the decision to the City Council.
   (B)   The process shall be as follows.
      (1)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review
with the city setting forth the basis for which he or she believes the decision
to be in error. The writing shall also include the person’s name and mailing
address.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall review
the decision and mail a written response to the aggrieved person within 20
days.
      (3)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the
city following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the City
Finance Officer. There shall be no fee assessed for filing an appeal.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council and a public meeting shall be held within 30 days after
the date said appeal was filed. The Council shall provide notice to the person
specifying the time, date and location of the meeting to hear the appeal.
      (5)   The Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing, however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days of the hearing. The Council may affirm or reverse or
modify the decision which caused the appeal.
(Prior Code, Chapter 14.07) (Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-25-2017)
PARK BOARD
§ 90.025 PARK BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created for the city a Park Board consisting of five
members. An additional liaison position shall be filled either the Mayor or a
member of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.01) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.026 MEMBERS, APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION, BOND.
   All members of the Park Board must be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Common Council. The term of each member is three years.
Thereafter, appointment of each member is for terms of three years so that
there will be an overlapping tenure. The members of the Park Board serve
without compensation. Each member of the Board, before entering upon his or her
official duties, must take and file an oath in the Finance Office in the usual
form required from such appointive officers of the city to uphold city
ordinances and the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.02) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 90.027 PRESIDENT, VICE PRESIDENT, SECRETARY.
   The Board shall elect from its number a President, Vice President, each of
whom shall serve for a term of one year or until a successor is elected and
qualified, except and unless said officer so elected is removed from the Park
Board before the end of his or her term. The Board shall also designate a
Secretary. Said Secretary does not need to be a member of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.03) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.028 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Vice President shall act in the absence or disability of the
President.
   (B)   In the event of death, retirement or removal of an officer from the
Park Board, a successor shall be elected immediately.
   (C)   The Secretary of the Board shall keep a record of its proceedings to
be filed promptly after preparation with the City Finance Office made available
upon request as required by city policy and state law.
   (D)   The Park Board shall determine the time of its regular meetings and
the number, and the Board may hold as many special meetings as it deems proper.
   (E)   Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but an affirmative vote of at least three members shall be necessary
to authorize any action of the Board. All officers of the Park Board shall vote
on all matters along with other members of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.04) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.029 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Park Board shall have all the combined powers and duties that a Park
Board would have as provided by SDCL Chapter 9-38, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.05) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.030 UNDER AUTHORITY OF COMMON COUNCIL.
   The Park Board is under the control and supervision of the Common Council
and any city funds expended for the management, supervision and improvement of
the city parks areas must be spent only upon following city purchasing policy
and within the adopted parks budget, which must be reviewed by the Park Board
and approved by the City Council. All vouchers submitted for expenditures for
the management, supervision and improvement of the city parks areas must be
available for review by the Park Board at a regular or special meeting and
submitted to the City Council for its approval or rejection.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.06) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 90.031 DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT.
   It shall be the duty of the President of the Park Board to preside at all
meetings of the Park Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to report to the
City Council, upon request, advising the Council of all actions taken by the
Park Board. Each year, the Board shall present to the city a budget for the
recommended and estimated expenditures for the operation and improvement of the
city’s park system for the following calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.07) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.032 CITY COUNCIL MAY PRESCRIBE RULES.
   The City Council may prescribe any rules, regulations and responsibilities
of said Park Board by amendment to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.08) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 90.033 CITY COUNCIL MAY CLOSE PARK AREAS.
   The City Council, at its discretion, may by resolution close any or all of
the park areas in the city to any use or activity whatsoever and prohibit any
persons except those authorized by the Chief of Police of the city to enter the
park area. In the event that the City Council desires to close any park area,
it shall consider the recommendation of the city before considering a
resolution specifying the park area being closed and the times it shall be
closed. During extraordinary circumstances, park areas may be closed by the
city or Chief of Police until a regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.09) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.034 ILLEGAL TO ENTER CLOSED PARK.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter, subject to the punishment set
forth above, for any person to enter any park area that has been closed by the
City Council as authorized by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.02.10) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
FAIRGROUNDS
§ 90.045 LEASE AGREEMENT AND LIABILITY WAIVER REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may use the Fairgrounds of the city or any other city owned
property designated by the city to fall under the provisions of this
subchapter, for any purpose whatsoever, without first signing a lease agreement
and/or a liability waiver and release from liability, as the city deems
necessary based upon the anticipated use.
   (B)   In the event the Fairgrounds or any other city owned property
designated by the city to fall under the provisions of this subchapter, are
being used for an event, said person shall also agree that all event
participants shall sign waivers provided by the city.
   (C)   In the event said person is using the Fairgrounds or any other city
owned property designated by the city to fall under the provisions of this
subchapter, for practice of an activity, but not an event, said person shall
sign the liability waiver and release from liability.
   (D)   Upon city approval of the use of the facility, the lease agreement and
liability waiver and release from liability forms will be provided for
applicant’s signature and, upon completion, maintained on file at the City
Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.01) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.046 FEES.
   No person shall be entitled to use the Fairgrounds or any other city owned
property designated by the city to fall under the provisions of this
subchapter, without either paying a fee set by the city or by making
arrangements in the form of a written rental agreement with the city for use of
the property by contribution of labor and/or materials in lieu of a fee.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.02) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.047 TICKET SALES.
   Each lease contract may include a ticket sales and expense reporting
requirement. If not stated within the lease contract, then, within 15 days from
the completion of the event, the lessee may provide an accounting to the city
of all tickets sold and all other revenue received for the use of the
Fairgrounds. In the event that labor and/or materials are contributed in lieu
of cash, then the contribution of labor and/or materials shall be made at the
time and in a manner specified in the lease contract for that use.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.03) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.048 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city may require, as a condition for the use of the Fairgrounds,
or any other city owned property designated by the city to fall under the
provisions of this subchapter, payment of a deposit in the sum as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, in addition to the amount required
in the rental agreement.
   (B)   The deposit shall be returned to the applicant/lessee within ten days
after the end of the lease term set forth in the lease agreement, provided that
the applicant/lessee has cleaned the premises within 48 hours after the end of
the lease term and left the premises in the same condition as it existed at the
commencement of the lease term.
   (C)   In the event any damage has occurred to the premises during the term
of the lease, whether said damage was caused by applicant/lessee or a guest or
invitee, the city shall deduct the cost of any damage from the deposit. The
balance, if any, shall be returned to the applicant/lessee.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.04) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.049 LIABILITY WAIVER AND RELEASE FROM LIABILITY.
   The liability waiver and release from liability required by the city shall
be signed by all persons using the Fairgrounds, or any other city owned
property designated by the city to fall under the provisions of this
subchapter, and all event participants shall include language to address the
following concerns which shall apply to all event participants and his, her or
its heirs and/or assigns.
   (A)   Any person signing said document will immediately upon entering the
premises inspect the area and agree that if at any time he or she feels that
anything on the premises is unsafe, he or she will immediately advise the Parks
Director and will leave the area until the condition is remedied.
   (B)   Any person signing said document waives, discharges and covenants not
to sue the city or any department thereof or any lessees of the City
Fairgrounds and its directors, officers, agents and employees.
   (C)   Any person signing the document agrees to indemnify and save and hold
harmless the releasees from any loss, liability, damage or costs they have
incurred arising out of or related to the use of said property whether caused
by the negligence of the releasees or otherwise.
   (D)   Any person signing the document assumes full responsibility for any
risk of bodily injury, death or property damage arising out of or related to
the use of the designated properties.
   (E)   Any person signing the document agrees that the document extends to
all acts of negligence by the releasees.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.05) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.050 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Any applicant/lessee shall be required to purchase liability
insurance, designating the city as a named insured, which shall cover all
operations and activities held on the leased premises during the term of the
lease.
   (B)   The liability insurance policy shall be with a reputable insurance
company licensed to do business in the state. Said policy shall be in the
minimum amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for
property damage, the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution for personal injury per person, with an aggregate of at least the
amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution or a combined
single limit in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution. The city shall be named as additional insured on said policy. Said
policy on insurance shall be provided to the city at least three days before
the beginning of the lease term and must be approved by the city and the City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 14.03.06) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
MOTOR VEHICLES IN PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 90.065 POWER AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city, after consultation with the Chief of Police and Parks
Superintendent, shall have the power and authority, when deemed necessary for
public health and safety, to determine the types and numbers of motorized
vehicles allowed in the parks area of the city at any time.
   (B)   In the event the city deems it necessary to limit the number and/or
type of motorized vehicles in any park area in the city, he or she shall cause
to be posted at the entrance to the park area affected by the restriction, a
sign providing for the types of vehicles allowed and the period of time for
which the restriction is imposed.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.01) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.066 CITY BIKE PATH.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicles upon the city bike path.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.02) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.067 BEAR BUTTE CREEK.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle within the confines of the Bear
Butte Creek.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.03) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.068 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from §§
90.066 and
90.067:
   (A)   City maintenance vehicles;
   (B)   City police vehicles; and
   (C)   Any handicapped person operating any approved device that is designed
specifically for individual handicap mobility.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.04) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2013-24, passed 1-
1-2014)
§ 90.069 RACING AND OTHER COMPETITION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in racing or other competitive events with bicycles
or other off-road vehicles in the Bear Butte Creek area or upon the trail
system maintained by the city or anywhere within the city when such action will
interfere with the safe usage of bicycle and pedestrian trail systems
maintained by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14.04.05) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005) Penalty, see §
90.999
URBAN FORESTRY
§ 90.080 PURPOSE; CREATION OF BOARD.
   (A)   The city hereby finds and determines that in order to protect existing
neighborhoods, promote good design in new areas and provide for sensitive and
compatible development in existing commercial areas, the Urban Forestry Board
shall be created to review and make recommendations on city tree plans and
developed, created or approved by the City Park Board.
   (B)   The purpose and intent for regulating the planting, removal and
maintenance of trees, brushes, shrubs and other woody vegetation, on public and
private property are threefold:
      (1)   To protect and increase property rights and values;
      (2)   To enhance and conserve the city’s aesthetic environment and
physical characteristics of the land; and
      (3)   To generally protect and enhance the quality of life and general
welfare of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.01) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.081 URBAN FORESTRY BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established an Urban Forestry Board, which
shall consist of five persons. Members of the City Park Board may also be
appointed to the Urban Forestry Board.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to review and make
recommendations on the city tree plan.
   (C)   The Board shall consider, investigate and make findings, reports and
recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of
its work.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.02) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017)
§ 90.082 STREET TREES.
   (A)   No street trees shall be planted unless and until the city or a
designated official, after consultation with the Urban Forestry Board, has
first approved the kind, size, variety and location thereof.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to top any street tree or other tree on
public property. Trees on public property and located within a public right-of-
way severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be topped
only with the approval of the city or a designated official.
   (C)   All stumps of street and park trees shall be cut below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.03) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.083 TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within public rights-of-way and on public grounds, as
it may determine.
   (B)   Any living tree within the public right-of-way and on public grounds
shall not be removed without permission from the city or a designated official.
      (1)   The minimum height of branches extending over the sidewalks in the
city shall be seven feet.
      (2)   The minimum height for branches extending over the public right-of-
way shall be 14 feet.
   (C)   The city may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to private property, sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water
lines or other public improvements, or is infested with any pest. This section
shall not prohibit the planting of street trees by owners of adjacent property,
provided that the selection and location of said tree is made in accordance
with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.04) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.084 TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to inspect and cause the removal of any
dead or diseased trees on private property within the city if such trees
constitute a hazard to life or property, or harbor pests, which constitute a
threat to other trees within the city. The city shall notify the owners of such
trees, in writing, to remove such trees within such reasonable time as shall be
determined by the city or a designated official. Removal shall be made by said
owners at their own expense. In the event of failure of owners to comply with
such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and
charge the cost of removal to the owners or to assess the costs thereof against
the property.
   (B)   Any person claiming an interest in any tree ordered to be removed
under division (A) above may appeal such order to the city or a designated
official within seven days of the date of notification.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.05) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005)
§ 90.085 STORAGE OF WOOD.
   No person shall store or permit the accumulation of any elm wood in the
city. No person shall store any tree or part thereof declared to harbor or
contain any pest infestation unless the bark is removed prior to storage.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.06) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.086 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY PARKS DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with any
city department employees or agents engaged in the planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying, inspecting or removing of any street trees, park
trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.05.07) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005; Ord. 2016-12, passed 1-
25-2017) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any
costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 14.01.03) (Ord. 2005-4, passed 4-1-2005)
CHAPTER 91: TEMPORARY CAMPING AT A RESIDENCE WITHIN THE CITY
Section
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Activity authorized
   
91.04   Preexisting, nonconforming use
   
91.05   Density limitations
   
91.06   Setback from public streets, sidewalks and lot lines
   
91.07   Campsite area
   
91.08   Parking
   
91.09   Soil and ground cover requirements
   
91.10   Water service and plumbing
   
91.11   Electrical system
   
91.12   Wastewater disposal, graywater disposal and portable toilets
   
91.13   Toilet and bathing facilities
   
91.14   Fire protection
   
91.15   Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and cooking fires
   
91.16   Garbage and rubbish storage, disposal and vermin control
   
91.17   Reporting communicable disease
   
91.18   Pet kennels and control of animals
   
91.19   Camping cabins
   
91.20   Permit
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these provisions is to establish and regulate temporary non-
public camping activities or camping not otherwise subject to state regulation
within the city. Any homeowner seeking to provide temporary non-public camping
as described in this chapter shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter. Nonprofit organizations and licensees exempted from state campground
license requirements by SDCL § 34-18-20, that conduct non-public camping
activities within the city, shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.01) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPING UNIT. Any trailer, tent camper, camper, tent, recreational park
trailer, self-contained recreational vehicle or other equipment that may be
used by the traveling public at individual campsites located at campgrounds or
areas used by the public as campgrounds.
   CAMPSITE. A specific parcel of land in a campground intended for occupancy
and use by a camping unit or units.
   PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING USE. A use of an improvement to real property,
such as a building, structure, parking lot use, sign or portion thereof, or of
the residential property, which was lawfully established prior to the passage
of the ordinance codified in this chapter but which, due to the application of
the district regulations found in
Chapter 156, is no longer authorized to continue.
   RESIDENTIAL PARCEL. A plot of land within the city shown on the Equalization
Office records to be taxed as one parcel, containing a single-family home, used
or occupied by the owner as a residence year-round together with any accessory
buildings, and including such open spaces as may be required under the
provisions of this chapter, having its principal frontage on a public highway,
road, street or private road or right-of-way as meets the requirements of
Chapters
154 and
156.
   TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL CAMPING. The use of private residential property by
the property owner or by others with the property owner’s permission that lasts
a maximum of 21 days in a 365-day period.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Any structure, building, enclosure, weather shelter or
provision of water, electrical sewer or other utility services which is not
placed on a foundation and is utilized for a period of less than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.02) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.03 ACTIVITY AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Any non-public camping for more than two consecutive nights on a
residential parcel either by the property owner, or with the property owner’s
consent, or public camping limited to one camping unit, occurring within the
city, shall require that the property owner limit those activities in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise licensed by
the state. Any non-public campsite or public camping with one camping unit
shall be located only on a residential parcel having a single-family home, and
shall only be for use by camping units, and shall not include the use of any
temporary structure.
   (B)   No camping shall be permitted on any undeveloped lot, parcel or
nonresidential parcel adjoining the residential parcel, as defined herein, or
on any other unimproved or vacant lot or nonresidential parcel.
   (C)   Temporary residential camping may not exceed 21 days in a 365-day
period.
   (D)   The private property where camping occurs must be kept in a clean,
safe and sanitary manner. Trash and debris must be removed when camping ceases
and must be disposed of in trash receptacles.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.04) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 PREEXISTING, NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   A temporary residential campsite, as provided in this chapter, is
considered a pre-existing nonconforming use, and is therefore able to continue
even though it does not meet the requirements of this chapter, if it meets the
following criteria:
      (1)   The residential camping consisted of a non-public campsite or
public camping with up to 19 camping units;
      (2)   The use existed prior to August 1, 2012;
      (3)   The current property owner maintained continuous ownership of the
subject property prior to August 1, 2012;
      (4)   The subject property has been continuously used for temporary
residential camping during each annual Rally since August 1, 2012, to the
present day; and/or
      (5)   The pre-existing use on the subject property has not changed or
expanded after August 1, 2012.
   (B)   The property owner bears the burden of proving by sufficient evidence
to show reasonable compliance with the above criteria.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.05) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.05 DENSITY LIMITATIONS.
   No temporary non-public camping activities permitted by this chapter shall
authorize more than 19 campers to stay on any residential parcel. In addition
to meeting all setback requirements stated in this chapter, non-public camping
activities shall be located at one campsite on the residential parcel or be
licensed by the state.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.06) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.06 SETBACK FROM PUBLIC STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND LOT LINES.
   Any camping unit located within a campsite as permitted by this chapter
shall have a front setback at least five feet from the back of the sidewalk or
the front lot line and shall be located so as to allow a ten-foot access lane
to an entry door of the residence. Similar to the temporary structure
requirement of §
150.056, any camping unit allowed by this chapter shall not be located within
five feet of any public right-of-way, any easement dedicated for public use or
any publicly owned property with specific prior authorization by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.07) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.07 CAMPSITE AREA.
   The CAMPSITE AREA is defined as the area defined by the combination of all
setback and access requirements on the subject residential parcel. All camping
units, equipment, storage containers, food and beverage items, temporary
sanitation facilities, cooking area and related material or equipment shall be
located within this campsite area. Only one campsite area per residential
parcel shall be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.08) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.08 PARKING.
   The homeowner shall provide sufficient temporary parking for all those
persons provided temporary non-public camping on that residential parcel.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.09) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.09 SOIL AND GROUND COVER REQUIREMENTS.
   The soil must provide sufficient slope to ensure that no drainage or runoff
caused by camping activities will go onto the adjoining property. Ground cover
shall be grass, landscaping or hardscape.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.10) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.10 WATER SERVICE AND PLUMBING.
   (A)   No permanent separate, nonresidential water supply or service
facilities shall be permitted to be constructed or located outside the
residence on the parcel. During the period of temporary non-public camping, the
homeowner may provide temporary water service from the residence as may
otherwise be permitted on a construction site by Chapters
51 and
150. A pre-existing, nonconforming camping use on non-commercial property, as
provided under §
91.04, which the property owner can demonstrate was established and has existed
continuously during each annual Rally since August 1, 2012, period prior to the
enactment of this chapter, may continue so long as that pre-existing use does
not change or expand.
   (B)   The above restrictions apply to independent RV/camper hookups that do
not meet the criteria as a pre-existing nonconforming use as provided under §
91.04.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.11) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.11 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   No permanent, separate, nonresidential electrical service facilities
shall be permitted to be constructed or located outside the residence on the
parcel. During the period of temporary non-public camping, the homeowner may
provide a temporary electrical service as permitted on a construction site by
the IBC, as adopted in Chapter 150. A pre-existing nonconforming camping use on
non-commercial property, as provided under §
91.04, which the property owner can demonstrate was established and has existed
continuously during each annual Rally period since August 1, 2012, may continue
so long as that pre-existing use does not change or expand.
   (B)   The above restrictions apply to independent RV/camper hookups that do
not meet the criteria as a pre-existing nonconforming use as provided under §
91.04.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.12) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.12 WASTEWATER DISPOSAL, GRAYWATER DISPOSAL AND PORTABLE TOILETS.
   (A)   No permanent separate, nonresidential wastewater or graywater
facilities shall be located outside the residence on the parcel where the
campsite is located. During the period of temporary non-public camping, the
homeowner may provide temporary self-contained portable toilet facilities of
the type required to be provided on a construction site by Chapter 150. No
wastewater or graywater resulting from temporary camping shall be permitted to
be disposed of in any storm sewer drainpipe or other drainage. All wastewater
and graywater shall be disposed of only at an approved dump station or similar
facility open to the public. A pre-existing, nonconforming camping use on non-
commercial property, as provided under §
91.04, which the property owner can demonstrate was established and has existed
continuously during each annual Rally period since August 1, 2012, may continue
so long as that pre-existing use does not change or expand.
   (B)   The above restrictions apply to independent RV/camper hookups that do
not meet the criteria as a pre-existing nonconforming use as provided under §
91.04. Any wastewater hookup which attaches to the wastewater service line of
the residence does not fall under these restrictions.
   (C)   Any property owner allowing temporary residential camping with more
than eight persons on the property for more than three consecutive nights must
obtain a temporary self-contained portable toilet facility, as defined above,
to be placed on the property for the duration of the camping event. This
requirement only applies during the “Official Rally Dates” of the Sturgis
Motorcycle Rally, including the three days prior and three days after the
Rally. The property owner is responsible for any associated costs with
temporary self-contained portable facility.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.13) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.13 TOILET AND BATHING FACILITIES.
   No permanent separate, nonresidential toilet and bathing facilities shall be
permitted to be located outside the residence on the parcel. All wastewater or
graywater resulting from any temporary toilet or bathing facilities for camping
shall be disposed of only at an approved dump station or similar facility open
to the public, or by the use of a temporary type facility permitted on a
construction site by the IBC, as adopted under
Chapter 150. A pre-existing nonconforming camping use on non-commercial
property, as provided under §
91.04, which the property owner can demonstrate was established and has existed
continuously during each annual Rally period since August 1, 2012, may continue
so long as that pre-existing use does not change or expand.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.14) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.14 FIRE PROTECTION.
   The open fire requirements of §§
96.055 through
96.072 shall remain in effect at all times at the residential parcel at which
any temporary non-public camping may occur. No open fire of any kind shall be
permitted during the period in which a burning ban is in effect within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.15) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.15 BARBECUE PITS, FIREPLACES, STOVES AND COOKING FIRES.
   During the period of temporary camping, only a temporary, contained fire
structure of a type permitted by
Chapter 150 shall be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.16) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.16 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH STORAGE, DISPOSAL AND VERMIN CONTROL.
   (A)   No permanent separate garbage or rubbish containers or facilities
shall be permitted to be constructed outside the residence on the parcel.
During the period of temporary non-public camping, the homeowner shall provide
the necessary temporary sanitation and garbage service of the type permitted
and subject to the requirements of Chapter 50. The rates as set forth in §§
50.035 through
50.048, and the authority to require additional waste disposal totes as
provided for at §
50.044, shall apply to all residences at which temporary camping occurs.
   (B)   Any property owner allowing temporary residential camping with more
than eight persons camping on the property for more than three consecutive
nights is required to pay a special sanitation fee, as set by the City Public
Works Department. This requirement only applies during the “Official Rally
Dates” of the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally, including the three days prior and
three days after the Rally. The property owner is responsible for any
associated costs with the special sanitation fee.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.17) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 REPORTING COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   During the period of temporary non-public camping, the homeowner shall be
obligated to comply with all health reporting requirements of state law and §
50.003.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.18) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.18 PET KENNELS AND CONTROL OF ANIMALS.
   No separate, nonresidential pet or kennel facilities shall be permitted to
be constructed or located outside the residence on the parcel. During the
period of any temporary non-public camping, any animal at the campsite will be
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 92, concerning animals and animal control authority of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.19) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.19 CAMPING CABINS.
   Camping cabins, as defined in ARSD 44:02:14:01, or any temporary structure
intended for similar or like use, shall not be permitted at any temporary
campsite.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.20) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.20 PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit and application. Applications for a permit for relief from the
temporary residential camping restrictions, as provided in this chapter, will
be made to the city or a designated official. Permits must comply with the
following.
      (1)   Application must be made on a form provided by the city.
      (2)   Application must be made a minimum of ten days before the City
Council meeting in which the application is considered.
      (3)   Permits must be posted at the property where the permitted activity
occurs.
      (4)   The permit may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements
deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the city or the surrounding
area.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. A permit issued under this chapter may be
revoked or terminated by the city if any condition or requirement is violated
by the property owner or other campers. A permit may also be revoked if the
property is not maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.21) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by the
maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-
2. Said punishment may also include payment of any costs and restitution
authorized by this chapter or state law. Violations may also be subject to
administrative citations pursuant to
Chapter 37. Each day of temporary camping in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation. In addition, a violation of this chapter may
be subject to the nuisance abatement provisions contained in
Chapter 94.
(Prior Code, § 11.08.03) (Ord. 2012-12, passed 8-1-2012; Ord. 2021-10, passed
12-14-2021)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.001   Definitions
   
92.002   Appeals
Administration and Enforcement
   
92.015   Investigation
   
92.016   Interference
   
92.017   Records
Animal Regulations
   
92.030   Animal shelter
   
92.031   Certain animals prohibited
   
92.032   Exceptions
   
92.033   Animals to be impounded; redemption
   
92.034   Chemical immobilization
   
92.035   Cruelty to animals, generally
   
92.036   Teasing and molesting
   
92.037   Killing, injuring or poisoning animals
   
92.038   Fights between animals prohibited
   
92.039   Abandonment
   
92.040   Inspection on report
   
92.041   Illegal animals surrendered
   
92.042   Excess animal permit
   
92.043   Vicious, ferocious, venomous or dangerous animals
Rabies
   
92.055   Rabies control; impounding for observation
   
92.056   Keeping rabid animals
   
92.057   Report of suspected cases
Dogs, Cats and Other Domesticated Animals
   
92.070   Rabies certificate
   
92.071   Exemptions
   
92.072   Animals running at large
   
92.073   Impoundment and disposition of animals
   
92.074   Redemption or destruction of animals running at large; untagged
   
92.075   Dogs with destructive habits
   
92.076   Kennels; license required
   
92.077   License fee for kennels
   
92.078   Kennel license; application
   
92.079   Barking dogs
   
92.080   Vicious animals
Urban Chickens
   
92.095   Scope and purpose
   
92.096   Definitions
   
92.097   Registration with Animal Control
   
92.098   Number and type of chickens allowed
   
92.099   Zoning districts allowed
   
92.100   Noncommercial use only
   
92.101   Enclosures and coops
   
92.102   Feed and water
   
92.103   Predators, rodents, insects and parasites
   
92.104   Waste storage and removal
   
92.105   Chickens at large
   
92.106   Odor and noise impacts
   
92.107   Nuisance prohibited
   
92.108   Unlawful acts
   
92.109   City not liable
   
92.110   Liability
 
   
92.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian or fish, except humans.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person appointed to perform this duty as
provided by this chapter or any police or law enforcement officer of the city.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by action of the city for the
purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found to be in violation of
this chapter.
   APPOINTED DESIGNEE. Any person appointed by the city, or employee of the
city, or in the case of a disaster, or other emergency situation, any member of
an animal rescue or animal care group authorized by the city.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when it is off the
property of its owner and not under the immediate control of a competent
person.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. An animal has been EXPOSED TO RABIES within the meaning
of this chapter if it has been bitten by or has been exposed to any animal
known to or suspected of being infected with rabies.
   KENNEL. Any premises where a person engages in the business of boarding
seven or more cats and dogs for private pet owners, for all or part of a day,
including pet sitting establishments, and short-term boarding facilities for
purposes other than veterinary medical procedures and observation. A breeding
operation is considered a KENNEL under this definition if a person, two or more
times in a 12-month period, intentionally breeds domestic animals with the
intention of selling or bartering the offspring of the animals. A KENNEL is
subject to all applicable requirements of this chapter as well as the
applicable portions of Chapter 156, including that it be located in a
commercial district or be subject to the use on review process as an at-home
business. A KENNEL shall also comply with all applicable requirements of state
laws and regulations.
   OWNER. Any person, groups of persons or corporations owning, keeping or
harboring an animal.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is under RESTRAINT if it is controlled by a leash, at
heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s commands, in a
vehicle, if attached to said vehicle or confined inside of the vehicle, in such
a manner as not to allow it to reach outside the confines of that vehicle, or
within a vehicle being driven on the street or parked within the property
limits of its owner or keeper.
   ROLLING 12-MONTH PERIOD. Any 12 consecutive months following a violation.
   SHELTER TECHNICIAN. Any person who is employed by the city to care for the
daily needs of food, water and shelter of any animal impounded by the Animal
Control Officer or County Sheriff’s Deputy.
   SPAYED FEMALE. A matron that has undergone surgery to prevent conception,
whose owner can provide suitable proof of said surgery.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal that has killed a human being or has inflicted
injury on a human being that required medical treatment, or has killed or
seriously injured a domestic animal without provocation, except for the
following:
      (1)   An animal that was provoked;
      (2)   An animal that was acting to protect persons or property; or
      (3)   An animal that injured or killed a person who was trespassing.
(Prior Code, § 32.01.02) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2014-10, passed
8-6-2014; Ord. 2019-04, passed 3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.002 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal permitted.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a citation issued by any Code Enforcement
Officer under this chapter may appeal said citation to the City Council within
20 days from receipt of citation. Before filing an appeal, the aggrieved person
is strongly encouraged to meet with the Chief of Police and the city to discuss
why the person believes the citation was issued in error. If unresolved, the
appeal may be commenced.
      (2)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the
city or its appointed designee within 20 days from receipt of citation. There
shall be a filing fee in the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the city
at the time of filing the notice of appeal. The city or a designated official
may waive the assessed fee if the appellant provides a reasonable basis showing
hardship or lack of ability to pay the fee.
      (3)   The notice of appeal shall include a statement of the action
complained of, why the same should be modified or rescinded, an address,
including an email address if applicable, where the appellant can be mailed
notice of hearings and a copy of the citation issued. Upon receipt of the
appeal documents from the city, the Finance Officer shall deliver a copy of the
appeal to the City Attorney.
   (B)   Time of hearing and notice. A public hearing shall be held on all
appeals within 45 working days after the filing of the appeal, unless a later
date is agreed upon by the aggrieved person and the city. The city shall cause
written notice of the date, time and place of such hearing to be served upon
the aggrieved person by personal service or certified mail to the address set
forth in the appeal documents at least ten days prior to the hearing. The
appeal shall be scheduled on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council for a period of at least 30 minutes unless otherwise directed by
the City Council.
   (C)   Hearing procedures. The following rules shall govern the procedures
for an administrative hearing.
      (1)   Hearings and administrative appeals need not be conducted according
to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
      (2)   Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of
evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory
rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence after objection
in civil or criminal actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
      (3)   Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence and evidence which lacks
trustworthiness shall be excluded.
   (D)   Rights of parties at hearing. The aggrieved person and the city shall
have these rights among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary, physical and oral evidence;
      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing; and
      (4)   To rebut evidence.
   (E)   Decision. After each appeal hearing, the Council shall consider the
evidence in executive session and may state its decision when it has concluded
the executive session. In addition, the Council shall provide written findings
stating the following:
      (1)   The evidence the City Council relied upon in reaching its decision;
      (2)   Based upon such written findings, the Council may sustain or
dismiss the citation or decision; and
      (3)   In sustaining citation, the Council may in its discretion reduce or
waive the payment of any civil penalty, permit, reinstatements, late penalty
fee or repeat offender increase.
   (F)   Report, costs. A written report of the decision, including the
findings, shall be furnished to the aggrieved person and the city within 20
working days from the date the appeal hearing is closed. The city and the
aggrieved person shall bear their own respective cost of the appeal proceeding.
The decision of the City Council shall be final.
   (G)   Subject to judicial review. The decision of the Council may be subject
to judicial review as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 32.01.04) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.015 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
to enforce the provisions thereof, any Animal Control Officer, or an appointed
designee, is empowered to enter any premises upon which an animal is kept or
harbored and to demand the extradition by the owner of such animal, any
applicable licenses or a valid rabies certificate for said animal. It is
further provided that the Animal Control Officer, or an appointed designee, may
enter upon the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or
inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal and to take possession of
such animal if there is probable cause to believe an animal or animals have
been treated inhumanely.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer, or an appointed designee, is hereby
authorized to follow and enter upon any enclosure or lot within the city in
quest of any animal suspected of being infected by rabies, or to apprehend any
dog which has been observed running at large.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.19) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2019-04, passed
3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.016 INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any official in the
performance of any duty of his or her office, or seek to release any animal in
the custody of the Animal Control Officer except as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.20) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.017 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep accurate and
detailed records of the licensing of, impounding and disposition of all animals
coming into their custody. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer
to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases
reported to them and their investigation of the same. It shall be the duty of
the Animal Control Officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed
records of all monies collected by them, and promptly transfer and deliver all
money or funds received to the Finance Office consistent with city policies.
These records shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by Police
Department and Finance Office staff, and other persons responsible for similar
records in the city. The records shall be audited annually in the same manner
as other city records are audited. The city may appoint another person to
perform the duties under this section.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.21) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2016-06, passed
8-17-2016; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
§ 92.030 ANIMAL SHELTER.
   (A)   The city shall provide and maintain suitable shelter for the
impounding of animals. Such shelter shall be so constructed that animals of
different kinds and different sizes may be segregated and maintained in a safe
and sanitary condition. Such shelter may either be constructed and operated by
the city, or the city may enter into a contract with a veterinarian or other
suitable person for the supplying and operation of the same. All animals
confined in such shelter shall be regularly fed, watered and treated in a
humane manner.
   (B)   The city may hire shelter technicians as needed. Persons holding this
position shall be responsible for the daily maintenance of the shelter, the
record keeping of the intake and release of animals, the maintenance of a
working adoption program, the accurate and detailed accounting of all monies
generated by the animal shelter. Monies collected by shelter technicians shall
be presented to the City Finance Officer without delay.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.01) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.031 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow, bring, keep or maintain, into or within the city,
whether under control or at large, any horse, cow, mule, swine, sheep, goats,
water fowl, pigeons or any other exotic, unusual or other animals not commonly
kept as domestic pets in urban environments. This prohibition applies except as
otherwise provided in §
92.032.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.02) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.032 EXCEPTIONS.
   The animals mentioned in §
92.031 shall be allowed within the city only when:
   (A)   They are used or are part of a legally authorized circus, menagerie or
carnival;
   (B)   They are used in or are a part of a legally authorized parade,
provided that such animals shall only be allowed within the city for said
purpose for the length of time necessary to participate in said parade;
   (C)   They are in the process of being transported from one area outside of
the city to another, in which case they shall be in constant supervision and
control of the owner, manager or driver and such transporting shall be done
with all due speed and care;
   (D)   They are on the premises of a duly licensed stock exchange, livestock
sale ring or veterinarian hospital;
   (E)   They are a part of a legally authorized livestock show or exhibition;
or
   (F)   They are animals of an exotic nature and are kept as pets. There shall
be no more than one such species on any premises, and the owner shall have
received prior approval of the City Planning and Permitting Department and the
Animal Control Officer before the animal is moved to the premises and permitted
to remain. As applicable, any exotic or prohibited animal allowed as a pet
under this section must comply with all applicable requirements of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, rabies certification, animals at large
and other requirements. The Animal Control Officer, Chief of Police or a
designated administrative official may place additional requirements on the
exotic pet as they deem necessary to ensure the safety of the community and pet
owner.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.03) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.033 ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED; REDEMPTION.
   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to impound any animal
found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and any persons claiming
any animal so impounded shall pay to the Animal Control Officer for its
discharge from the animal shelter the sum as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution for each day or fractional part of a day each animal has
been impounded, except that in the case of impounded fowl or pigeons the charge
shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per day per bird. The
city shall have a lien against the animals for the cost of keeping and caring
for such impounded animals in the amount it would take to have said animal
discharged under the provisions herein. The city may foreclose said lien as by
law provided by the foreclosure of liens against chattels.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.04) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.034 CHEMICAL IMMOBILIZATION.
   The Animal Control Officer or his or her duly appointed designee is hereby
authorized to use, operate and possess such devices that are designated to
propel projectiles for the purpose of intermuscular injection of drugs used in
the humane capture of animals. Any person using the above-described devices
shall have specialized training in the use of the device, any and all
departmental policies concerning the device, in the drugs, in the proper use of
the drugs, and in the care of the animal after such drugs have been injected.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.05) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.035 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS, GENERALLY.
   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in any way. Any person who
inhumanely beats, or wantonly or maliciously tortures, neglects or deprives an
animal of necessary food, potable water or shelter; or overloads, abandons,
mutilates or without justified cause kills any animal shall be guilty of a
violation of this section. For the purpose of this section, NEGLECT includes a
failure to remove odor-producing or other waste, failure to provide adequate
sanitation, veterinary care, adequate facilities or other care recognized as
customary to maintain an animal’s health and well-being consistent with the
species, breed, physical condition and type of animal.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.06) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2019-04, passed
3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.036 TEASING AND MOLESTING.
   Any person who inhumanely teases, molests, baits or in any way bothers any
animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.07) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.037 KILLING, INJURING OR POISONING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously kill, wound
or injure any animal in any way except as to protect the lives of any person or
livestock from being attacked by such animal; or to willfully or maliciously
administer poison to any animal that is the property of another person or to
expose any such poison substance with the intent that the same shall be taken
and swallowed by any dog or cat or any animal that is the property of another
person.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.08) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.038 FIGHTS BETWEEN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall willfully allow any animal to fight, worry or injure another
animal, nor shall any person keep any house, pit or other place to be used in
permitting any fighting, worrying or injuring of animals.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.09) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.039 ABANDONMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal upon a public
right-of-way, or upon the property of another, or upon property owned by that
person within the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.10) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.040 INSPECTION ON REPORT.
   (A)   In addition to general authority to investigate a violation of an
ordinance, an Animal Control Officer or Police Officer is authorized to inspect
the area within a residence where any animal is kept when the Department
receives two credible complaints within a seven-day period that an illegal
number of animals being kept at a residence or other defined location.
   (B)   A credible complaint for the purpose of this chapter is a complaint
from a person over the age of 18 who is a legal resident residing within 500
feet of the location at which the alleged illegal animal(s) are being kept.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.11) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2019-04, passed
3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.041 ILLEGAL ANIMALS SURRENDERED.
   (A)   When a Police Officer or Animal Control Officer determines that an
illegal number of animals as provided herein are located at a residence, the
Officer shall give written notice to the resident that the illegal animals must
be surrendered to the animal shelter within two business days of that notice.
   (B)   As an alternative to surrender within that time, the resident may
provide credible documentation to the Department that the illegal animal(s)
have been legally transferred to another location, euthanized or that the
resident has submitted an application for an excess animal permit or kennel
license for the illegal animals.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.12) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2019-04, passed
3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.042 EXCESS ANIMAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person owning, possessing or maintaining more than the legal limit
of a total of six common domestic animals (not including fish and chickens),
for a period of more than 18 weeks within a 12-month period, shall apply for an
annual excess animal permit. To do so, the person shall make application on a
form provided by the City Police Department and pay an application fee as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. The city will then, by
letter, request written consent of the majority of adults residing within 400
feet of the exterior boundaries of the residence for which the application is
submitted.
   (B)   An Animal Control Officer will make a site inspection and submit a
written site inspection report and recommendation to the Chief of Police. The
report shall state location of the proposed permit site and the number of
animals proposed. If approved for more than six animals, subsequent renewal of
the annual permit shall require compliance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter, as well as compliance with all other applicable city ordinances,
state laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.13) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2019-04, passed
3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.043 VICIOUS, FEROCIOUS, VENOMOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to be kept or maintained, run
at large or displayed in a crowded area within the city, any animal of a
venomous, vicious, ferocious or dangerous habit, nature or disposition. Any
such animal found running at large within the city may be impounded or disposed
of by the Animal Control Officer. All persons or organizations authorized by
the city are excluded from this provision.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.22) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
RABIES
§ 92.055 RABIES CONTROL; IMPOUNDING FOR OBSERVATION.
   (A)   When any person owning or harboring an animal has been notified that
said animal has bitten or attacked any person, the owner must immediately place
the animal under the care and observation of the Animal Control Officer or a
licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than ten days, however, in those
cases where the animal is a dog and the owner has a current rabies vaccination
for said dog, the Officer may, if he or she feels the facilities are adequate
and, if the owner is a responsible person, allow the quarantine of the dog on
the owner’s premises. In such a case, the owner must sign a statement in which
the owner recognizes and assumes the responsibility that is involved with the
quarantine of a dog that has bitten. A quarantined dog must, at all times, be
available for inspection during the quarantine.
   (B)   At the end of the ten-day period of observation, the animal shall be
examined by a veterinarian or the Animal Control Officer and, if cleared, may
be reclaimed by the owner, and the owner must pay the expense incurred incident
thereto to include a daily impound fee as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution per day.
   (C)   Any animal impounded or placed for observation showing active signs of
rabies, suspected of having rabies or known to have been exposed to rabies
shall be confined under competent observation for such time as may be deemed
necessary to determine a diagnosis.
   (D)   Any animal that has bitten or attacked and cannot be captured, shows
signs of or is suspected of rabies, or any animal that has no confirmable
rabies vaccination history may be destroyed in such a manner that the head is
not damaged and can be submitted for rabies examination to a laboratory.
   (E)   Every unvaccinated animal bitten by another animal showing positive
symptoms of rabies shall be forthwith destroyed or shall, at the owner’s option
and expense, be held for observation for not less than six months under direct
supervision of a veterinarian, and the animal is to receive a rabies
vaccination one month prior to its release from observation.
   (F)   Every owner having knowledge that his or her animal has bitten or is
suspected of biting a human being, shall forthwith report the same to the City
Police Department for disposition of said animal under the provisions of the
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.14) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.056 KEEPING RABID ANIMALS.
   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal infected with rabies or
any animal known to have been bitten by an animal known to be infected with
rabies.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.15) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.057 REPORT OF SUSPECTED CASES.
   (A)   Report of suspected cases; general. Any person who shall suspect any
animal in the city to be infected with rabies shall report said animal to the
Animal Control Officer, describing the animal and giving the name and address
of the owner if known.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.16)
   (B)   Report of suspected cases; veterinarians. Veterinarians within the
city receiving information or reports of suspected rabies in wild animals or
domestic animals shall report such information to any Animal Control Officer in
the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.17)
   (C)   Report of suspected cases; physicians. Physicians within the city,
immediately upon treatment of any person bitten by an animal, shall report such
information to any Animal Control Officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.02.18)
(Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
DOGS, CATS AND OTHER DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
§ 92.070 RABIES CERTIFICATE.
   Every person who keeps, maintains or has in his or her control any dog, cat
or ferret, or other domestic animal within the city, shall have the animal
inoculated for the prevention of rabies at least every two years with the
modified live virus. It shall be the duty of the owner of the animal to place a
collar around the neck of each animal so owned or kept by him or her to which
the metallic rabies tag furnished by a licensed veterinarian shall be securely
fastened. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal,
over the age of six months without obtaining the rabies certificate from a
licensed veterinarian.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.01) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.071 EXEMPTIONS.
   Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by a licensed veterinarian
for the care and treatment of dogs, cats or ferrets are exempt from provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.02) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.072 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Any person who owns or who has under his or her care a dog, cat,
ferret or other domestic animal shall not allow said animal to run at large in
the city, and except as provided for in division (B) below, when said animal is
present within the city, it shall either be on a leash not longer than ten feet
controlled by a person, or properly secured to a leash which has been tied to
an immovable object, or confined within an enclosure sufficient to keep said
animal restrained from escaping such enclosure.
      (2)   No animal shall be leashed to an immovable object so as to permit
the animal to walk on or over any public sidewalk or street, or any property of
another person other than that of the owner of said animal. Any animal not
confined by leash or enclosure as set forth herein, is hereby declared to be
running at large and is declared to be a public nuisance. When animals are
found running at large, and their ownership can be discovered by examination of
any rabies license which must be affixed to the animal, or by inquiry of any
person residing in the immediate vicinity where the animal was first taken into
possession, such animal need not be impounded, but the Animal Control Officer
may cite the owner of such animal to appear in court to answer charges of
violations of this chapter. Such citation shall state the violation date, time,
location, breed and color of the animal, rabies tag number, if known, and the
name and address of the owner of said animal. Said notice shall direct the
owner to appear before the magistrate court to answer to the charge of such
violation.
   (B)   Public park, recreation areas, bike path and cemetery. It shall be
unlawful to have any animal in any public park, recreation area, bike path or
cemetery, or in an area specifically designated as a pet area within the city,
except under leash control and on designated roads and walkways. Any persons or
organizations otherwise authorized by the city are exempt from this limitation.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.03) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2012-10, passed
7-4-2012; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.073 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any dog, cat or ferret found running at large as defined in this
chapter may be taken by the Animal Control Officer and impounded in the animal
shelter to be confined in a humane manner. Any animals impounded and not
claimed by their owners at the expiration of seven days may be disposed of at
the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, or appointed designee, except as
hereinafter provided in certain cases of certain dogs, cats and ferrets.
   (B)   Immediately after impounding such dog, cat or ferret, before
euthanizing or disposing of it, the owner shall be given notice of the
conditions whereby he or she may regain possession of such dog, cat or ferret.
If any owner has requested his or her animal to be euthanized and disposed of
humanely, the Animal Control Officer or appointed designee may collect from
said owner a fee that will cover the cost of such euthanasia, disposal and
impoundment for the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.04) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2021-04, passed
8-16-2021; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.074 REDEMPTION OR DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; UNTAGGED.
   (A)   During the period of possession, any person, by paying the city the
sum as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per day, or any
part thereof, to a maximum of seven days, or any part thereof, for the impound
and having a current rabies certificate may redeem and obtain possession of a
dog, cat or ferret that was untagged or tagged and thereby impounded.
   (B)   If the owner of any impounded dog, cat or ferret, under the provisions
of the article, shall fail to redeem such dog, cat or ferret within seven
consecutive days, not counting Sunday and holidays, after such impounding, said
dog, cat or ferret shall be disposed of by humane euthanasia or adoption by the
Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer may euthanize by a humane manner any sick
or injured animal which has been impounded without holding it for seven days if
its condition is such that euthanasia is the most humane manner to dispose of
the animal.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.05) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2021-04, passed
8-16-2021; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.075 DOGS WITH DESTRUCTIVE HABITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer to run at large
within the city, any dog with destructive habits or disposition, which destroys
property other than that of his or her owner, or is in the habit of barking at
persons passing along or using the streets and public sidewalks of the city.
The Animal Control Officer under proper authority is hereby empowered to
impound any such animal.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.06) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.076 KENNELS; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person owning, possessing, keeping or maintaining within the city, a
kennel as defined herein for a period of more than 18 weeks shall be required
to first obtain a kennel license. For purposes of this chapter, anyone
operating or maintaining a kennel, as defined above for a period of more than
18 weeks shall also comply with all the provisions of this chapter, as well as
all applicable provisions of Chapter 156 for a commercial enterprise, and also
all applicable state laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.07) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.077 LICENSE FEE FOR KENNELS.
   License or annual renewal inspection fee shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution per year. The City Police Department will oversee the
Animal Control Officer’s performance of annual inspections and renewals.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.08) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 92.078 KENNEL LICENSE; APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain a kennel license as required herein, a person shall make
application on a form provided by the City Police Department and pay the
license fee. The city will then, by letter, request written consent of the
majority of adults residing within 400 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
premises where such kennel is proposed to be located and kept. The Animal
Control Officer shall make a site inspection and submit the application and
written site inspection report to the Chief of Police. The report shall state
the name and place where such kennel is to be located, the number of animals
proposed and the size of the kennel proposed to be kept.
   (B)   If approved, each subsequent annual license application shall require
that applicant be in compliance with all applicable zoning laws, all applicable
provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable rules and regulations
of the state and the city before approval.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.09) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2019-04, passed
3-5-2019; Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.079 BARKING DOGS.
   (A)   No person owning or possessing any dog, licensed or unlicensed,
confined on the premises, or otherwise, shall suffer or permit such dog to
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by continuous barking or
howling or making other loud or unusual noises.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of any person in possession of any such dog,
which disturbs the peace and quiet to dispose of the disturbance even if
disposing of the dog is the only effective means.
(Prior Code, § 32.03.10) (Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.080 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      VICIOUS ANIMAL.
         (a)   An animal may be declared to be VICIOUS by the Chief of Police
under the following guidelines:
            1.   Upon written request of the victim or the attending physician
of the victim of an animal bite or serious scratch; and
            2.   Upon receipt of an officer report or credible written witness
statement describing an animal which in a vicious or terrorizing manner
approaches a person or another animal in an apparent attitude of attack, or
bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a person or other animal,
upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private grounds or places within
the city.
         (b)   No animal may be declared VICIOUS if the injury or damage is
sustained by any person who is committing or attempting to commit a willful
trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the
animal, or who was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or
who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(Prior Code, § 32.04.01)
   (B)   Declaration of a vicious animal.
      (1)   When the Chief of Police, after researching the matter thoroughly,
signs a declaration of vicious animal, the declaration shall be filed with the
City Finance Office, and the Chief of Police shall notify the owner of the
declaration in writing that the animal must be registered as a vicious animal
within 24 hours after the receipt of the written notice. The notice shall be
served either in person or by mailing the notice by certified mail.
      (2)   The owner of an animal that has been declared vicious shall make
application to the animal control office to register the vicious animal and
shall comply with the following.
         (a)   The owner of the animal shall notify animal services:
            1.   In case of a change in ownership of the animal, in which case
said notice shall include the name, address and telephone number of a new
owner;
            2.   In case of an address change of the owner or any change in
where the animal is housed;
            3.   In case there is any change in the health status of the
animal; and
            4.   In the case of the death of the animal.
         (b)   If the animal is outdoors, attended and off the owner’s
property, the animal shall be muzzled on a leash no longer than six feet and
under the control of a person over 18 years of age.
         (c)   If the animal is outdoors and unattended, the animal must be
locked in an escape-proof area approved by animal services. Minimum area
standards shall include the following.
            1.   Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of
more than two inches. In the case of a wooden fence, the gaps shall not be more
than two inches.
            2.   Any gates within the pen or structure shall be lockable and of
a design to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the animal.
            3.   The required pen or structure shall have secure sides and may
need a secure top if determined by animal services. If the pen or structure has
no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be imbedded into the ground or
concrete.
            4.   The pen or structure shall protect the animal from the
elements.
            5.   The pen or structure may be required to have double exterior
walls to prevent the insertion of fingers, hands or other objects.
         (d)   The animal shall be permanently identified by injecting an
identification microchip into the animal using standard veterinarian procedures
and practices. The number and the veterinarian who injected the microchip are
to be reported to animal control staff and the City Police Department.
         (e)   A universal sign denoting a vicious animal shall be displayed on
the area or enclosure and on a place visible from the sidewalk or road adjacent
to the property where the animal is kept.
         (f)   The owner shall carry animal liability insurance in the amount
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, covering the medical
and/or veterinary costs resulting from the vicious actions or any other damage
the animal may do or cause to be done. Proof of insurance shall be filed with
animal control staff and the City Police Department.
         (g)   The owner shall present proof of current rabies vaccination and
current city license of the animal to animal services.
         (h)   The owner shall present proof the animal has been altered to
prevent reproduction to animal control staff and the City Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 32.04.02)
   (C)   Violations of this section.
      (1)   If the conditions of this section are not complied with, the animal
shall be euthanized in a humane manner and proof of euthanasia filed with
animal control.
      (2)   Any vicious animal not in compliance with this section may be
seized by the Animal Control Officer or any police officer and impounded. If
the animal cannot be captured, it may be destroyed. If the animal has been
running at large, or bites a person, or bites another animal, the Animal
Control Officer or any police officer may order the owner to deliver the animal
to the animal shelter immediately, and the owner ordered to appear in court to
show just cause to why this animal shall not be destroyed. If the owner fails
to deliver the animal as ordered, the Animal Control Officer or any police
officer shall use those means as are necessary to impound the animal. If a
vicious animal is impounded, all costs of keeping and caring for the animal
while impounded, in excess of the normal daily charge, shall be at the owner’s
expense and shall be paid before the animal may be released to the owner.
      (3)   If the registered owner of the animal refuses to comply with the
conditions of this chapter, the animal may be euthanized in a humane manner and
proof of euthanasia filed with animal control staff, the Police Department and
the City Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 32.04.03)
(Ord. 2005-05, passed 4-22-2005; Ord. 2014-10, passed 8-6-2014; Ord. 2022-05,
passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
URBAN CHICKENS
§ 92.095 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The city recognizes the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a sustainable
activity that can also be a rewarding pastime. Therefore, it is the purpose and
intent of this subchapter to permit the keeping and maintenance of chicken hens
for residential egg production. The chicken must be kept in a clean and
sanitary manner that is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare of the community. The keeping of other poultry or fowl is
prohibited unless allowable under a different portion of this code.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.01) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHICKEN. A member of the subspecies Gallus Gallus Domesticus, a domesticated
fowl. For the purpose of this subchapter, CHICKEN refers only to a female
chicken or hen.
   CHICKEN KEEPER. Any person operating, managing or otherwise caring for
chickens as provided under this subchapter.
   COOP. A covered house, structure or room that is required in order to
provide chickens with shelter from the weather and with a roosting area
protected from predators.
   ENCLOSURE. A fenced or wire area or pen required in association with a coop
in order to provide an outside exercise area for the chickens, free from
predators and of a size that allows for access to a foraging area, sunlight and
the like.
   HEN. Any female adult chicken.
   ROOSTER. Any male adult chicken.
   TRACT OF LAND. An expanse of land identified by address legally described
with definitive boundaries.
   URBAN CHICKEN. A chicken kept on tract of land pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.02) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.097 REGISTRATION WITH ANIMAL CONTROL.
   Any person keeping chickens under this subchapter must register with the
City Animal Control Officer the location of where the chickens are kept and
provide the name and contact information of the primary chicken caretaker or
property owner.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.03) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.098 NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.
   (A)   The maximum number of chickens allowed is six per tract of land
regardless of how many dwelling units are on the tract.
   (B)   Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
   (C)   Chickens must have wings appropriately clipped to prevent them from
flying.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.04) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.099 ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED.
   (A)   Chickens are only permitted for tracts of land located in the
following districts, as identified on the official zoning map on file with the
city:
      (1)   Agricultural Zoning District (AG);
      (2)   Medium Density Residential Housing;
      (3)   Low Density Residential Housing; and
      (4)   Single-Family Residential/Office Commercial District (GC-3).
   (B)   Chickens, as provided under this subchapter, are not permitted on any
tract of land within the above zoning districts that contains more than one
single-family detached residence on the property. Tracts of land containing
multi-family residences or buildings are not permitted to have chickens under
this subchapter.
   (C)   This subchapter does affect or otherwise bypass any restrictive
covenant that regulates urban chickens on a specific tract of land.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.05) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.100 NONCOMMERCIAL USE ONLY.
   (A)   Chickens must be kept for personal use only.
   (B)   The selling of chickens, eggs, chicken manure or the breeding of
chickens for commercial purposes is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.06) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.101 ENCLOSURES AND COOPS.
   (A)   Keeping. Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all
times. Chickens must be secured within a coop during non-daylight hours.
   (B)   Proximity to residences. No person shall establish or maintain any
enclosure or keep any chickens on the premises within 15 feet of any adjacent
residential dwelling, church, school or place of business.
   (C)   Coop placement. All coops shall be placed appropriately on the lot so
as to inhibit access to the coop from adjacent properties and to prevent
interference or create a nuisance with the people on adjacent property or in
the public right-of-way. Coops must not be placed within any setback applicable
to the zoning district as found in
Chapter 156 or within 15 feet of any adjacent property, whichever is greater.
Coops must not be placed within any drainage easement on the property. Any coop
must only be located in the rear or side yard of the tract of land, and at no
time may a coop or enclosure be located in the corner side yard or the front
yard of any property.
   (D)   Screening. The coop and enclosure must be screened from adjacent
landowner’s sidewalks and right-of-way views. The screen must be an opaque
fence and/or landscape screen.
   (E)   Enclosure specifications. Any enclosure must be fenced and secured
from predators, including all openings, doors and gates. Enclosures must be
kept in a clean, dry, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
   (F)   Coop specifications. Chicken coops must be designed to provide safe
and healthy living conditions for the chickens with a minimum of three square
feet per bird while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the
neighborhood. Coops must be of a sufficient size to permit free movement of the
chickens.
      (1)   A coop must be enclosed on all sides, and must have a roof and
doors, and must have proper ventilation. Access doors must be able to be shut
and locked at night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator-
and bird-proof wire of less than one-inch openings.
      (2)   The materials used in making a coop must be uniform for each
element of the structure such that the walls are made of the same material, the
roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any windows or openings are
constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap, waste board, sheet
metal or similar materials is prohibited. Coops must be well maintained.
      (3)   Coops must be kept in a clean, dry, neat and sanitary condition at
all times.
      (4)   A coop may not be taller than eight feet, measured from the natural
grade of the ground, and must be easily accessible for cleaning and
maintenance.
   (G)   Cessation of chicken keeping. Upon ceasing to maintain chickens on the
property, all enclosures and coops related to chicken keeping must be removed
from the premises within 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.07) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.102 FEED AND WATER.
   Chickens must be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
The feed and water must be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators.
All stored feed must be kept in a rodent and predator proof container.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.08) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.103 PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS AND PARASITES.
   The chicken keeper must take necessary action to reduce the attraction of
predators, rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites.
Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in
unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed and appropriately
disposed of by the city’s Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.09) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.104 WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with
a roof or lid over the entire structure. No more than three cubic feet of
manure must be stored on the tract of land. All other manure not used for
composting or fertilizing must be removed. The coop and surrounding area must
be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten food must be removed
in a timely manner.
   (B)   Any deceased chickens must be removed and appropriately disposed of
within a timely manner after discovery.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.10) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.105 CHICKENS AT LARGE.
   (A)   The chicken keeper must not allow chickens to roam off the tract of
land.
   (B)   No dog, cat or other domesticated animal which kills a chicken off the
tract of land will, for that reason alone, be considered a dangerous or
aggressive animal, or the city’s responsibility to enforce its animal control
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.11) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.106 ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS.
   Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related substances must
not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract of land. Noise
from chickens must not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of the tract of
land to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.12) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.107 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   Notwithstanding complete compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep any chickens in such a
manner as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and
enjoyment of private property by residents and domestic animals, interfere with
the normal use and enjoyment of public property by persons within the community
or which in any manner constitutes a nuisance to others. Public nuisances under
this section shall be subject to the code enforcement provision of
Chapter 37 or may be abated in accordance with the provisions in Chapters
94 and
156, and state law. If a chicken enclosure, or the chickens themselves, are
found to be a nuisance, the chicken keeper must appropriately relocate all
chickens, dismantle and remove all chicken enclosures, coops and related
materials. Any disposal of chickens or chicken related expenses are at the
chicken keeper’s expense. Any required removal must be completed within a
maximum of 30 days of a final determination that a nuisance exists.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.13) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.108 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Notwithstanding complete compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Keep chickens in violation of any provision of this subchapter or any
other provision of this code;
   (B)   Keep chickens inside a residence or dwelling;
   (C)   Slaughter any chickens within the city;
   (D)   Keep a rooster;
   (E)   Allow chickens to trespass on adjacent tracts of land; or
   (F)   Release or set free chickens in any public area, public property, park
or any other property within the city without the property owner’s permission.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.14) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.109 CITY NOT LIABLE.
   The city shall not be liable for any damage to chickens, enclosures, coops
or any chicken keeping operations resulting from the city’s use of spray to
kill pests or weeds, or other legal use of the same, on public rights-of-way,
public property, city property or in other approved areas.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.15) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.110 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The owner of the property upon which the chickens are located and the
owner of the chickens on the property shall share equally in the responsibility
to ensure the chicken keeping operation, including, but not limited to, care of
the chickens, enclosure and coop, is maintained in an acceptable manner. The
responsibility described herein shall include payment for any damages suffered
by a third party.
   (B)   Compliance with all applicable state statutes and rules shall be
evidence of such compliance.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.16) (Ord. 2022-05, passed 3-21-2022)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the
state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of
any costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter or state law.
Violations may also be subject to administrative citations as provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal
Control Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer, their duly appointed agents, the
City Police Department or any law enforcement agency with authority to issue
citations in the city. All violations in this section may be investigated by
the Police Department with possible criminal charges. Any of the above
enforcement agencies are authorized to issue an administrative citation for any
violation of this chapter.
      (3)   The administrative citation penalty for a violation of this chapter
shall result in the fine set forth in the city’s annual resolution. Any
increase in administrative penalty for subsequent violations must occur within
a 12-month rolling period.
      (4)   Any specific penalty or enforcement provided for specific sections
of this chapter are cumulative to the general penalties and enforcement
provided under this division (A).
(Prior Code, § 32.01.03)
   (B)   Any violation of §§
92.095 through
92.110 is subject to the penalty and enforcement sections of this chapter. The
city may utilize any action available under the law to address violations of §§
92.095 through
92.110, including, but not limited to, the following.
      (1)   Any person violating §§
92.095 through
92.110 shall be subject to the general penalty provision of SDCL § 22-6-2. In
addition, the city may seek to enjoin the actions of any person or operation
which violate the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The city may enforce penalties for violation of §§
92.095 through
92.110 under the provisions of Chapters
37 and
94.
      (3)   (a)   If there is an immediate threat to public safety as a result
of any violation of §§
92.095 through
92.110, the city shall have the authority to remove or relocate the chickens
which are the source of the threat.
         (b)   In addition, where such a threat to public safety exists, the
city may direct and require the chicken keeper to destroy and/or relocate said
chicken operation at the chicken keeper’s expense.
         (c)   In a public health emergency declared by a County, State or
Federal Health Department, including, but not limited to, an outbreak of Avian
Flu or West Nile virus, immediate corrective action may be required in
accordance with applicable public health regulations and procedures, and in
conjunction with Animal Control.
(Prior Code, § 32.06.17)
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 11-18-2015; Ord. 2016-06, passed 8-17-2016; Ord. 2022-05,
passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 93: HOBBY BEEKEEPING
Section
   
93.01   Scope and purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Compliance with all applicable laws
   
93.04   Required location of hives
   
93.05   Apiary management
   
93.06   Colony densities
   
93.07   Nuisance prohibited
   
93.08   City not liable
   
93.09   Liability
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The city recognizes the unique role bees play in maintaining the growth of
the wide variety of plant species present in the community. To balance the
interests of those persons who desire to keep bees with those who might find
unregulated beekeeping activities and the unrestricted presence of bees
offensive, the city now adopts this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.01) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APIARY. Any place where one or more colonies of bees are kept.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who engages in hobby beekeeping within the city.
   BEES. Any life stage of the common honeybee, Apis mellifera L or any other
species of bees which is allowed in the state by SDCL Chapter 38-18.
   COLONY. The bees in any hive, including queens, workers and drones.
   HIVE. Any frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log gum, skep or any other
container or combinations of such containers which may be used as a domicile
for bees, with a total size not to exceed 36 inches wide, 36 inches deep and 78
inches high.
   HOBBY BEEKEEPING. The activities associated with keeping, controlling,
harboring and/or maintaining one or more colonies of bees within city limits.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.02) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 93.03 COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE LAWS.
   Beekeepers shall register each hive and apiary they own, possess or manage
within the city as required by SDCL Chapter 38-18. Beekeepers shall comply with
all applicable federal and state laws, including, but not limited to, those
provisions found within SDCL Chapter 38-18, ARSD Article 12:41 and city
ordinances, including any applicable zoning regulations.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.03) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 93.04 REQUIRED LOCATION OF HIVES.
   (A)   Proximity to residences. No person shall establish or maintain any
hive or keep any bees on the premises within 15 feet of any dwelling. This
restriction does not apply to residences occupied by a beekeeper residing on
the same lot where the hive is located.
   (B)   Hive placement. All hives shall be placed appropriately on the lot so
as to inhibit access to the hive from adjacent properties and to prevent
interference with the movements of people on adjacent property or in the public
right-of-way. Hives shall not be placed within any setback applicable to the
zoning district as found in Chapter 156. Hives shall not be placed within any
drainage easement on the property. In addition, the front of the hive shall
face away from the nearest property line, sidewalk and/or right-of-way,
whichever is closest. However, the facing requirement shall not be applicable
if sufficient screen exists, as described in division (C) below, between the
hive and the closest property line, sidewalk or right-of-way.
   (C)   Screening. Hobby beekeepers are encouraged to use screening which
meets or exceeds accepted industry standards between the hive and neighboring
lots, sidewalks and/or rights-of-way, such as fences, hedges, walls or similar
barriers to inhibit interference between bees and persons on adjacent
sidewalks, rights-of-way and property.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.04) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 APIARY MANAGEMENT.
   A beekeeper shall:
   (A)   Provide an adequate and convenient source of water at all times to the
bees on the property on which the apiary is located, to prevent bees from
congregating at other water sources where they may come into contact with
humans and animals, and the water shall be maintained so as not to become
stagnant;
   (B)   Maintain and manage such hives so as not to create a nuisance; and
   (C)   Ensure that no bee comb or other materials that might encourage
robbing are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon removal from the
hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or
placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.05) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 93.06 COLONY DENSITIES.
   In addition to the location requirements set forth above, it shall be
unlawful to keep more than one colony in a hive on any tract, lot or parcel
within the city. However, if the perimeter of the lot on which one or more
hives are placed permits all hives to be located at least 100 feet from all
property lines, the maximum number of hives which may be placed on that lot
shall not exceed the number permitted by SDCL § 38-18-3 and by ARSD Article 12:
41. For each two colonies authorized above, there may be maintained upon the
same tract one nucleus colony as required from time to time for management of
swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an
authorized colony within 30 days after the date it is acquired.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.06) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   Notwithstanding complete compliance with the requirements of this chapter,
it shall be unlawful for any person to keep any colony or colonies in such a
manner, or bees of such a disposition, as to cause any unhealthy condition,
interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of private property by residents
and domestic animals, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of public
property by persons within the community or which in any manner constitutes a
nuisance to others. Public nuisances under this section shall be subject to the
code enforcement provision of Chapter 37, or may be abated in accordance with
the provisions in Chapters 94 and 156, and state law. If a colony is found to
be a nuisance, the hobby beekeeper must relocate or destroy all hives, at the
beekeeper’s expense, within a maximum of 30 days of a final determination that
a nuisance exists.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.07) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 CITY NOT LIABLE.
   The city shall not be liable for any damage to bees, hives, colonies or
hobby beekeeping operations resulting from the city’s use of spray to kill
pests or weeds, or other legal use of the same, on public rights-of-way, public
property, city property or in other approved areas.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.08) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 93.09 LIABILITY.
   The owner of the property upon which the hive and/or colony is located and
the owner of the bees on the property shall share equally in the responsibility
to ensure the bees and hive are maintained in an acceptable manner. The
responsibility described herein shall include payment for any damages suffered
by a third party. Compliance with all applicable state statutes and rules shall
be evidence of such compliance.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.09) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   The city may utilize any action available under the law to address
violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the general
penalty provision of SDCL § 22-6-2. In addition, the city may seek to enjoin
the actions of any person or operation which violate the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The city may enforce penalties for violation of this chapter under the
provision of
Chapter 37.
   (C)   If there is an immediate threat to public safety as a result of any
violation of this chapter, the city shall have the authority to remove or re-
locate the hive or colony which is the source of the threat. In addition where
such a threat to public safety exists, the city may direct and require the
beekeeper of said hive or colony to destroy and/or relocate said hive or colony
at the beekeeper’s expense. For the purpose of this penalty section, the term
THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY shall include, but is not limited to, a circumstance
when there is a colony not residing in a hive structure intended for
beekeeping; or a dangerous swarm of bees that poses an immediate risk to the
safety of humans; or a colony residing in a human-made hive which is not
properly registered as require by SDCL Chapter 38-18 or which, by virtue of its
apparent condition, appears abandoned by a beekeeper.
(Prior Code, § 32.05.10) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-6-2017; Ord. 2022-05, passed
3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Scope and purpose
   
94.002   Definitions
Nuisances Generally
   
94.015   Specific acts, conditions and/or things deemed to be nuisances
   
94.016   Filing a nuisance complaint
   
94.017   Courtesy letter/notice of violation
   
94.018   Notice to complainant and right to review
   
94.019   Abatement or filing of review required within 15 days
   
94.020   Notice of review by Legal and Finance Committee
   
94.021   Issuance of ticket of violation
   
94.022   Abatement
   
94.023   Landowner responsible for any costs
   
94.024   Immediate abatement required in certain cases
Depositing of Filth, Obnoxious and Offensive Substances
   
94.035   Application
   
94.036   Action to be taken by city
Weeds, Trees, Bushes and the like
   
94.050   Weeds and noxious vegetation
   
94.051   Overhanging tree limbs or bushes
   
94.052   Notice to cut grass, weeds, overhanging limbs and the like
   
94.053   Removal of vegetation by the city
Slaughterhouses, Meat Markets and Livestock Sale Rings
   
94.065   Offensive and unwholesome material
   
94.066   Right of entry
   
94.067   Destroying spoiled meats
   
94.068   Abatement
Non-Domestic Animals
   
94.080   Building materials not to provide harborage for animals
   
94.081   Notice to owner from Health Officer
   
94.082   Action required by owner
   
94.083   Food and/or feed protection
   
94.084   Feeding of big game animals prohibited
Depositing and Burning of Materials
   
94.095   Deposit on public or private ground prohibited
   
94.096   Manure
   
94.097   Stagnant water
   
94.098   Dead animals
   
94.099   Keeping or using putrid materials, hides and the like
   
94.100   Unwholesome business
   
94.101   Scattering papers
   
94.102   Depositing of foreign objects; trespassing into the Deadman Creek
Channelization Project prohibited
Junk Dealers
   
94.115   License required
   
94.116   Application for license
   
94.117   Record of purchases
   
94.118   Reports to Police Department
   
94.119   Restrictions
   
94.120   Business confined to premises
   
94.121   Burning prohibited
   
94.122   Wrecking and dismantling of old cars limited
   
94.123   Fenced enclosure required
Indecent Acts
   
94.135   Indecent exposure
   
94.136   Indecent act
   
94.137   Insulting females
Sexually-Oriented Performances and Performers
   
94.150   Prohibited activities on licensed premises
   
94.151   Contact between any performer and patron
   
94.152   Performance in posted designated areas only
   
94.153   License required for premises
   
94.154   License required for sexually-oriented performer
   
94.155   Basis for denial of license
   
94.156   Fees
   
94.157   Display of license
   
94.158   Inspection
   
94.159   Expiration of license
   
94.160   Suspension
   
94.161   Revocation
   
94.162   Liquor or malt beverage license
   
94.163   Appeal process
   
94.164   Validity in case of judicial declaration
 
   
94.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate acts, conditions and things that
are or may be injurious to the health and/or safety of the public; that are
indecent or offensive to the senses; or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of another’s life or
property.
(Prior Code, § 12.01.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIG GAME ANIMAL. Any cloven-hoofed wild animal, mountain lion or wild
turkey.
   DAMAGED BUILDING. Any structure and/or building which has been destroyed or
damaged by natural disasters or fire and has not been torn down, salvaged or
repaired.
   DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS. Any structure which, because of the lack of
maintenance, has become a fire hazard, public health or safety hazard.
   FULLY CLOTHED. Having opaque coverings over the male or female torso/midriff
area, to include the buttocks and genitals, and covering the nipple and areolae
of the female breast. This does not include the arms, hands or leg areas of the
body,
   FULL OPAQUE COVERING. Not transparent or translucent; impenetrable to light
and not allowing a person to see through it.
   GARBAGE. Cans, bottles, ashes, kitchen refuse and/or an accumulation of
animal and vegetable matter which attends the preparation, cooking and eating
of food, cans, bottles and ashes.
   IMPURE WATER. Any well or other supply of water used for human consumption
or for household purposes which has become polluted.
   INDECENT. Conduct or language patently offensive in its content or
application.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person engaged in business as a dealer or trader in junk,
old metals, rags, waste paper, green hides, old automobiles, carcasses of
animals used for fertilizer or other articles or things which from the worn
condition are rendered useless for the purpose for which made.
   JUNK YARD. Any area, lot or location where two or more unusable automobiles
or old metals, rags, waste paper, green hides or other similar articles are
bought, sold, unloaded or stored.
   LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises which is licensed to allow sexually-oriented
performing and which is licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
   LICENSEE. Any person, association, partnership, corporation, club or other
entity which is licensed to allow sexually-oriented performing and who
possesses a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals with less than a
full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a full
opaque covering or any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the
depiction of covered male genitals in a discernable turgid state.
   NUISANCE. Anything, which is injurious to the health or safety, or is
indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
   PATRON. Any person present on licensed premises that is not in the employ of
the licensee.
   PERFORMER/ENTERTAINER. Any person who is present on licensed premises with
the consent of the licensee for the purpose of entertaining any patrons on the
premises, and who is licensed to perform such entertainment. This term includes
those who are paid to perform as well as those who are not paid.
   RODENT HARBORAGE. Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rodents thus favoring the rodents’ multiplication and continuous existence, in,
under or around a structure of any kind.
   RODENTS. Any non-domestic animal, including, but not limited to, rats,
skunks and raccoons.
   RUBBISH. Any waste other than garbage, including paper, boxes, cartons,
wastes from gardens and lawns and tree branches.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Any act simulating or appearing to simulate the act of
masturbation, sexual intercourse or other physical contact with a person’s
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is
female, the breast.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED PERFORMER. Any person who wears the fully opaque covering
required by §§
94.150 through
94.164, but who could not be described as fully clothed, and who includes in
his or her performance any act or movement that appears to simulate sexual
conduct, or other motions and activities that are completed for payment or
compensation of any kind by any person, for the amusement and enjoyment of any
patron of a licensed premises.
   STAGE. The portion of the licensed premises in which an entertainer may
perform and which may not, during any such performance, also be occupied by any
patron who has not been specifically invited on stage by the performer to
participate in the performance.
   STAGNANT WATER. Any excavation, pond, low-lying area, public or private, in
which water has become stagnant and/or has produced mosquito larvae and/or has
an offensive odor.
   WASTE MATERIAL. Any noncombustible inorganic matter, including, but not
limited to, ashes, glass, sand, earth, stones, concrete, mortar, metals and tin
cans.
   WRECKED VEHICLE. Any automobile which because of body damage, or operating
apparatus, including tires and wheels, is in such a condition to render the
start, legal operation or use of said automobile impossible.
(Prior Code, § 12.01.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004; Ord. 2008-21, passed
10-18-2008; Ord. 2014-08, passed 7-2-2014)
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 94.015 SPECIFIC ACTS, CONDITIONS AND/OR THINGS DEEMED TO BE NUISANCES.
   The following specific acts, conditions and things are each declared a
public nuisance, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any garbage, refuse or waste
which is likely to cause or transmit disease or which is a hazard to health;
   (B)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any rubbish. This provision
shall not include building materials for sale used on pending construction;
   (C)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any waste material. This
provision shall not include materials which are not human-made and are used to
fill a site for the purpose of construction or land leveling;
   (D)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any abandoned, discarded or
unused furniture, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, stoves, sinks,
toilets, cabinets or household furnishings/fixtures and/or storing said items
in such a manner as to be visible to the public from adjoining property, public
alleys or streets;
   (E)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any vehicle or vehicles that is/
are abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative including any vehicle with
flat tires, missing wheels and the like;
   (F)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any automobile or automobiles
which is/are non-licensed automobiles or because of body damage, or operating
apparatus, including tires and wheels, is/are in such a condition to render the
start, legal operation or use of said automobile or automobiles impossible. Any
vehicle which is left for repair at a regularly operated repair garage is
exempt from this section;
   (G)   Any trailer, recreational vehicle or implement which is left standing
on a public right-of-way for a period of 120 hours or longer;
   (H)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property any trees and/or bushes that
interfere with the health, safety or enjoyment of another;
   (I)   Damaged buildings;
   (J)   Dilapidated buildings;
   (K)   Impure water;
   (L)   Undressed hides, which for any reason are kept longer than 24 hours;
hides which are kept at a place where they are to be manufactured into items,
such as gloves, coats and the like, and are stored inside an approved
structure, which complies with all health regulations for such manufacturing,
shall be exempt from this section;
   (M)   The accumulation of manure; manure accumulated to be properly used as
a fertilizer shall be exempt from this section;
   (N)   Rodents;
   (O)   Stagnant water;
   (P)   Any dead animal remaining on any public or private ground for a period
of more than 24 hours;
   (Q)   Depositing, placing, letting fall or throwing materials into a pond,
pool or waterway as to pollute said water;
   (R)   Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool unless approved by the
City Council and the State Department of Environment and Natural Resources;
   (S)   (1)   Ignition of any bonfire or campfire on public or private
property;
      (2)   Campfires which are placed in approved fire rings and are in
conjunction with a year-round state licensed campground shall be exempt from
this section; and
      (3)   Approved campgrounds shall receive approval from the Fire Chief in
writing prior to burning.
   (T)   Parking or allowing a livestock truck, trailer or any other vehicle,
which gives off an offensive odor or contains an offensive substance or other
filth on any public or private grounds;
   (U)   Causing or allowing any offensive, foul odors or stenches that are
dangerous or offensive to the neighborhood to be emitted from public or private
property;
   (V)   Causing or allowing pieces of paper, newsprint, excelsior, handbills,
posters, building paper, advertisements or other materials to be carried about
by the winds;
   (W)   Slaughterhouses;
   (X)   Depositing, placing, throwing or letting fall any item into the
Deadman Creek Channelization Project, including, but not limited to, leaves,
garbage, ashes, grass clippings and tree branches;
   (Y)   Entering the Deadman Creek Channelization Project without prior
permission from the Public Works Director;
   (Z)   Leaving or allowing to remain outside of any dwelling, building or
other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or
other structure under his or her control in a place accessible to children, any
non-operating ice box, refrigerator or other container without first removing
said door or lid for said ice box, refrigerator or container; or
   (AA)   Depositing or placing any offal, filth, filthy waters, human or
animal waste, obnoxious liquid substances, including petroleum products such as
oil, gasoline and the like, on any private lot or public grounds.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.016 FILING A NUISANCE COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, in the event any city
representative receives a complaint, either orally or in writing, he or she
shall forward the complaint to the Engineering and Inspections Office for
investigation.
   (B)   As part of the investigation, the Engineering and Inspections Office
shall obtain the following information in writing:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the person making said complaint;
      (2)   Address of the property for which the complaint is being filed; and
      (3)   Nature of the complaint.
   (C)   After obtaining the necessary information from the complainant, the
Building Inspector may request assistance from other city departments or
request an investigation by a more appropriate city employee and/or agent as is
necessary based upon the nature of the complaint.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.017 COURTESY LETTER/NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, in the event the Building
Inspector, other employee and/or agent finds that any violation exists, the
city shall send a courtesy letter/notice of violation to the property owner.
   (B)   The letter shall state the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the property owner;
      (2)   Address and legal description of the property in violation;
      (3)   Nature of the violation;
      (4)   Title, chapter and section violated;
      (5)   Demand that the property owner become compliant; and
      (6)   The date upon which the representative will inspect the property
for compliance.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.03) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.018 NOTICE TO COMPLAINANT AND RIGHT TO REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   In the event the Building Inspector or other employee and/or
agent concludes that a violation does not exist, the Building Inspector or
other employee and/or agent shall send a letter to the complainant within 15
days advising him or her of said determination.
      (2)   In the event, the complainant is not satisfied with the
investigation and subsequent determination; said complainant may file a written
request for review.
   (B)   The process shall be as follows.
      (1)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review
with the Building Inspector setting forth the basis for which he or she
believes the decision that a violation does not exist to be in error. The
writing shall also include the person’s name and mailing address.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the written request for review, the Building
Inspector shall notify the Public Works Committee.
      (3)   The Public Works Committee shall have 30 days to review the case
and give its decision in writing to the complainant.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.04) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.019 ABATEMENT OR FILING OF REVIEW REQUIRED WITHIN 15 DAYS.
   Any person who has received written notification of an existing violation
shall either abate said nuisance or file a written notice of review with the
Building Inspector within 15 days of receipt of the courtesy letter/notice of
violation.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.05) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.020 NOTICE OF REVIEW BY LEGAL AND FINANCE COMMITTEE.
   Any person who disagrees with the determination of a violation by the
Building Inspector or other employee and/or agent shall have the right to have
the Public Works Committee review the decision. The process shall be as
follows.
   (A)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review with
the Building Inspector setting forth the basis for which he or she believes the
decision that a violation exists to be in error. The writing shall also include
the person’s name and mailing address.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the written request for review, the Building Inspector
shall notify the Public Works Committee.
   (C)   The Public Works Committee shall have 30 days to review the case and
give its decision in writing to the landowner.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.06) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.021 ISSUANCE OF TICKET OF VIOLATION.
   If the landowner fails to abate the nuisance or request a review from the
Public Works Committee within the given time, the city may issue a complaint
and summons to the landowner ordering the landowner to appear in court to
answer said violation. Each violation may be considered a Class 2 misdemeanor
for each day of violation until the nuisance is abated.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.07) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.022 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   In lieu of or in addition to the issuance of a complaint and summons
to appear in court, for violation of this subchapter, the city shall also have
the authority to abate said nuisance as set forth in SDCL § 21-10-6.
   (B)   The Building Inspector or other employee and/or agent that conducted
the investigation shall have the authority to employ a contractor to assist
with said abatement.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.08) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.023 LANDOWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY COSTS.
   (A)   Any related expenses, receipts and administrative, legal and/or
investigative fees shall be billed to the landowner.
   (B)   In the event the landowner fails to pay said bill within 30 days, the
City Finance Officer may file a special assessment on the property with the
County Auditor’s office.
   (C)   In the event the nuisance abated is an unsafe or dilapidated building,
junk, trash, debris or similar nuisance arising from the condition of the
property, the city may commence a civil action against the owner of the real
property for its costs of abatement in lieu of taxing the cost by special
assessment.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.09) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.024 IMMEDIATE ABATEMENT REQUIRED IN CERTAIN CASES.
   (A)   Nuisance cases involving subjects such as, but not limited to,
bonfires, campfires, dead animals, undressed hides, fireworks, depositing
filth, spoiled foods or similar items which are determined by the Building
Inspector or investigating employee to be an immediate threat to public health
and safety shall be abated immediately, unless it is otherwise dictated by the
Building Inspector or other investigation employee of the city.
   (B)   Sections
94.018 through
94.021 shall not be applicable to nuisances deemed to be in need of immediate
abatement due to the threat to public health and safety.
   (C)   In the event the violator refuses to comply with the orders of the
city, the city may have the nuisance abated immediately at the owner’s expense.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to interfere with the city’s
authority to immediately abate a nuisance that has been determined by the city
to be an immediate threat to public health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 12.02.10) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
DEPOSITING OF FILTH, OBNOXIOUS AND OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES
§ 94.035 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall only apply to nuisances caused by
the following:
   (A)   Depositing of garbage or refuse;
   (B)   Depositing of rubbish;
   (C)   Depositing of waste material;
   (D)   Vehicles containing obnoxious, offensive or nauseous substances;
   (E)   Offensive odors; and
   (F)   Depositing filth.
(Prior Code, § 12.03.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.036 ACTION TO BE TAKEN BY CITY.
   The following guidelines and penalties shall apply only to this subchapter.
   (A)   Due to public health and safety concerns, once it has come to the
attention of the city that one or more of the above listed nuisance violations
have been committed the City Police Department may issue a ticket or the city
may serve a complaint and summons to appear in court to answer for said
violation.
   (B)   In addition, the Building Inspector or other investigating employee
shall have the authority to have the nuisance abated, removed or cleaned up
immediately at the cost of the violator.
   (C)   When the Building Inspector or other investigating employee is dealing
with a vehicle, which contains obnoxious, offensive or nauseous substances, he
or she shall direct the owner to remove the vehicle. If the owner is unable to
be found within a reasonable time, the Building Inspector or other
investigating employee shall have the vehicle towed at the owner/driver’s
expense. All towing and storage charges shall be assessed against the owner or
driver of the vehicle before possession is returned. For the purpose of this
section only, a REASONABLE AMOUNT OF TIME shall be defined to be no longer than
30 days under any circumstances; however, nothing in this provision shall
prevent the city from taking immediate action when necessary to protect the
health and safety of the public.
(Prior Code, § 12.03.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
WEEDS, TREES, BUSHES AND THE LIKE
§ 94.050 WEEDS AND NOXIOUS VEGETATION.
   (A)   All weeds and plants declared to be dangerous, or noxious weeds by the
State Department of Agriculture or the Commission of State Weed Control, and
all other weeds suffered or allowed to grow during the growing season which are
declared noxious, dangerous or unhealthy vegetation are hereby declared a
public nuisance. It shall be the duty of the property owner or any lot within
the city to cut such noxious vegetation at such time as necessary to prevents
its growth.
   (B)   No landowner shall allow domestic grass, weeds or noxious vegetation
to grow to a height of more than eight inches.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.051 OVERHANGING TREE LIMBS OR BUSHES.
   (A)   The limbs of trees or bushes hanging less than 16 feet in height above
the driving surface of Lazelle Street, Main Street or Junction Avenue shall be
declared a public nuisance and shall be removed as stated in §§
94.052 or
94.053.
   (B)   The limbs of trees or bushes hanging less than 12 feet in height above
the driving surface of all streets within the city limits other than those
listed above shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be removed as stated
in §§
94.052 and/or
94.053.
   (C)   Due to public safety concerns, the full width of sidewalks shall be
kept clear of all vegetation between the walking surface and eight feet above
the walking surface.
   (D)   All limbs of trees or bushes which are hanging less than eight feet in
height above the walking surface of all sidewalks within the city shall be
declared a public nuisance and shall be removed as stated in §§
94.052 and/or
94.053.
   (E)   The Chief of Police may declare all trees or bushes which cause or may
in the future cause a traffic or visibility problem a public nuisance; in
addition, the Chief may, because of public safety, order said vegetation
removed immediately.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of all landowners to keep all overhanging trees
and bushes herein described cut down and removed on all lots owned or occupied
by them, and to the middle of the street abutting the land owned or occupied by
them.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.052 NOTICE TO CUT GRASS, WEEDS, OVERHANGING LIMBS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Street Superintendent, Chief of Police, Police Officers or City
Health Officer, at any time during the growing season, shall notify landowners
in writing by certified mail or in person with a return of service. Upon
service, the landowner shall have ten days in which to remove the violation.
   (B)   This notice shall, in addition, inform the landowner that he or she is
required to keep all vegetation cut and in compliance with city ordinances
throughout the growing season.
   (C)   Upon receipt of subsequent notices, after receiving the initial notice
to cut any overhanging limbs, weeds, trees and the like, the landowner shall be
required to abate any similar nuisance within five days of written
notification.
   (D)   Notices shall include the following information:
      (1)   Landowner’s name and address;
      (2)   Address of property in violation;
      (3)   Legal description of property;
      (4)   Ordinance section violated;
      (5)   Requirements of the ordinance; and
      (6)   Required completion date.
   (E)   The landowner may appeal the case in writing to the Legal and Finance
Committee as stated in §
94.020 with one exception: The landowner must make said appeal within the time
frame set for removal of the nuisance; if the landowner fails to make a written
appeal within this time frame, the nuisance may be abated as stated in §
94.068.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.03) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.053 REMOVAL OF VEGETATION BY THE CITY.
   (A)   If the owner of said property fails to remove or cut vegetation within
the given time allowed by ordinance, the Street Superintendent may cause such
vegetation to be removed.
   (B)   The Street Superintendent or his or her designee may enter upon the
property for the purpose of removing or cutting vegetation, which is in
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.04) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
SLAUGHTERHOUSES, MEAT MARKETS AND LIVESTOCK SALE RINGS
§ 94.065 OFFENSIVE AND UNWHOLESOME MATERIAL.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of slaughtering animals, pack
them for market, render any animal matter, conduct a meat market or operate a
livestock sale ring within the city or within one mile thereof, without
approval of the City Council. Said approval shall be conditional upon said
person proving compliance with any applicable health regulations and having
received verification hereof by the authorized health representative.
   (B)   Any establishment legally in operation prior to the adoption of this
section shall be permitted to continue said operation until such time the
operation has become a health hazard to the general public.
   (C)   No person shall permit or suffer to remain on the premises where such
business is carried on any decaying meat, blood, bone, offal, filth or other
animal matter so that the same shall become offensive and unwholesome and
endanger health or be a nuisance to the neighborhood. Such premises shall at
all times be kept in a clean, healthy and non-offensive condition.
(Prior Code, § 12.05.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.066 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The City Health Officer and/or police officer of the city, and any and all
of their assistants, shall be permitted free entrance at all hours of the day
or night to all places used for any investigative purpose specified in this
subchapter, and shall have the right to unrestricted examination of such places
and of the machinery and utensils therein contained, and of the meat or
provisions therein exposed for sale and the manner of conducting and operating
such business. No person shall willfully hinder or obstruct such entrance or
examination.
(Prior Code, § 12.05.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.067 DESTROYING SPOILED MEATS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale any spoiled, diseased,
rotten, emaciated, tainted or putrid meat or provisions of any kind.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the Health Officer of the city, any meat
provisions for sale in any market, shop or other building are tainted, putrid,
unwholesome or dangerous to the public health, it shall be the duty of the
Health Officer of this city to serve notice in writing upon the person exposing
for sale such provisions, requiring him or her to destroy the same in such a
manner and within such time as he or she deems necessary.
   (C)   In the event said person fails to conform to such notice, the Health
Officer or his or her representative shall destroy such meat or provisions at
the expense of the person exposing such meat or provision for sale.
   (D)   In the event said person refuses to pay for the cost of disposal, the
city shall dispose of the items and file an assessment against said person.
(Prior Code, § 12.05.03) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.068 ABATEMENT.
   Any violations of this subchapter may be abated as set forth in §
94.022 as an existing nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 12.05.04) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS
§ 94.080 BUILDING MATERIALS NOT TO PROVIDE HARBORAGE FOR ANIMALS.
   No person shall permit to accumulate upon any premises, whether improved or
vacant, or upon any open lot, alley, street or drive, any lumber, boxes,
barrels, bricks, stones, refuse, scrap, metal, iron or other materials that may
permit harborage for non-domestic animals.
(Prior Code, § 12.06.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.081 NOTICE TO OWNER FROM HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   When it has come to the attention of the City Health Officer either by
citizen complaint or by city staff, the City Health Officer shall notify the
owner in writing by certified mail.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Owner’s name and address;
      (2)   The property address and legal description; and
      (3)   Nature of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 12.06.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.082 ACTION REQUIRED BY OWNER.
   (A)   Upon receipt of written notice or order from the City Health Officer,
the owner of any property specified in said notice or order shall take
immediate steps for rodent-proofing said building and/or property.
   (B)   Unless said work and improvements required for such rodent-proofing
have been completed by the owner of the property within the time specified or
an extension has been granted, the owner shall be deemed to have violated the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.06.03) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.083 FOOD AND/OR FEED PROTECTION.
   All food and/or feed, whether for human or animal consumption, shall be
protected from non-domestic animals by storing in buildings, compartments,
containers or rooms which are rodent-proof.
(Prior Code, § 12.06.04) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
§ 94.084 FEEDING OF BIG GAME ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall set out any grass, lawn cuttings, alfalfa, hay, grain,
minerals, salts, fruits, vegetables, nuts or commercial animal feed or food
supplement for the purpose of the consumption by any big game animal, with the
intention of providing such animals with supplementary nutrition or dietary
enhancement or with the intention of attracting any big game animal for
viewing.
(Prior Code, § 12.06.05) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004; Ord. 2008-20, passed
10-18-2008) Penalty, see §
94.999
DEPOSITING AND BURNING OF MATERIALS
§ 94.095 DEPOSIT ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE GROUND PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit of place any offal, filth, filthy waters, garbage,
ashes, wastewater, sewage, tin cans, excrement, manure (except when used for
brief periods and in a proper manner as a fertilizer), decaying fruit,
vegetables, fish, meat or bones, or any foul, putrid or obnoxious liquid
substances (including all gasoline and petroleum or products thereof), on any
private lot, public thoroughfares (including all streets, highways and
sidewalks), or public grounds of the city. No person shall throw, let fall on
or permit to remain on any street, alley or public ground, any of said
materials while engaged in handling or removing the same.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.01) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.096 MANURE.
   Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate anywhere in the city, and it shall
be used only in the proper manner as a fertilizer.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.02) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.097 STAGNANT WATER.
   No owner of any lot, or any other person responsible, shall allow the
collection of any stagnant water on any lot or premises within the city.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.03) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.098 DEAD ANIMALS.
   No owner or possessor of any animal which shall have died shall suffer the
same to lie on any public ground, street, lane or alley or any private lot or
place within the city, nor shall any person throw or leave any such animal or
any vegetable or animal matter or any slop or filth, whether solid or fluid,
into any pool of water in the city, or other place, to the annoyance of any
citizen of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.04) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.099 KEEPING OR USING PUTRID MATERIALS, HIDES AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall keep or use or cause to be kept or used any stale, putrid or
stinking fat, grease or meat, nor shall any person keep for more than 24 hours
any undressed hides, except at the place where used for manufacturing. No owner
or occupant of any grocery, cellar, tallow chandler, shop, soap factory,
tannery, pork or beef-packing house, stable or barn, shall suffer the same to
become foul, nauseous or offensive.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.05) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.100 UNWHOLESOME BUSINESS.
   No person shall on the premises owned or occupied by him or her permit or
suffer any nuisance, either by exercising any unwholesome trade, calling or
business, or by having or suffering any unwholesome or offensive substances
whatsoever to remain on his or her premises until, by offensive, foul odors or
stenches or otherwise, said premises shall become offensive, hurtful or
dangerous to the neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.06) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.101 SCATTERING PAPERS.
   No person shall throw into, deposit upon or in any manner permit to get in
any street, alley or passageway of the city, pieces of paper, newspapers,
excelsior, handbills, posters, building paper, lithographs used for
advertisement upon billboards or any materials likely to be carried about by
the winds.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.07) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.102 DEPOSITING OF FOREIGN OBJECTS; TRESPASSING INTO THE DEADMAN CREEK
CHANNELIZATION PROJECT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit, place, throw or let fall into the Deadman Creek
Channelization Project located on Deadman Creek in the city any substance or
object whatsoever, including garbage, ashes, grass clippings, trees, tree
branches, leaves or any other type of litter or material. No person shall enter
the Deadman Creek Channelization Project without prior permission of the Public
Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 12.07.08) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004) Penalty, see §
94.999
JUNK DEALERS
§ 94.115 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or operate a junkyard
within the city without first having secured a license therefore as herein
provided.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.01) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.116 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to procure a license as a junk dealer or operate a
junkyard shall file written application with the Finance Office.
   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The names and residences of each applicant, if an individual,
partnership or firm;
      (2)   The names of the principal officers and their residences, if the
applicant be an association or corporation;
      (3)   A detailed description of the character of the business in which
the applicant desires to engage and the kind of materials the applicant desires
to collect, buy, sell or otherwise deal;
      (4)   The length of time each applicant has resided in the city,
      (5)   Each applicant’s place of previous employment;
      (6)   Whether each applicant or any of them have been convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor, and if so what offense, when, and in what court;
      (7)   A description of the premises where the business is to be located
or carried on. Such description shall be given by street and number in case of
a building and in case such business is carried on wholly or in part on a
vacant lot or lots, the lot and block number shall be given, together with the
exact dimensions of the space to be occupied in any manner in the conduct of
such business; and
      (8)   Such other information as may be required by the City Council or
the Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.02) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.117 RECORD OF PURCHASES.
   (A)   Any junk dealer shall keep in such form as the Chief of Police shall
prescribe, and written in ink, indelible pencil, or by typewriter, a daily
record of all articles purchased. Said daily record shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and age of the person form whom each article was
purchased;
      (2)   The occupation and name of the employer of the person from whom
each article was purchased;
      (3)   The day and hour of such purchase; and
      (4)   The price paid for each article.
   (B)   The records shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of
the Chief of Police or any police officer, or any person duly authorized in
writing by the Chief of Police. No entry in such records shall be changed,
erased, obliterated or defaced.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.03) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.118 REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Any junk dealer, upon being served with written notice so to do by a member
of the Police Department, shall report to the Chief of Police a description of
all goods, articles or things purchased or received by him or her in the course
of business of a junk merchant at such time and during such period of time
specified in the notice stating the amount paid for and the name, residence and
general description of the person from whom such goods, articles or things were
received.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.04) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.119 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The handling, storing and/or keeping of old bones of any description
whatsoever by any person within the city is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   The handling, storing and/or keeping of such bones is hereby declared
to be a nuisance, and the violation of this section by the holder of any
license granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall be sufficient
cause for the revocation of the license in addition to any other penalty
prescribed by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.05) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.120 BUSINESS CONFINED TO PREMISES.
   No junk dealer shall carry on the business at or from any other place than
the premises designated and described in the application and license and all
junk of all kinds and description shall be kept wholly within the boundaries of
such premises.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.06) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.121 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No junk dealer shall burn old cars or other refuse on the premises covered
by said license or at any other place within the city.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.07) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.122 WRECKING AND DISMANTLING OF OLD CARS LIMITED.
   The wrecking and/or dismantling of old cars for the purpose of junking the
bodies and securing old parts shall be done wholly inside the buildings
occupied by said junk dealer or within the enclosure hereinafter provided for
and shall not in any event be done upon the highways or streets of the city or
outside the premises described in the application and license.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.08) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.123 FENCED ENCLOSURE REQUIRED.
   In all cases, no license shall be granted until the lots, lot or part of a
lot where the junk business is to be conducted has an enclosure with a tight,
well-constructed and well-painted fence of at least seven feet in height. After
the construction of such fence, it shall at all times be suitably maintained
and kept in good repair by the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.09) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
INDECENT ACTS
§ 94.135 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   (A)   No person shall appear in any public place or places exposed to public
view in the state of nudity.
   (B)   No person shall appear in any public place or places exposed to public
view with his or her genitals or the female breast covered with paint or any
similar substance without also having the genitals or breasts covered with a
full opaque covering. Paint or any similar substance does not qualify as a full
opaque covering as discussed in this section.
(Prior Code, § 12.09.01) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.136 INDECENT ACT.
   No person shall commit any indecent act in a public place or a place exposed
to public view.
(Prior Code, § 12.09.02) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.137 INSULTING FEMALES.
   No male person shall make any impudent, insulting or licentious advance or
salutation to any female person upon any street, or in any store or other
public place.
(Prior Code, § 12.09.03) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED PERFORMANCES AND PERFORMERS
§ 94.150 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No performer while on the licensed premises and in the presence of any other
person shall perform any one or more of the following:
   (A)   Fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual parts of his
or her body, to include the genitals, and the nipple and areola of the female
breast;
   (B)   Expose any devise, costume or covering, which gives the appearance of,
or simulates, the genitals, pubic area or the nipple and areola of the female
breast; or
   (C)   To move or behave in a manner which constitutes sexual conduct.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.01) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.151 CONTACT BETWEEN ANY PERFORMER AND PATRON.
   No patron shall have physical contact with any performer during the course
of a performance on licensed premises except under the following conditions:
   (A)   The performer shall have invited the patron to participate in the
performance; and
   (B)   The contact, which takes place, does not involve any act by the patron
or performer that is prohibited by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.02) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.152 PERFORMANCE IN POSTED DESIGNATED AREAS ONLY.
   (A)   No performer shall perform on the premises of a business licensed
under this subchapter in any area other than that which the licensee has
designated and described in licensee’s current application as the designated
sexually-oriented entertainment area.
   (B)   Any designated sexually-oriented entertainment area shall be located
inside the premises of the licensed business in an enclosed area in a manner
that the licensed performance is not visible to any person located outside of
the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.03) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.153 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall begin to operate a business where there is sexually-
oriented performing without first obtaining a conditional use permit for such
business operation within the Adult Overlay District as provided for in
Chapter 156. Any business premises intending to offer sexually-oriented
performing shall also obtain a valid license issued by the Police Department.
In addition, no person or business shall employ or allow a person to perform on
the premises who is not licensed as a sexually-oriented performer.
   (B)   To obtain a business license authorizing sexually-oriented
performances, the business owner shall make application to the Police
Department on a form prescribed and provided by the city. The applicant shall
be qualified according to the provisions of this subchapter. The application
shall be signed under oath by the applicant and notarized. The application
shall include and/or be accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   The name, telephone number and mailing address of the owner of the
business making application;
      (2)   The name, telephone number and address of the business in which the
performing is intended;
      (3)   If any prior license or permit has been denied, revoked or
suspended, the reasons therefor and the effective date of such revocation or
suspension;
      (4)   The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent
authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the business;
      (5)   The name and address of all employees of applicant whose employment
duties may include providing entertainment through sexually-oriented
performances at applicant’s premises;
      (6)   An acknowledgment by the applicant that all state and federal tax
records required to be maintained by applicant related to the employment status
of any performer licensed under this subchapter, and performing on premises
licensed under this subchapter, shall be subject to inspection upon request of
law enforcement or Department of Revenue representatives;
      (7)   An acknowledgment by the applicant that any change in the
information submitted with the application will be provided to the Police
Department within three business days of the change, to be provided in the form
of a supplemental application; and
      (8)   Any other information determined to be necessary and relevant to
the application process by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Upon completion the application shall be submitted to the Police
Department. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to contact the
Police Department to obtain an appropriate date and time to complete the
application process with the Police Department. The applicant shall demonstrate
in the application documents that the proposed premises are in full compliance
with §§
156.270 through
156.276, and that the conditional use permit required for such entertainment
activities by that provision has been obtained by the applicant. No premises
located outside the General Industrial Zone shall be permitted to apply for
such a license unless, in the year prior to submitting the application, the
applicant was issued a sexually-oriented performance premises license for the
same premises sought to be licensed under the subsequent application. Any
authority to conduct such performances without a conditional use permit as a
prior nonconforming use outside the General Industrial Zone shall expire at the
end of the calendar year in which it was issued. If said applicant meets all
qualifications and complies with all requirements of this subchapter, the
Police Department shall issue the license within 30 days of the date of the
application.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.04) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.154 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SEXUALLY-ORIENTED PERFORMER.
   (A)   No person shall perform as a sexually-oriented performer without a
valid license.
   (B)   To obtain a sexually-oriented performer license, the applicant shall
make application to the Police Department on a form prescribed and provided by
the city. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this
subchapter. The applicant will be signed under oath by the applicant and
notarized.
   (C)   The application shall include and/or be accompanied by the following
information:
      (1)   The applicant’s full, legal name and any other names used in the
preceding five years;
      (2)   Current residential mailing address and telephone number;
      (3)   Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate, current
driver’s license with picture, or other picture identification document issued
by a governmental agency;
      (4)   If any prior license or permit has been denied, revoked or
suspended the reasons therefor, the issuing jurisdiction and the effective date
of such revocation or suspension;
      (5)   Any criminal charges, complaints, information, or indictments in
the preceding five years which resulted in a conviction, a plea of guilty or no
contest for any offense described in SDCL Chapters 22-22, 22-23 and 22-24;
      (6)   Written confirmation that applicant is an employee of the business
at which the applicant seeks to perform, as shown by a valid IRS documentation
in the form of a current W-4 form. In the alternative, for an applicant that is
not an employee at a premises licensed under this subchapter, the application
must show that applicant has obtained a temporary vendor license and a state
sales tax license for applicant’s performance activities within the city; and
      (7)   Any other information or documentation determined to be necessary
and relevant to the application process by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
   (D)   The application process shall be conducted at the Police Department.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to contact the Police
Department to obtain an appropriate date and time to complete the application
process with the Police Department. If said applicant meets all qualifications
and complies with all requirements of this subchapter, the Police Department
may issue the license the day the application is completed and all requirements
of this subchapter complied with, and in no event shall the Police Department
wait any longer than 30 days to either issue the license or advise the
applicant of the denial of said issuance.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.05) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.155 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   The Police Department shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant for a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented
performer license. The Police Department shall not approve the issuance of a
license in the event one or more of the following is found to be true:
   (A)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
   (B)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant, in relation
to a sexually-oriented business or arising out of any other business activity
owned and operated by the applicant and licensed by the city;
   (C)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
   (D)   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
subchapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually-oriented business
without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The
fact that a conviction is being appealed shall be of no effect;
   (E)   The license application fee required by this subchapter has not been
paid;
   (F)   The applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with this subchapter or any other city ordinance; and/or
   (G)   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in
SDCL Chapters 22-22, 22-23 or 22-24;
(Prior Code, § 12.10.06) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.156 FEES.
   The annual, non-refundable application fee for a business allowing sexually-
oriented performing shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. The
annual application fee for a sexually-oriented performer shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.07) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014)
§ 94.157 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The license for a business allowing sexually-oriented performing shall be
displayed in a place clearly visible to the public and law enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.08) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.158 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement
officers, and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the
performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this subchapter,
normally and regularly conducted by such agency, to inspect the premises of the
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this subchapter, at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   No licensee, operator or employee of such a business shall refuse to
permit a law enforcement officer or any agency enumerated in this section to
inspect the premises at any time the premises is occupied or open for business.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.09) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.159 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each sexually-oriented business license and sexually-oriented performer
license shall expire December 31 of the year issued and may only be renewed by
making application as provided in this subchapter and complying with the
applicable provision of the conditional use permit as set forth in §§
156.270 through
156.276.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.10) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014)
§ 94.160 SUSPENSION.
   The Chief of Police shall suspend a business license as hereinbefore set
forth for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that the
licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
   (A)   Refused to allow an inspection of the business premises; or
   (B)   Has violated any other provision of this subchapter or the applicable
provisions of the conditional use permit as set forth in §§
156.270 through
156.276.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.11) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014)
§ 94.161 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall revoke the license of a business allowing
sexually-oriented performing if a cause for suspension set forth in the
previous section occurs and the license has been suspended in the previous 12
months.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall revoke the license of a business allowing
sexually-oriented performing if it is determined that:
      (1)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the
application;
      (2)   The licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use
or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   The licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;
      (4)   The licensee has allowed a sexually-oriented performer to perform
on the premises without having obtained a sexually-oriented performer’s license
as required by this subchapter;
      (5)   The licensee or an employee knowingly operated the business during
a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (6)   The licensee has been convicted of an offense set forth in SDCL
Chapters 22-22, 22-34 or 22-24;
      (7)   The licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
activity to occur on the licensed premises;
      (8)   The licensee is delinquent in payment to the city taxes or fees
related to the business or arising out of any other business activity owned or
operated by the licensee and licensed by the city; or
      (9)   The licensee has allowed sexually-oriented performing to occur on
its premises in a manner that is in violation of this subchapter or the
applicable provisions of the conditional use permit as set forth in §§
156.270 through
156.276 and has failed and/or refused to immediately eliminate the violation.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.12) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014)
§ 94.162 LIQUOR OR MALT BEVERAGE LICENSE.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the city
from seeking revocation or suspension of a licensee’s liquor or malt beverage
license for a violation of this subchapter pursuant to SDCL Title 35.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.13) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.163 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Any applicant having paid the required application fee that is aggrieved by
a decision of the Chief of Police regarding their application made under this
subchapter shall be entitled to have said decision reviewed by the city. If,
after review, said person is unsatisfied, he or she may appeal the decision of
the city to the City Council. The process shall be as follows.
   (A)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review with
the city at the City Finance Office setting forth the basis for which he or she
believes the Chief of Police’s decision to be in error. The writing shall also
include the person’s name and mailing address.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall review
the decision of the Chief of Police and mail a written response to the
aggrieved person within five days.
   (C)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the city
following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the City Finance
Office within five days of mailing the review decision by the city.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the City Finance Office shall set
a public hearing on the appeal at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting,
and the public hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date said appeal
was filed. The City Council shall provide notice to the person specifying the
time, date and location of the hearing.
   (E)   The City Council may informally notify the aggrieved person of its
decision following the hearing; however, the City Council shall issue a written
decision to the person within 20 days of the hearing. The City Council may
affirm or reverse the decision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.14) (Ord. 2013-22, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 2014-03, passed
3-5-2014)
§ 94.164 VALIDITY IN CASE OF JUDICIAL DECLARATION.
   Should any section, clause, or provision of this subchapter be judicially
declared to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the remainder
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.10.15) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the
state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of
any cost and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
      (2)   In addition, any violation of the provisions of this chapter may
result in the revocation and/or suspension of any license issued pursuant to
any section of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.01.03)
   (B)   All violations of §§
94.050 through
94.053 shall be considered a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.05)
(Ord. 2004-11, passed 7-24-2004)
CHAPTER 95: CEMETERY
Section
General Provisions
   
95.001   Scope and purpose
   
95.002   Definitions
Administration
   
95.015   Bear Butte Cemetery; city authority
   
95.016   Administration
   
95.017   Fiscal management
   
95.018   Procedure for the sale of cemetery lots
   
95.019   Purchaser to agree
   
95.020   Reclaiming and resale of lots by city
   
95.021   Restrictions on the resale of lots
   
95.022   Records
Interment and Disinterment
   
95.035   Interments and disinterment subject to state law
   
95.036   Limitations upon interment
   
95.037   Multiple cremains
   
95.038   Application for permit for interment
   
95.039   Supervisions
   
95.040   No removal of body without lawful authority
   
95.041   Adequate notice to be given
   
95.042   Disinterment
   
95.043   Disinterment by order of court or coroner
   
95.044   Graves
   
95.045   Cremated remains to be disposed of pursuant to state law
   
95.046   Approved memorial or marker
   
95.047   Memorial maintenance
   
95.048   City may correct placement errors
   
95.049   Licensed Funeral Director in charge of funerals
Cemetery Rules, Regulations and Provisions
   
95.060   Hours
   
95.061   Walking on lots and lawns prohibited
   
95.062   Injury to trees, shrubs and memorials
   
95.063   Vehicles
   
95.064   Children under 12
   
95.065   Scattering of rubbish prohibited
   
95.066   Proper conduct for sacred place
   
95.067   Planting or removal of trees and shrubs prohibited without permission
   
95.068   Enclosures, hedges, grave guards prohibited
   
95.069   Vases and the like
   
95.070   Other materials placed on graves
   
95.071   City not responsible for articles left
   
95.072   Illegal to remove lawfully placed material
   
95.073   Curbing and crushed rock or quartz
   
95.074   Grave repair and maintenance
 
   
95.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth those regulations necessary for
the administration, maintenance, management and operation of the Bear Butte
Cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.01) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISINTERMENT. The act of digging up the remains of a person previously
buried.
   INTERMENT. The act of burying of the remains of a person.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.02) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 95.015 BEAR BUTTE CEMETERY; CITY AUTHORITY.
   The City Park Board, under the authority of the Common Council, shall be
responsible for making recommendations for the Bear Butte Cemetery with the
following guidelines under the authority of SDCL § 9-12-18.
   (A)   The city shall always provide and continue a perpetual care fund for
the perpetual care of said Cemetery.
   (B)   The money in said fund shall be used only for maintenance and
expansion of Cemetery facilities and land.
   (C)   The city staff will care for, maintain and operate said Cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.01) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.016 ADMINISTRATION.
   The officials who shall have the duties with regard to the care, operation
and maintenance of the Bear Butte Cemetery are as follows.
   (A)   The city shall appoint a Cemetery Manager who may also be another city
employee. The Cemetery Manager shall be in charge of the sale of all Cemetery
lots, the receipt and disposition of all fees or money gifts or deposits, the
establishment and control over all Cemetery funds, the issuance of certificates
of purchase and the issuance of all burial and burial removal permits. Said
Manager shall keep a complete set of records as required in this chapter. Said
Manager shall work with the city to ensure enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter and shall perform all other applicable duties as set forth in this
code.
   (B)   Certificates of purchase shall be issued for no other purpose than the
burial of human dead.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.02) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.017 FISCAL MANAGEMENT.
   The Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund shall be managed by the City Finance
Officer and invested in accordance with the adopted investment policy of the
city. The Perpetual Care Fund shall consist of all monies received for
perpetual care.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.03) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.018 PROCEDURE FOR THE SALE OF CEMETERY LOTS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to purchase a Cemetery lot or lots shall do so by
paying the required fee to the city office determined by the city for such lot
or lots desired. The lots in such Cemetery shall be sold according to the plans
and specifications on file in the City Finance Office. The cost of any lot
shall be paid in full by credit card, check or cash. Upon the full payment of
the required fee for the sale of a lot or lots, the city shall issue to the
purchaser a receipt which shall entitle said purchaser to all the rights and
responsibilities herein provided but shall not give title to said purchaser of
said lot or lots.
   (B)   (1)   The selling price of all lots shall be as follows (plus all
applicable sales tax).
 
          Lot Fee                                               Perpetual Care                                        Total Fee
Adult     The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
          resolution                                            resolution                                            resolution
Cremation The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
          resolution                                            resolution                                            resolution
Infant    The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
          resolution                                            resolution                                            resolution
 
      (2)   No burial shall be permitted in any lot until the purchase price
and perpetual care has been fully paid to the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.04) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.019 PURCHASER TO AGREE.
   The purchaser of any lot does by his or her purchase agree to abide by all
provisions of all laws and ordinances of this state and city in force at any
time relating to the Cemetery, including all amendments hereafter adopted, and
all rules and regulations adopted in connection with said Cemetery. Any
purchaser of any lot does by his or her purchase agree that no transfer shall
be made of said lot, or any part thereof, to any other person without the
approval of the City Finance Officer after first offering said property to the
city as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.05) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.020 RECLAIMING AND RESALE OF LOTS BY CITY.
   The city shall have the right to discontinue all rights granted to a
purchaser of any lot after a period of 20 years from the date of sale thereof,
should the City Finance Officer upon investigation determine that the purchaser
or owner thereof has not used said lot, or any part thereof, or that such owner
is deceased and that such lot will not likely be used as a burial place for the
owner or any members of his or her family. In the event that any such lot is to
be reclaimed, inquiry shall be made to ascertain the names and addresses of
such deceased owner or heirs, and notice shall be given to such person, by
mail, of the intention of the city to reclaim said property. Whether any heirs
of such deceased owner or purchaser are located or not, the original cost of
said lot shall be held in trust by the city until such time as proof
satisfactory to the city is made by the heirs of such deceased owner of the
right to such proceeds, or for ten years, whichever occurs first. In case no
heir of said deceased owner is located, then the amount of the original cost
shall be delivered to the Secretary of State as unclaimed property.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.06) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.021 RESTRICTIONS ON THE RESALE OF LOTS.
   If the owner or approved purchaser of any lot on which no burial has taken
place desires to sell the same, he or she shall inform the City Finance Officer
of his or her desire to sell, whereupon the city shall have an option for 30
days thereafter to purchase said property on the basis of the regular selling
price by the city of lots in the same section or block. If such option is not
exercised by the city, said owner or purchaser may then sell to any other
person, however, no lot shall be sold for a price greater than that originally
paid to the city for said lot. No transfer or assignment of any lot, or
interest therein, shall be valid without the consent of the City Finance
Officer. No person shall buy or sell any lot within the Cemetery for purposes
of speculation. In the event any lot is purchased by the city pursuant to this
section, the City Finance Officer shall ascertain that the owner has clear
ownership before such purchase is made.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.07) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.022 RECORDS.
   In addition to all of the records required to be kept by the laws of the
state relating to cemeteries, burials and removal of dead and the like, the
following records shall be kept by the City Finance Officer or his or her
appointee:
   (A)   A complete plat or map of the Cemetery, showing the exact location of
said Cemetery, and describing or indicating all sections, lots, interments and
the like of said Cemetery, and all other information as may be required by law
or ordinance;
   (B)   A complete record of all lots that have been sold and all subsequent
approved purchases issued and the names and addresses of all purchasers;
   (C)   A complete record of all burial permits issued, fees paid and the
names and addresses of all persons purchasing said permits;
   (D)   A complete record of all disinterments made and fees paid therefor;
   (E)   A book, furnished and owned by the city, known as the Burial Record
Book, in which shall be recorded the deceased’s age and the date and cause of
his or her death, and number of the lot and block of his or her burial, copies
of burial or removal permits, and all other information which may be required
by law or ordinance, or which the City Finance Officer deems important; and
   (F)   Any other records which the City Finance Officer shall deem important
or necessary.
(Prior Code, § 6.02.08) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
INTERMENT AND DISINTERMENT
§ 95.035 INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENT SUBJECT TO STATE LAW.
   Interments and disinterments are also subject to the laws of this state, and
nothing in this subchapter shall conflict with said laws, and such regulations
herein provided are in addition to, and supplementary or included in, said laws
of the state. No interment or disinterment of any body shall be permitted in
any lot until full compliance is made with all laws and ordinances regarding
burials then in force. The purpose of this subchapter is to give the city
control over interments and disinterments in the Bear Butte Cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.01) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.036 LIMITATIONS UPON INTERMENT.
   All interments in lots shall be restricted to purchasers of the lot or
members of the immediate family, or relatives of the owners or purchaser
thereof, designated by a notarized, written document from the lot owner or
their heirs stating their wishes to the contrary is provided to the City
Finance Officer. Only one body shall be allowed in each grave except in the
event where permission is obtained from the city or a designated official. No
adult cremains shall be allowed in an infant lot.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.02) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.037 MULTIPLE CREMAINS.
   The number of cremains per lot shall be at the discretion of the city or a
designated official. Any memorial for multiple interments must be flush with
the ground.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.03) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.038 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT FOR INTERMENT.
   (A)   All burials shall be performed by an excavation contractor licensed by
the city. The excavation contractor shall be selected and identified by the
licensed funeral director in the application submitted for the permit. The city
shall not select or notify the contractor but will provide the limits of the
lot. The city will provide final grading and seeding following burials.
    (B)   No grave shall be dug without said permit being first issued and
record made thereof. Any person may make application only when the lot owner or
purchaser has given his or her permission for interment, and said applicant
must be able to furnish proof of such permission to the City Finance Officer or
funeral director at the time the application is made. If the application is
found to be in order, the City Finance Officer may issue said permit. In the
absence of said City Finance Officer, the City Deputy Finance Officer may issue
said permit. A statement of fees for services as herein provided shall be
delivered to the funeral director in charge of the funeral on or before the
fifteenth day of the month following the funeral, and the fees set in said
billing shall be paid to the city by the funeral director on or before the
thirtieth day of the month.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.04) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.039 SUPERVISIONS.
   All graves shall be dug under the supervision of the Public Works
Department, but only after a burial permit, as provided herein, has been
properly secured.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.05) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.040 NO REMOVAL OF BODY WITHOUT LAWFUL AUTHORITY.
   No person, whether a relative or not, shall remove any body from any lot
without lawful authority to do so.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.06) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.041 ADEQUATE NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.
   The right is reserved by the City Finance Officer to require at least 24-
hour written notice prior to any interment and at least one week’s notice prior
to any approved disinterment or removal unless it is by a court order.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.07) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.042 DISINTERMENT.
   (A)   Any lot owner or purchaser or next of kin of the deceased desiring a
disinterment must make proper application for a permit to do so to the state
and to the City Finance Officer and shall pay the proper charges for such
disinterment. The applicant for disinterment shall also select an excavation
contractor licensed by the city and pay the cost of having the contractor
complete the disinterment and restoration of the grave site. The charges for
marking and final grading following disinterment shall be set forth in the
city’s annual fee resolution.
   (B)   No disinterment shall be made, and no permit issued, except as
otherwise provided, until such fees are fully paid. No permit for the removal
of any body shall be issued except upon presentation of the written permission
of the lot owner or next of kin of the deceased, unless otherwise herein
provided or otherwise provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.08) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.043 DISINTERMENT BY ORDER OF COURT OR CORONER.
   The City Finance Officer is the only person authorized to permit the opening
of graves, unless otherwise provided by state law and with the following
exceptions:
   (A)   When the Cemetery is directed to make a disinterment by the order of a
court of competent jurisdiction and a certified copy of such order has been
filed with the City Finance Officer; or
   (B)   When the County Coroner directs the disinterment for the purpose of
holding an inquest and has filed with the City Finance Officer his or her
signed authorization to release the body to himself or herself or his or her
lawful agents, the disinterment must be completed by the Coroner or his or her
lawful agents.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.09) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.044 GRAVES.
   (A)   Graves shall be located at least six inches within the lot boundaries
as follows.
 
         Adult Graves Infant Graves  Cremains
Depth    5’ to 5-1/22-1/2’to 3’2-1/2’ to 3’
Lot size 5’ X 10’ 3’ X 5’    Within designated lot
Opening  42” X 8’ Container Size Container Size
 
   (B)   No person four years of age and over shall be buried in the Cemetery,
unless the casket is enclosed in a concrete or steel container commercially
manufactured and with a durability approved by the Public Works Department. No
wooden, fiberglass or non-durable containers shall be allowed for any aged
person.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.10) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.045 CREMATED REMAINS TO BE DISPOSED OF PURSUANT TO STATE LAW.
   No person shall scatter cremated remains within the cemetery except as may
otherwise be permitted by resolution of the Common Council. Any cremated
remains disposed of in the cemetery shall be done so consistent with any
applicable state law, including SDCL Chapter 34-26A.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.11) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2025-01, passed
4-7-2025) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.046 APPROVED MEMORIAL OR MARKER.
   Any memorial or marker intended to be erected or placed on any grave or lot
shall first be approved by the Public Works Department as to the size, location
on lot, foundations and kind of stone to be used, and all such memorials, their
erection, materials and placement must be in conformance with this subchapter
or with any rules or regulations hereafter established by the city. All
memorials shall have at least a four-inch wash on all sides. All memorials
placed as foot markers shall be flush with the ground. Surface vaults and
ledgers will not be allowed in any new section that is developed.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.12) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.047 MEMORIAL MAINTENANCE.
   Should any memorial become unsightly, dilapidated or a menace to visitors
the city shall have the right at the expense of the monument company, the lot
owner or purchaser either to correct the condition or to remove the same.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.13) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.048 CITY MAY CORRECT PLACEMENT ERRORS.
   The city, without any liability, may correct any error that may occur in the
placement of any memorial.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.14) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.049 LICENSED FUNERAL DIRECTOR IN CHARGE OF FUNERALS.
   Any funeral within the Cemetery shall be under the charge and direction of a
licensed funeral director.
(Prior Code, § 6.03.15) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
CEMETERY RULES, REGULATIONS AND PROVISIONS
§ 95.060 HOURS.
   The Cemetery will be open April 1 to October 1 from 8:00 a.m. until 8:00
p.m. and October 2 to March 31 from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.01) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018; Ord. 2019-09, passed
10-15-2019)
§ 95.061 WALKING ON LOTS AND LAWNS PROHIBITED.
   Persons within the Cemetery shall use the avenues, roads, walks and alleys,
and no one is permitted to walk upon or across lots or lawns unless it be
necessary to do so to gain access to one’s own lot. The Cemetery expressly
disclaims liability for any injuries sustained by anyone violating this rule.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.02) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.062 INJURY TO TREES, SHRUBS AND MEMORIALS.
   Persons visiting the Cemetery or attending funerals are strictly prohibited
from picking flowers, wild or cultivated, breaking or injuring any trees,
shrubs or plants, or from writing upon, defacing or injuring any memorials,
fences or other structures within the Cemetery grounds.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.03) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.063 VEHICLES.
   (A)   Motorized cars and other vehicles must be kept under complete control
at all times.
   (B)   The following are prohibited:
      (1)   The driving of motorized cars or other vehicles through the gates
or in the Cemetery at speeds greater than ten mph;
      (2)   The driving of any motorized car, vehicle or animal across or upon
any grave, lot, lawn or parking or leaving the same thereon; and
      (3)   Parking or leaving any motorized car or vehicle on any road or
driveway within the Cemetery at such location or in such position as to prevent
any other car or vehicle from passing the same and if so parked or left, the
city will remove the same and the owner of said removed vehicle shall be
legally liable for the cost of the removal.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.04) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.064 CHILDREN UNDER 12.
   Children under 12 years of age are not permitted within the Cemetery or its
buildings unless accompanied by a responsible adult.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.05) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.065 SCATTERING OF RUBBISH PROHIBITED.
   The throwing of rubbish on the drives and paths or on any part of the
grounds or in the buildings of the Cemetery is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.06) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.066 PROPER CONDUCT FOR SACRED PLACE.
   (A)   It is of utmost importance that there should be strict observance of
the properties of the Cemetery. Hence, all persons within the Cemetery should
avoid conduct unbecoming a sacred place.
   (B)   The following conduct is prohibited within the Cemetery:
      (1)   Loud or boisterous talking;
      (2)   Loitering on the grounds or in any of the buildings;
      (3)   Bringing of lunches or refreshments into the Cemetery or consuming
them on the grounds;
      (4)   Peddling or soliciting the sale of any commodity within the
Cemetery;
      (5)   Placing of signs, notices or advertisements of any kind within the
Cemetery;
      (6)   Bringing of dogs into the Cemetery or any of its buildings unless
on a leash and properly cleaned up after;
      (7)   Bringing of firearms into the Cemetery except by a military escort
accompanying a veteran’s funeral or attending a memorial service; and
      (8)   Bringing of alcoholic beverages in the Cemetery or buildings.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.07) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.067 PLANTING OR REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   (A)   No trees or shrubs shall be planted in or removed from any lot, walk
or lawn space without permission of the Public Works Department.
   (B)   In the event any tree or shrub or curbing situated on any lot shall
become harmful to any adjacent lot or become unsightly or inconvenient, the
Public Works Department shall have the authority to remove the same.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.08) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.068 ENCLOSURES, HEDGES, GRAVE GUARDS PROHIBITED.
   No enclosures, hedges and/or grave guards of any kind shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.09) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.069 VASES AND THE LIKE.
   No glass jars, wooden vases or glass containers of any type shall be
permitted in the Cemetery for use as flower holders. All glass containers
presently located in the Cemetery shall be removed. Only vases that are
reversible or set in a monument shall be allowed. Only vases made of metal,
marble or set in concrete shall be permitted and said vases shall be set flush
with the ground.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.10) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.070 OTHER MATERIALS PLACED ON GRAVES.
   (A)   Any flag or other decoration, funeral design, cut flowers and/or any
other item placed on lots, graves or trees may be removed by city employees
when the same becomes unsightly or interferes with maintenance.
   (B)   Any flowers and/or decorations for Memorial Day shall be removed
within two weeks following the holiday.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.11) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.071 CITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ARTICLES LEFT.
   In no case shall the city or any officer or employee thereof be responsible
for articles, which may be left on any lot or grave. In all cases, the right is
given to the city to remove from any lot or grave any article which is
unsightly or otherwise objectionable.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.12) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.072 ILLEGAL TO REMOVE LAWFULLY PLACED MATERIAL.
   No person shall remove any tomb, monument, gravestone, receptacle for
flowers and/or flowers, shrubs or any other structure, which is lawfully placed
in any Cemetery of this city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.13) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.073 CURBING AND CRUSHED ROCK OR QUARTZ.
   No curbing of Cemetery lots will be allowed. No crushed rock or quartz shall
be placed on any grave.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.14) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.074 GRAVE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.
   Anyone planning to make improvements on lots or gravesites shall receive
written permission from the Public Works Department before the project is
started.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.15) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 95.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any
costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 6.01.03) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
CHAPTER 96: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
96.001   Scope and purpose
   
96.002   Definitions
   
96.003   General requirements
Fire Code
   
96.015   Adoption of International Fire Code
   
96.016   Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
96.017   Permits
   
96.018   Conflicts between this chapter and the Fire Code
   
96.019   NFPA Fire Prevention Standards
Fire Department
   
96.030   Establishment, duties and responsibilities
   
96.031   Officers
   
96.032   Selection and term of Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chiefs
   
96.033   Equipment and care of property
   
96.034   Insignia
   
96.035   Required aid
   
96.036   Interference with the Department
   
96.037   Damaging apparatus
   
96.038   Obedience to officers and police powers
   
96.039   Deferred compensation program authorized
   
96.040   Deferred compensation program purpose
   
96.041   Program eligibility requirements
   
96.042   Program funding and investment
   
96.043   Program disbursement of deferred compensation
General Fire Provisions
   
96.055   Driving over or on a fire hose
   
96.056   Parking near station or hydrant
   
96.057   Unlawful to tamper with fire appliances or hydrants
   
96.058   False alarm
   
96.059   Refuse fires
   
96.060   Controlled burns by permit
   
96.061   Authorized controlled burn
   
96.062   Open fires
   
96.063   Recreational fire
   
96.064   Ban on outside burning
   
96.065   Fireworks display
   
96.066   Fireworks lighting period
   
96.067   Fireworks sales
   
96.068   Installation of key boxes
   
96.069   Hazardous materials
   
96.070   Unattended gas pumps
   
96.071   Fire land
   
96.072   Fire service billing and authority to recover costs
 
   
96.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing the
formation of the City Fire Department and regulations relating to fire
prevention and public safety.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.01) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system which is designed to give a warning signal
or notice to a central location or designated recipient that smoke, fire,
equipment malfunction or an intruder has been detected at an identified
location.
   AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR (AED). A device used to deliver a shock to
the heart of a person suffering from ventricular fibrillation or sudden cardiac
death.
   CHARCOAL GRILL. A metal or stone device not resting on the ground with a
metal grate designed to cook food using charcoal briquettes, char wood, hard
wood or similar fuel.
   CHIEF. The City Volunteer Fire Department Chief or his or her designee.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Code Enforcement Officer or
other person designated by the city to perform the duties of administration and
enforcement of the code.
   CONTROLLED OR PRESCRIBED BURN. An intentionally-ignited fire contained
within a designated area, the goal of which is to remove highly-flammable
undergrowth and thus reduce the risk of forest or wildfire.
   EXHIBITS and TRADE SHOWS. As defined in § 105.6.12 of the International Fire
Code.
   FALSE ALARMS. Any call from an alarm system or person indicating a fire or
unauthorized entry when no such activity has occurred. FALSE ALARMS shall
include an alarm call related to cooking smoke or small appliance smoke at a
residence.
   FIRE APPLIANCE. Any device, fire hydrant, Fire Department connection, water
or sprinkler valve used by the Fire Department for the purpose of firefighting
activities.
   FIREWORKS.
      (1)   Any substance or combination of substances or articles prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy
cannons and toy canes in which explosives are used.
      (2)   The term FIREWORKS shall not include toy pistols, toy guns, in
which paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are
used and toy pistol caps which contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive
mixture.
      (3)   The term FIREWORKS shall not include wire or wood sparklers of not
more than 100 grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are non-
explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per
tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow worms,
smoke devices or trick noisemakers, which include paper streamers, party
poppers, string poppers, snappers and drop pops, each consisting of not more
than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
   LIQUEFIED-PETROLEUM-GAS-FUELED COOKING DEVICES. As defined in the
International Fire Code.
   LIQUID FUEL GRILL. A metal or stone device designed to cook food using
liquefied or gaseous combustible fuel.
   MANUAL FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A system comprised of only manually operated fire
alarm initiating devices installed in accordance with the applicable code
requirements.
   OPEN BURNING AND RECREATIONAL FIRES. As defined in the International Fire
Code.
   OPEN FIRE. Any outdoor fire, including campfires, that is not contained
within a fully enclosed fire box or structure from which the products of
combustion are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through
a stack, duct or chimney. The term OPEN FIRE shall not include charcoal grills
or liquid fuel grills or other outdoor fire containment devices approved by the
SVFD Fire Chief or a recreational fire that complies with the SVFD Fire Chief’s
requirements.
   OPEN FLAMES. As defined in the International Fire Code.
   OPEN FLAME COOKING DEVICES. As defined in the International Fire Code.
   OPEN FLAME DEVICES. As defined in the International Fire Code.
   PERMITS. As defined in the International Fire Code.
   PUBLIC. Any person who is not a part of the city’s emergency service
response.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire burning material other than trash,
garbage, construction site waste or rubbish, where the fuel being burned is
contained within a device or container approved by the SVFD Fire Chief, and the
fire has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or
less in height, and is being used for ceremonial, cooking, warmth, religious,
enjoyment or similar purpose.
   SVFD. The City Volunteer Fire Department.
   TEMPORARY MEMBRANE STRUCTURES, TENTS AND CANOPIES. As defined in § 105-6.44
of the International Fire Code.
   WASTE OIL. A waste liquid from the use of Class II-B combustible liquids,
such as motor oil, hydraulic oil, lubricating oil, brake fluids and
transmission fluids. This definition does not include the products classified
as Class I or III-A liquids or corrosives, toxics or highly toxic material, as
defined in Article 79 and Article 80 of the International Fire Code. (See §
2211.2.2 of the International Fire Code.)
(Prior Code, § 9.01.02) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017; Ord.
2019-06, passed 4-29-2019)
§ 96.003 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Central stations.
      (1)   Central stations shall immediately notify the Emergency Services
Communication Center (County Dispatch) for dispatch of the Fire Department.
      (2)   The Fire Department must be notified by fax or electronic report of
all trouble signals which exist for greater than a single eight-hour time
period.
   (B)   Curbs. Where deemed necessary by the city or a designated official,
the fire apparatus access road shall be identified with red painted curbs as
deemed necessary. Where no curb exists, a six-inch-wide red stripe the length
as deemed necessary shall be acceptable.
   (C)   Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed
width of not less than 24 feet, except for approved security gates in
accordance with § 503.6 of the International Fire Code, and an unobstructed
vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet, six inches. Additional width may
be required when multiple responding emergency apparatus is expected to pass.
The width, length and interval will be as approved by the city or a designated
official.
   (D)   Disposition of signals. In all cases involving alarm and supervisory
signals, the Emergency Services Communication Center, for dispatch of the Fire
Department, shall be contacted prior to notification of the subscriber.
   (E)   Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a
fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (F)   Fire alarm activation. No person shall silence a fire alarm until the
Fire Department arrives, unless the person responsible for the property or fire
alarm system has thoroughly investigated the building or area of alarm and
found no evidence of fire, at which time the fire alarm system may be silenced,
and may be reset, provided the Fire Department is notified of such action and
investigation findings.
   (G)   Open burning. An operational permit is required from the city or a
designated official for the kindling or maintaining of an open fire or a fire
on any public street, alley, road or other public or private ground.
Instruction and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to.
   (H)   Places of temporary assembly. An operational permit is required to
operate an indoor or outdoor public assembly function where a tent or multiple
tents, structures or canopies exceeding an aggregate area of 1,000 square feet
and is utilized as an assembly occupancy. Two sets of plans for all indoor/
outdoor public assembly functions shall be submitted to the Building Department
for review at least 45 days prior to its use as an assembly area. The event
layout design must be in accordance with the City Volunteer Fire Department.
   (I)   Required access. Where access to or within a structure or an area is
restricted of secure openings, or where immediate access is necessary for life-
saving or firefighting purposes, a minimum of three feet clear and unobstructed
access shall be maintained on the sides of and in front of fire protection
systems and associated equipment. Specific equipment referenced is as follows,
but not limited to, fire extinguishers, fire sprinkler control valves, risers,
hose stations, standpipes and fire alarm and control panels.
   (J)   Required construction permits. The city or a designated official is
authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in §§ 105.7.1
through 105.7.12 of the International Fire Code.
   (K)   Spraying or dipping. A construction permit is required from the city
to install or modify a spray room, dip tank or booth.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.02) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017; Ord.
2019-06, passed 4-29-2019) Penalty, see §
96.999
FIRE CODE
§ 96.015 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   (A)   IFC Chapter 15, Flammable Finishes shall be amended by deleting §
1501.2 Permits.
   (B)   IFC Chapter 16, Fruit and Crop Ripening shall be amended by deleting §
1601.2 Permits.
   (C)   IFC Chapter 17, Fumigation and Thermal Insecticidal Fogging shall be
amended by deleting § 1701.2 Permits.
   (D)   IFC Chapter 18, Semiconductor Fabrication Facilities shall be amended
by deleting § 1801.2 Permits.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.01) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.016 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   The Fire Safety Provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the city
employees authorized to act under the administrative citation provisions of
Chapter 37.
   (B)   The city may designate such members of the SVFD or city employees to
assist in enforcement activities as may be needed.
   (C)   No person may deny entrance to fire personnel acting within their
official duties.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.02) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.017 PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The city may require permits by administrative rule.
      (2)   All required permits shall be obtained from the city or a
designated official. All permits shall expire within one year or sooner if
noted on the permit. An additional permit may be obtained under the discretion
of the city or a designated official upon expiration.
   (B)   Any person wanting to have open fires or burns within the confines of
the city or one mile thereof, shall first make a written request to the city.
The city shall then approve or disapprove the burn project. If it is the
decision of the city to deny the application for a burn permit, the applicant
may appeal to the City Council as provided for in appeals under
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.03) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.018 CONFLICTS BETWEEN THIS CHAPTER AND THE FIRE CODE.
   If any provision of this chapter conflicts with the provisions of the Fire
Code or the NFPA Standards, the provisions of this chapter shall take
precedence.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.04) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.019 NFPA FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS.
   There is hereby adopted by the city the goal of meeting the purposes of the
of the NFPA by prescribing regulations consistent with nationally recognized
good practice for safeguarding to a reasonable degree the lives and property of
the residents of the city from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devises,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property and the use of occupancy of
building or premises, by adopting this chapter and any all revisions to it.
(Prior Code, § 9.02.05) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 96.030 ESTABLISHMENT, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to create a Municipal Fire Department
to provide fire protection services to the residents and business of the city.
   (B)   In addition and at its sole discretion, the city may contract with the
City Volunteer Fire Department or similar outside agency to provide such
services.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.01) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017)
§ 96.031 OFFICERS.
   The Department may include employees as recommended by the city and approved
by the City Council for the effective operation of the Fire Department. Should
the city contract with an outside agency such as the City Volunteer Fire
Department to provide services, the city may choose to only employ
administrative and other support positions.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.02) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.032 SELECTION AND TERM OF FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEFS.
   The City Council may, as recommended by the city, hire a Fire Chief to
oversee all or any portion of the Fire Department, search and rescue or
hazardous materials response services.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.03) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.033 EQUIPMENT AND CARE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall report to the City Council each year during
budget review the status and condition of all equipment currently under the
Fire Department’s care. Under the guidance of the city and Fire Department, the
city from time to time may provide additional equipment which is required to
maintain the city’s ISO rating and as needed to maintain efficiency and
properly protect life and property from fire and other hazards.
   (B)   All city owned equipment under the care of the Fire Department shall
be maintained in a proper working manner consistent with industry standards.
   (C)   All city owned equipment of the Fire Department shall be safely and
conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by the city.
   (D)   No person shall use any city owned fire apparatus or equipment for any
private purpose, without first receiving approval from the city, nor shall any
person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article
used in any way by the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.04) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.034 INSIGNIA.
   (A)   Each member of the Fire Department may be issued a badge designating
his or her rank. Each member of the Fire Department driving a vehicle may be
issued a suitable insignia to be attached to the vehicle or vehicles.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided for by contract annually on June 1, each
member shall be issued a new identification card from the Fire Department
stating that the individual is an accepted member of the City Fire Department.
   (C)   No person may display any badge, card, sign, decal, license plate or
similar items representing themselves as a Fire Department member unless
authorized by the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.05) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017)
§ 96.035 REQUIRED AID.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or other member of the Fire Department may request the
aid of any reasonable person, citizen, inhabitant or bystander, in conveying
any engine, fire apparatus or other equipment to an emergency scene.
   (B)   Said individuals may also be requested to lend assistance at the
emergency scene.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.06) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.036 INTERFERENCE WITH THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   No person shall willfully hinder or interfere with any city officer or
member of the Fire Department in the performance of his or her duty as a member
of the Fire Department.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall willfully cut, deface, destroy or injure
any element or part of any alarm system or fire telecommunications wire, pole
signal box.
   (C)   No unauthorized person shall ride upon or attempt to ride upon any
emergency vehicle or fire apparatus of the Fire Department when responding to
or returning from any emergency.
   (D)   No person not on official duty with the Fire Department shall follow
within 500 feet of any emergency vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.07) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.037 DAMAGING APPARATUS.
   No person shall willfully damage any engine or other equipment belonging or
pertaining to the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.08) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.038 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS AND POLICE POWERS.
   Any person present at an emergency scene shall be subject and obedient to
the orders of the Fire Chief or such person in charge of the emergency scene.
All regularly appointed members of the Fire Department, who are thereby wearing
the insignia provided for in this chapter, are hereby given the necessary
special police powers for the purpose of enforcing provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.09) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.039 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.
   The city recognizes the unique contribution to the public safety system of
the city provided by the City Volunteer Fire Department. The city further
recognizes the need to encourage continued participation by and retention of
trained volunteers by the Volunteer Fire Department to ensure the Department
can respond to fire and other service calls within the city. Accordingly, there
is hereby established by the City Council, as authorized by the state
legislature, authority to develop a deferred compensation program for the
eligible members of the City Volunteer Fire Department. Upon development of the
terms and signature by both parties, the deferred compensation program
agreement shall be maintained on file in the City Finance Office. Until the
terms of the deferred compensation program are drafted and made a part of the
contract for services between the city and the City Volunteer Fire Department
and signed by each party, the deferred compensation program as described in §§
96.040 through
96.043 shall not become effective.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.10) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 96.040 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM PURPOSE.
   The program is intended to help meet this need for retention and continued
participation by establishing a modest financial contribution by the city to a
special reserve fund within the city budget to permit eligible Volunteer Fire
Department members to earn deferred compensation payment for five years or more
of approved service to the combined benefit of the City Volunteer Fire
Department and the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.11) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.041 PROGRAM ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   The eligibility requirements to determine the qualification of a Department
member for the deferred compensation plan shall be those eligibility standards
established in the program agreement currently in effect between the city and
City Volunteer Fire Department. In the event the fire protection contract
services should be terminated, ended or not renewed, any continuing obligation
of the city for continuing the deferred compensation program, notwithstanding
the terms of this chapter, shall terminate as well.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.12) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.042 PROGRAM FUNDING AND INVESTMENT.
   (A)   By January 10 of each year in which the fire protection contract
between the City Volunteer Fire Department and the city is in effect, the
Secretary of the SVFD shall provide to the City Finance Office written
confirmation signed by the President of the Board of Directors of the SVFD,
naming the Department members approved to participate in the program based on
their service in the preceding calendar year.
   (B)   In addition, this list shall name all other active members for the
preceding year, all Reserve members for the preceding year, all members that
retired during the preceding year and all honorary members for the preceding
year. Within ten days of receipt of that written confirmation, the city shall
transfer to the duly authorized fund for the Volunteer Fire Department Fire
deferred compensation program the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution per approved SVFD member. Thereafter, the Program
Investment Committee, consisting of the City Finance Officer and the President
of the Board of Directors of the Volunteers, or their designee, shall meet
quarterly to provide the City Finance Officer with their recommendation for the
investment of those funds held in the Deferred Compensation Program Fund.
   (C)   Any investment of those funds shall be governed by and subject to the
restrictions on municipal investment set out at SDCL § 9-22-6 and the companion
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.13) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.043 PROGRAM DISBURSEMENT OF DEFERRED COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Any approved member of the SVFD, having completed a minimum of five
years of approved service, shall be eligible to receive those funds and any
earnings accrued thereon, upon the retirement of that member from the SVFD.
   (B)   Withdrawal and payment shall be made by the City Finance Office within
ten business days of written notification by SVFD Secretary that the SVFD has
accepted the resignation of the retiring member, and confirming each of the
years for which the retiring member had been approved as a participant in the
deferred compensation program, and further stating the total number of years of
approved service provided by the retiring member for which payment is claimed
by the retiring member.
   (C)   However, during the period of the first five years of the operation of
the deferred compensation program, any member in good standing as of January 1,
2011, who may achieve one, two, three or four years of eligible service after
January 1, 2012, and who shall retire between January 1, 2012, and December 31,
2015, shall be able receive payment of the deferred compensation benefit
calculated upon the approved years of service achieved by that retiring member
after January 1, 2012.
(Prior Code, § 9.03.14) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
GENERAL FIRE PROVISIONS
§ 96.055 DRIVING OVER OR ON A FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall drive over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when
laid down on any street or alley or elsewhere to be used during any emergency
or during any training session without the consent of the Fire Chief or
designated officer in charge of the scene.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.01) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.056 PARKING NEAR STATION OR HYDRANT.
   (A)   As provided for at §
72.05(A)(7), no person shall park on any street or public ground within 15 feet
of a fire hydrant.
   (B)   No person shall place any vehicle or object within 15 feet of an
entrance to a place where fire apparatus are stored.
   (C)   (1)   As per § 507.5.5 of the International Fire Code entitled “Clear
space around hydrants,” there is required five feet of clear space around the
circumference of the hydrant.
      (2)   No person shall place on public or private ground any posts,
fences, structures, vehicles, growth, trash, storage or any obstruction within
five-foot circumference of any fire hydrant, Fire Department connections or
fire system controls.
      (3)   The Fire Department shall not be deterred or hindered in any way
from gaining immediate access to fire-protection equipment private or public.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.02) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-18-2015) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.057 UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH FIRE APPLIANCES OR HYDRANTS.
   No person shall tamper with, remove, disturb or deface fire hydrants and/or
appliances utilized by the Fire Department for firefighting except for the
purpose of extinguishing fire, training, testing, recharging or making
necessary repairs, when allowed by the Fire Chief, when so authorized.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.03) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.058 FALSE ALARM.
   No person shall signal or transmit an alarm which is false in nature.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.04) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.059 REFUSE FIRES.
   No person shall set or cause to be set or allow upon their premises public
or private any fire or the purpose of destroying any paper, rubbish, trees,
leaves, grass, household trash or other materials.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.06) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.060 CONTROLLED BURNS BY PERMIT.
   (A)   No controlled burns shall be allowed without first obtaining a permit
from the city. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall make application to the
Fire Department on a form to be furnished by the city. The Fire Chief shall
then submit a recommendation to the city. The applicant may appeal any negative
decision to the City Council, as provided for in
Chapter 37.
   (B)   The permit application shall include and/or be accompanied by the
following:
      (1)   The applicant’s name and address;
      (2)   The proposed purpose of the burn;
      (3)   A detailed description of the location and vegetation to be burned;
      (4)   The proposed date and time of the burn; and
      (5)   A permit issued by the State Division of Wildlife if the proposed
location is located within the Black Hills Fire Prevention District.
   (C)   In determining whether to issue a permit, the Fire Chief shall
consider and advise the city as to whether the requested burn is in the best
interest of the public for prevention and control of fire or fuel mitigation.
   (D)   The city shall not approve any permit until the landowner has provided
a certificate of insurance or a hold harmless agreement fully indemnifying the
Fire Department and the city for any actions taken or not taken during the
controlled burn.
   (E)   At all times a controlled burn is in progress on private land, the
landowner shall be present to assist the Fire Department.
   (F)   Unless the city or a designated official waives costs incurred for
suppression and/or control of the fire, the landowner shall pay any and all
expenses incurred during a controlled or prescribed burn.
   (G)   Compensation for manpower and apparatus shall be equal to the rates
established annually by the State Division of Wildland Fire.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.07) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.061 AUTHORIZED CONTROLLED BURN.
   (A)   The city may, when approved by the city or a designated official,
utilize open fire for the disposal of goods at the city’s rubble site.
   (B)   When deemed necessary for the purpose of fire prevention, pest or
rodent control, the city may conduct a controlled burn on property under its
control.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.08) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.062 OPEN FIRES.
   No persons shall set or cause to be set or allow to be set upon their
premises any open fire exposed to the wind and elements so that the coal,
flame, cinders or burning parts thereof may be blown towards or against any
surrounding or adjacent property.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.09) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.063 RECREATIONAL FIRE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a RECREATIONAL FIRE is a fire
maintained in a manner approved by the SVFD Fire Chief and in a manner that
does not constitute a nuisance under
Chapter 94.
   (B)   No recreational fire within the city shall be permitted during the
period of July 28 through August 18. The SVFD Fire Chief shall maintain and
provide to the public upon request, and make available on the city website, a
list of approved backyard and patio fire grills and stoves. The use of these
approved devices or structures is permitted within the city when there is no
ban on outside burning in effect. Any recreational fire must be located at
least eight feet back from the property line and at least five feet away from
any structure or other combustible materials. The use of a non-approved device
or structure shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.10) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.064 BAN ON OUTSIDE BURNING.
   (A)   During periods of poor air quality, drought and dryness or at any time
a high fire danger rating has been issued by the State Division of Forestry,
the city or a designated official shall have the authority to issue a
proclamation which prohibits recreational fires, open fires or outdoor burning
within the city or one mile thereof.
   (B)   When the fire danger is past, the city or a designated official shall
issue a proclamation that the ban on burning is lifted.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.11) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.065 FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
   (A)   No person may sell or ignite any fireworks within the city limits,
except as herein provided.
   (B)   All professional pyrotechnic fireworks displays and other activities
believed by the city or a designated official to be of similar nature in risk
shall be completed in conjunction with a valid fireworks display which complies
with NFPA 1123 and as specifically authorized in writing by the city or a
designated official. The city or a designated official shall have the authority
to ban the use of fireworks if, in his or her opinion, the potential fire risk
is unacceptably high. This ban may be appealed by any resident of the city to
the City Council as provided for in
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.12) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.066 FIREWORKS LIGHTING PERIOD.
   (A)   Unless specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council for a
stated period of time within a calendar year, fireworks lighting and use are
prohibited within the city. The city, in consultation with the SVFD Fire Chief,
may recommend to the City Council a resolution to approve the lighting of
fireworks within the city limits for a stated period of time, and as allowed by
state law and administrative rule within the calendar year. Unless otherwise
established by Council resolution, this period shall be: from 8:00 a.m. to 10:
00 p.m. on July 3; from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on July 4; and from 4:00 p.m.
on December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1.
   (B)   A person using or lighting fireworks which results in litter or debris
landing on the property of another shall be responsible to clean up such litter
and/or debris. An owner of property adjoining a dedicated right-of-way shall be
responsible to clean up litter and debris in such right-of-way resulting from
the use or lighting of fireworks, without regard to where the fireworks were
lit.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.13) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014; Ord. 2019-06, passed 4-29-2019) Penalty,
see §
96.999
§ 96.067 FIREWORKS SALES.
   (A)   For a period each year from June 27 through July 5, and from December
28 through January 1, fireworks may be sold within the city limits. Said sales
shall be in accordance with all state and federal requirements, and no person
shall be permitted to conduct such sales without a license issued by the city.
To obtain a license to conduct such sales, the person shall first submit an
application, including a copy of a valid sales tax license issued in
applicant’s name to the SVFD Fire Chief. An application fee as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, payable to the city, shall be
submitted with the application. After review and recommendation by the SVFD
Fire Chief, the City Finance Officer shall issue or deny the license request
within five business days. Any licensee under this section shall maintain
records of all sales activities and transactions as required by the provisions
of §
113.17(J). Licensed fireworks only sales premises shall be specifically
exempted under §
113.17(F) from city temporary vendor license fees and special sanitation fees
otherwise required by Chapter 113. Approved fireworks sales periods shall be
posted on the city website.
   (B)   At no time shall a collapsible lantern or similar structure of thin
paper or similar material, designed to be lit and then released into the air,
be allowed for sale or use within the city or within one mile of city limits.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.14) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2014-02, passed 3-5-2014) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.068 INSTALLATION OF KEY BOXES.
   (A)   The following properties shall be required to have key boxes installed
which contain keys to allow the Fire Department immediate access necessary for
life-saving, firefighting and/or law enforcement purposes:
      (1)   All multiple-dwelling housing units;
      (2)   Motels and hotels with four or more units not having doors from
each guest room going directly to the outside or not having an employee on
premises 24 hours each day;
      (3)   All buildings or structures which are three or more stories high;
      (4)   Buildings with fire alarm systems and/or fire suppression systems;
      (5)   All buildings with elevators;
      (6)   Buildings, other than commercial, the owner of which requests that
the Police and/or Fire Department have a key;
      (7)   All buildings in commercial, highway service and industrial zoned
areas of the city for which a permit is required;
      (8)   Covered malls as defined in the Building Code;
      (9)   Buildings or sites containing hazardous materials;
      (10)   Schools;
      (11)   Public or government owned buildings; and
      (12)   Buildings, which are determined by the city or a designated
official to be difficult to access or those buildings having absentee
landowners.
   (B)   The type and location of boxes must be approved by the city or a
designated official. Key boxes shall contain keys to gain access to the
property as required by the city or a designated official.
   (C)   All existing building, which fall into the above categories but are
not in compliance with this section shall, within 12 months of written
notification from the city or a designated official, install a key box in
compliance with this section.
   (D)   The Fire Department shall maintain a list of occupancies where key
boxes are installed. The Department shall visit each site annually and open key
boxes and notify landowners of any required maintenance.
   (E)   When a landowner changes locks on a structure with a key box, the
landowner shall notify the Fire Department of said key change. The Fire
Department shall arrange a time to place new master keys in the lock boxes.
   (F)   Any building with a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week guard service or
personnel on duty who is awake within the interior of the site may be exempt
from installation of a key box upon the approval of the city or a designated
official.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.15) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017)
§ 96.069 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall store, manufacture, distribute or in any way handle
any materials declared to be hazardous by the International Fire Code in
violation of
Chapter 156, and without also first notifying the city.
   (B)   Persons storing, manufacturing, distributing or in any way handling
any hazardous material must register with the city and receive approval as
required by
Chapter 156 prior to beginning his or her operation.
   (C)   The following information shall be provided to the city:
      (1)   Names of contact person;
      (2)   Phone number of contact person;
      (3)   List of materials, quantities, storage location;
      (4)   Use of material;
      (5)   Site plan of property; and
      (6)   Emergency plan.
   (D)   Any person storing, manufacturing, distributing or in any way handling
hazardous materials shall provide the City Fire Department with an MSDS
(material safety data sheet) for each material stored, handled or distributed.
   (E)   Any person manufacturing, distributing or in any way handling
hazardous materials shall be responsible for any and all cost incurred by the
Fire Department and/or the city during any event, fire or spill caused by the
person.
   (F)   Any person shall placard his or her property, structures and storage
facilities as required by NFPA 701 (National Fire Protection Agency) and as
required by the codes adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.16) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.070 UNATTENDED GAS PUMPS.
   Any gas filling station within the city which provides 24-hour service or
pay at the pump service must provide 24-hour staffing or install recorded video
monitoring devices which provide surveillance of pumps which are accessible
during all hours of operation.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.17) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013)
§ 96.071 FIRE LAND.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of any building permit, and upon review of plans and
specifications for new structures, the city or a designated official may
require the installation and maintenance of a fire lane.
   (B)   Any required fire lane shall not be less than 14 feet wide unless a
narrower lane is approved and noted on the building permit (or final plans) by
the Building Inspector. It shall be signed and properly identified by ground
markings, and such signs shall comply with all requirements of the Building
Code.
   (C)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle in any area on public or
private property designated as a fire lane.
   (D)   (1)   The driver of a commercial vehicle may stop temporarily at a
place designated as a fire lane, if the area has also been designated as a
joint use loading zone/fire lane by the city or a designated official.
      (2)   No vehicle shall, however, be allowed to remain parked in any zone
so designated for a period exceeding 15 minutes.
      (3)   Any vehicle parked within any zone designated as a fire lane is
required to activate and maintain emergency signal flashers in continuous
operation.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.18) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.072 FIRE SERVICE BILLING AND AUTHORITY TO RECOVER COSTS.
   (A)   The City Volunteer Fire Department, while under contract with the
city, is authorized to seek and obtain reimbursement, not to exceed the amount
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, for any and all
costs it has incurred in providing public safety services from any party
receiving such services or any party obligated to provide reimbursement for any
of those services. Such reimbursement is specifically authorized against any
property owner, vehicle owner, insurance carrier or other party or person
having an obligation to provide partial or complete repayment of such costs.
   (B)   The billing may include, but is not limited to, the following: travel,
hours accrued, equipment, material used and meals for personnel.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.19) (Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-
2-2013; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017; Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-5-2015; Ord.
2091-06, passed 4-29-2019)
§ 96.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the
state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of
any costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. As an alternative to
criminal prosecution of a violation, a civil penalty authorized by
Chapter 37 may be assessed by means of an administrative citation allowed under
that chapter. An administrative citation issued by a Code Enforcement Officer
as described in
Chapter 37 shall be payable directly to the city. Issuance of an administrative
citation and payment of the civil penalty shall not bar further enforcement
action by the city for continuing or subsequent violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9.01.03)
   (B)   (1)   Any nonresidential or residential building and/or structure
having an alarm or alarm system which produces more than three false alarms in
any 12-month period shall be a violation of §§
96.055 through
96.072 for which the owner is responsible. For such violations within any 12-
month period, a civil penalty as authorized by division (A) above and
Chapter 37 may be imposed by the city as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution.
      (2)   In the event of an excessive number of accidental activations or
failure of an alarm system, the city or a designated official is authorized to
require the building owner or occupant to provide fire watch or other personnel
until the system is repaired and in proper operating order. The required
personnel shall provide at least one approved means for notification of County
Dispatch, and that person’s sole employment obligation shall be to perform
constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires or other
security issues. The city shall have no civil or financial liability for any
expenses incurred for providing the required personnel.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.05)
   (C)   Violations of §
96.066 are subject to the penalties stated in division (A) above as well as
prosecution under §
50.041.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.13)
(Ord. 2006-18, passed 9-2-2006; Ord. 2012-20, passed 1-2-2013; Ord. 2014-02,
passed 3-5-2014; Ord. 2017-10, passed 12-20-2017; Ord. 2019-06, passed 4-29-
2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
      
112.   LOTTERIES
      
113.   LICENSING OF TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
      
114.   TRANSIT OPERATORS
      
115.   AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE
      
116.   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.001   Scope and purpose
   
110.002   Definitions
Licensing and Sales
   
110.015   License required
   
110.016   Wholesale license fee
   
110.017   Submission of invoices and assessment of fees
   
110.018   Delivery and sale required within city
   
110.019   Consequences for failure to timely pay city
   
110.020   Maintenance of records and inspection by dealer
   
110.021   Limitation of one license per location
   
110.022   Classification and fees required for alcoholic beverage, malt
beverage, wine licenses and renewals
   
110.023   Special event license requirements
   
110.024   Consumption only permit
   
110.025   Hours of operation
   
110.026   Retail (on-/off-sale) malt beverage and state farm wine license
provisions
   
110.027   Authorized number of off-sale liquor licenses
   
110.028   Sales on Sunday or Memorial Day pursuant to statute
   
110.029   Action by Council
   
110.030   Character requirements for license
   
110.031   Area limited
   
110.032   Kegs of malt beverage; retail sale; records
   
110.033   Consuming, blending, possessing alcoholic beverages in public places;
disposal of containers of alcoholic beverages restricted
   
110.034   Open containers permitted upon approval
   
110.035   Weapons prohibited on premises where sold
   
110.036   Annual review of applications
   
110.037   Sales with license only
   
110.038   Additional fee for video lottery machine holders
   
110.039   Traffic in alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
110.040   Persons under 21 barred from on-sale premises
   
110.041   Violation as ground for revocation of suspension of license; multiple
licenses
Full-Service On-Sale and Malt Beverage Restaurant Licenses
   
110.055   License application requirements
   
110.056   Definitions
   
110.057   Annual report
   
110.058   License renewal
   
110.059   Only retail, on-sale service permitted
   
110.060   Full-service restaurant license fee
   
110.061   Registry of full-service restaurant on-sale licensees
   
110.062   Issuance of new full-service restaurant license restricted
   
110.063   Spa and/or health and beauty retail on-/off-sale malt beverage and
wine licenses
Structure Requirements, On-Sale Establishments
   
110.075   Mandatory compliance with state and local licensing laws
   
110.076   General requirements and/or limitations
   
110.077   Construction requirements
   
110.078   Wall, floor and roof requirements
   
110.079   Window requirements
   
110.080   Restroom requirements
   
110.081   Exit requirements
   
110.082   Occupancy requirements/limitations
   
110.083   Initial inspection required prior to sales
   
110.084   Appeal process
 
   
110.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall set forth licensing requirements related to the sale of
alcohol and malt beverages and shall regulate drinking establishments and the
sale of alcohol and malt beverages within the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.01.01)
§ 110.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a term
is not defined in this section or elsewhere in this chapter, the term is to be
given the meaning as defined in SDCL Title 35.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages as
defined in this chapter.
   BAR. Any permanent installed counter within the restaurant area from which
alcoholic beverages are regularly served to customers by a person employed by
the facility and is tending bar or drawing or mixing or otherwise preparing
alcoholic beverages for consumption within the facility.
   BUILDING/STRUCTURE. Structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
for the shelter, support or enclosure for persons, animals or property. A
BUILDING may be precut or prefabricated, or it may be made up of mobile modules
or sections, factory fabricated and transportable by rail or truck to a
building site and designed to be incorporated into a structure upon a permanent
foundation on said site.
   BULK CONTAINER. Any package or any container within which container is one
or more packages.
   BUSINESS. Any activity, trade, calling, profession or occupation, whether
sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or
other recognized entity, which regularly provides delivery of products and/or
services from an address or other location(s) within the corporate limits of
the city. BUSINESS includes HOME OCCUPATIONS which involve the sale of goods or
services as described in this definition.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any state recognized or I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) not-for-
profit organization (either a private foundation or public charity) that is
organized and operated exclusively for established philanthropic, humanitarian,
altruistic, benevolent, public-spirited, scientific, literary or religious
purposes, including, but not limited to, relief of the poor, the distressed or
the underprivileged; advancement of religion; advancement of education or
science; erecting or maintaining public buildings, monuments or works;
lessening the burdens of government; lessening neighborhood tensions;
eliminating prejudice and discrimination; defending human and civil rights
secured by law; and combating community deterioration and juvenile delinquency.
    CIVIC ORGANIZATION. Any state recognized or I.R.C. § 501(c)(4) not-for-
profit organization or league not organized for profit but operated exclusively
for the promotion of social welfare or for the purpose of serving a public or
mutual benefit within or to the community. Also, alternatively, any local
association of persons, the membership of which is limited to the persons in
the city and the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to charitable,
education or recreational purposes in the city.
   DISTILLED SPIRITS. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions
and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use, containing not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by weight.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION. Any state recognized or I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) not-
for-profit organization that is organized and operated exclusively for
established educational purposes, encompassing individual instruction, as well
as public instruction on subjects useful to the individual and beneficial to
the community.
   EVENT. An organized occurrence or happening lasting four or more consecutive
days or where the city provides extraordinary services, including, but not
limited to, sanitation services, law enforcement or traffic control. This
definition does not apply to a special event license described below.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any state recognized or I.R.C. §§ 501(c)(8) or 501
(c)(10) not-for-profit organization that is organized and operated for a
fraternal purpose and whose membership is based on a common tie or the pursuit
of a common object. A FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION must operate under a lodge system.
   FLOOR. An area that is surrounded by exterior walls and a roof of the
building or portion thereof.
   MALT BEVERAGE. A beverage made by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or decoction, or combination of both, in potable brewing water, of malted
barley with hops, or their parts, or their products, and with or without other
malted cereals, and with or without the addition of unmalted or prepared
cereals, other carbohydrates or products prepared therefrom, and with or
without the addition of carbon dioxide, and with or without other wholesome
products suitable for human consumption containing not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by weight.
   MINOR. Any person who is under the age of 21.
   OFF-SALE. The sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption off the
premises where sold.
   ON-SALE. The sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption only upon the
premises where it is sold.
   ON-SALE DEALER. Any person who sells, or keeps for sale, any alcoholic
beverage for consumption on the premises where sold.
   OPERATION. In action, functioning.
   PACKAGE. The bottle or immediate container of any alcoholic beverage.
   PACKAGE DEALER. Any person other than a distiller, manufacturer or
wholesaler, who sells, or keeps for sale, any alcoholic beverage for
consumption off the premises where sold.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any location that the local, state or national government
maintains for the use of the public, such as a highway, park or public
building.
   RESTAURANT. A room and/or structure regularly, and in bona fide manner, used
and kept open for the serving and/or preparing of meals to guests for
compensation which has suitable table accommodations for at least 50 guests
therein at one and the same time; and a kitchen connected therewith containing
conveniences for cooking sufficient to provide preparation and cooking of meals
in a bona fide manner for 50 or more guests at one and the same time.
Facilities who serve only prepackage foods or items that can be heated in a
microwave or small pizza or toaster ovens will not be considered a RESTAURANT.
   RETAIL LICENSE. Any on-sale or off-sale license issued under the provisions
of this chapter.
   RETAILER or RETAIL DEALER. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for
other than resale.
   ROOF. Any structural element or group of elements which are structural in
nature and are covered with a material(s) that is (are) weather resistant. The
ROOF shall be the top most element of the structure that meets the requirements
of the current adopted Building Code.
   SALE. The transfer, for a consideration, of title to any alcoholic beverage.
   SPECIAL EVENT. 
      (1)   An event or activity occurring or to be conducted within the city
by a generally recognized:
         (a)   Civic organization with an active chapter located within the
city;
         (b)   Charitable organization with an active chapter located within
the city;
         (c)   Educational organization with an active chapter located within
the city;
         (d)   Fraternal organization with an active chapter located; or
         (e)   Veteran’s organization with an active chapter located within the
city.
      (2)   In addition, a SPECIAL EVENT may include an event to be conducted
by a licensee, holding a license issued by the city pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2
(4), (12) or (16), for the following purposes:
         (a)   A recognized event linked to developing and encouraging tourism
in the community and/or county; or
         (b)   A recognized event within the city or county which is not
primarily intended or planned to increase tourism activities but which the City
Council finds would be of benefit to the citizens of the community.
   SPECIAL EVENT ON-SALE LICENSE. 
      (1)   For purposes of obtaining a special event on-sale license, a
special event within the municipality is defined as an event or activity to be
conducted within the city by a generally recognized:
         (a)   Civic organization with an active chapter located within the
city;
         (b)   Charitable organization with an active chapter located within
the city;
         (c)   Educational organization with an active chapter located within
the city;
         (d)   Fraternal organization with an active chapter located within the
city; or
         (e)   Veteran’s organization with an active chapter located within the
city, or an event where a licensee already holding an on-sale license issued by
the city pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(4), (12) or (16) applies for and receives
approval from the Common Council:
            1.   A recognized event linked to developing and encouraging
tourism in the community and county; or
            2.   A recognized event within the city or county which is not
primarily planned to increase tourism activities but which the City Council
finds would be of benefit to the citizens of the community.
      (2)   To obtain the SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE, the applicant shall submit an
application stating the qualifications for a special event license on a form
consistent with the requirements of SDCL § 35-4-124, and providing all
additional information required by the City Finance Office to meet the
requirements of this chapter. A SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE may only be issued to a
current city license holder only for the same class of license previously
issued to the licensee by the city.
   TO SELL AND SERVE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. To take orders for alcoholic
beverages and to deliver alcoholic beverages to customers as a normal adjunct
of waiting tables. This term does not include tending bar or drawing or mixing
alcoholic beverages.
   WALL. Any wall or element of a wall, or any member or group of members,
structural or non-structural, which defines the boundaries of a building and
which is opaque in nature with the exception of windows or doors and supports a
roof and/or floor above.
   WINE. Any liquid either commonly used, or reasonably adapted to use, for
beverage purposes, and obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar and
containing not less than 0.5% of alcohol by weight but not more than 24% of
alcohol by weight.
   VETERANS ORGANIZATION. Any bona fide congressionally chartered veterans
organization.
(Prior Code, § 3.01.02) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
LICENSING AND SALES
§ 110.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep for sale, exchange, barter or distribute
any alcoholic or malt beverage without having obtained a license as required by
the provisions of the State Liquor Control Law, SDCL Title 35, and by this
chapter.
   (B)   Any person who intends to sell, keep for sale, exchange, barter or
distribute any alcoholic or malt beverage shall make an application for license
under provisions of the State Liquor Control Law, SDCL Title 35, to the City
Finance Officer.
   (C)   Upon issuance of said license, the licensee shall be given a copy of
this chapter and sign a statement verifying that he or she has received a copy
of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to acknowledge
in writing he, she or they have read and understood this chapter. Any violation
of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty set out at §
110.999.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.01) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.016 WHOLESALE LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The city does hereby impose a fee of 5% of the wholesale purchase
price, plus freight, for all malt beverages as defined by SDCL § 35-1-1, as
amended, delivered to the following persons:
      (1)   Any person holding a malt beverage retailer’s license, issued
pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(16);
      (2)   Any person holding a malt beverage package dealer’s license, issued
pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(17); or
      (3)   Any person holding a special malt beverage retailer’s license,
issued pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-11.4.
   (B)   The authority for the imposition of this fee is contained in SDCL §
35-4-60.2.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.02)
§ 110.017 SUBMISSION OF INVOICES AND ASSESSMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   All malt beverage wholesalers, as defined by SDCL § 35-1-1, and
licensed, pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2, shall provide a copy to the Finance
Officer of all invoices for sales of malt beverages delivered to the malt
beverage dealers, as described in §
110.016, within the city, on or before the fifth day of each month for all
sales made in the city for the prior month.
   (B)   The Finance Officer shall on the fifteenth day of each month, or on
the first working day thereafter, send a statement to each malt beverage
dealer, assessing the fee required hereunder, based upon all invoices received
by the city for malt beverages delivered to the dealer for the prior calendar
month. The dealer shall have a period of ten days within which to pay to the
city the fee required hereunder. In the event of the failure by the dealer to
pay the required fee within said ten-day time period, the Finance Officer shall
notify the malt beverage wholesalers, in writing, by first-class mail, postage
prepaid, of the fact that this fee has not been paid and that the license
holder is in violation of the terms of this chapter. A copy of the notice sent
to the malt beverage wholesaler shall be sent to the dealer who is in default.
The wholesalers shall not deliver any malt beverage to the dealer who is in
default under the terms of this chapter until such time as the wholesalers are
notified by the city that all fees owing to the city have been paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.03)
§ 110.018 DELIVERY AND SALE REQUIRED WITHIN CITY.
   No malt beverage dealer, as described in §
110.016, shall sell any malt beverages that have not been delivered to the malt
beverage dealer within the city for sale within the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.04) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.019 CONSEQUENCES FOR FAILURE TO TIMELY PAY CITY.
   (A)   No malt beverage dealer’s license, as described in §
110.016, shall be renewed until all fees owing pursuant to this chapter have
been paid in full.
   (B)   In addition to the termination of the malt beverage sales to the
premises affected and/or non-renewal of a license, the city may take any civil
action authorized by the statutes of the state to collect the charges imposed
by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.05) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.020 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND INSPECTION BY DEALER.
   (A)   The Finance Officer shall maintain an accurate record, using the
information supplied by the malt beverage wholesaler of the sales made to the
individual malt beverage dealers in the city.
   (B)   The records, including copies of wholesalers’ invoices, maintained by
the Finance Officer concerning any malt beverage dealer shall be open to
inspection only by that dealer or his or her designee during normal business
hours.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.06)
§ 110.021 LIMITATION OF ONE LICENSE PER LOCATION.
   No person shall hold both a retail on-sale liquor license, issued pursuant
to SDCL § 35-4-2(4) and a retail malt beverage on/off-sale and state farm wine
license issued pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2(16) and (17), for the same location.
However, a person holding a malt beverage manufactures license and an on-sale
liquor license for the same premises, and open to the public at least six days
a week for 11 months a year, may hold a malt beverage retailer license to sell
for off-sale consumption of the malt beverage it manufactures, but only at the
licensed premises at which the malt beverage is manufactured.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.07) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.022 CLASSIFICATION AND FEES REQUIRED FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, MALT
BEVERAGE, WINE LICENSES AND RENEWALS.
   (A)   The following classification and fees are established.
 
Annual        Initial Fee                                                               Renewal Fee
License
Package off-
sale liquor.
Any person
who sells or
keeps for
sale any      The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution          The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
alcoholic                                                                               resolution
beverage for
consumption
off the
premises
where sold.
Retail on-
sale liquor.
Any person
who sells or
keeps for
sale any
alcoholic
beverage,
including
distilled     The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per city The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
spirits,      resident, determined by last U.S. Census                                  resolution
other than
pursuant to
another
license under
this chapter,
for
consumption
on the
premises
where sold.
Retail on-                                                                              The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
sale liquor   Market price as set by City Council                                       resolution
(restaurant).
Retail malt
beverage on-/
off-sale and
state farm
wine. Any
person who
sells malt
beverages for
consumption
on or off the The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution          The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
premises                                                                                resolution
where sold,
other than
resale, this
includes malt
beverages as
both package
dealers and
on-sale
dealers.
Retail on/                                                                              The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
off-sale wine The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution          resolution
and cider.
 
   (B)   The following classifications and fees are established for licenses
for sales of distilled spirits.
 
Special Event Licenses                                                      Initial Fee                                                                  Renewal
                                                                                                                                                         Fee
Special retail malt beverage on-/off-sale and state farm wine or retail on-
/off-sale wine and cider license (nonprofit, civic, charitable or fraternal The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per day per N/A
organizations only or current licensee). The daily fee for such license     type of license up to 15 consecutive days
issued shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
Special retail on-sale liquor license. (Public, civic, charitable,
educational or fraternal organization, or current licensee, in conjunction  The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per day per
with special event within city, selling licensed on-sale liquor.) The daily type of license up to 15 consecutive days                                    N/A
fee for such license issued shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution.
 
(Prior Code, § 3.02.08)
§ 110.023 SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A special retail malt beverage on-/off-sale and state farm wine
license may be issued in conjunction with a special event, as defined at §
110.002, within the city to any qualified civic, charitable, educational,
fraternal or veterans organization or any qualified licensee licensed pursuant
to SDCL § 35-4-2(4), (6) or (16) in addition to any other licenses held by the
special events license applicant.
   (B)   A special retail on-off sale wine and cider license may be issued in
conjunction with a special event, as defined in §
110.002, within the city to any qualified civic, charitable, educational,
fraternal or veterans organization or any qualified licensee licensed pursuant
to SDCL § 35-4-2(4), (6) or (12) or SDCL Chapter 35-12 in addition to any other
licenses held by the special events license applicant.
   (C)   A special retail on-sale liquor license may be issued in conjunction
with a special event, as defined in §
110.002, within the city to any qualified civic, charitable, educational,
fraternal or veterans organization or any qualified licensee licensed pursuant
to SDCL § 35-4-2(4), (6) or (16) in addition to any other licenses held by the
special events license applicant.
   (D)   The daily fee for each special event retail malt beverage on/off-sale
and state farm wine license, special event retail (on-/off-sale) wine and cider
license that is issued shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
The daily fee for each special event retail on-sale liquor license that is
issued shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
   (E)   A public hearing is required before approval and issuance of any
license under this section.
   (F)   Any licenses issued pursuant to this section may be issued for a
period of time established by the City Council not exceeding 15 consecutive
days.
   (G)   Any nonprofit licensee under this section may not be issued more than
five special event licenses for a total of 15 days during a single calendar
year. Any current licensee may not be issued more than 30 special event
licenses during a single calendar year.
   (H)   This license may be issued pursuant all additional requirements of
SDCL § 35-4-124, including the procedural regulations adopted by a resolution
of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.09)
§ 110.024 CONSUMPTION ONLY PERMIT.
   (A)   The fee for this permit shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution.
   (B)   This permit allows the applicant to provide alcoholic beverages free
of charge during the applicant’s rental or use of city facilities or
properties.
   (C)   The application permit must be completed and filed with the Finance
Office at least 30 days prior to the first day of proposed rental or use of a
city facility or property and must be accompanied by a signed rental agreement
and other documents required by city policy.
   (D)   The applicant must be at least 21 years of age and provide an
acceptable form of identification, together with a signed hold harmless
agreement.
   (E)   This permit allows, with City Council’s approval, the consumption of
any alcoholic beverages on the city property or by an individual or a nonprofit
corporation within the city. The length of the consumption permit may not
exceed 24 hours. Hours of consumption may not exceed those permitted for on-
sale licensees.
   (F)   The applicant must have at least the amount as shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution in liability insurance coverage for the
permit. A statement from applicant’s insurance carrier confirming coverage for
the proposed site and naming the city as co-insured shall be provided with the
application or it will be denied as an incomplete application.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.10)
§ 110.025 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The following table establishes the hours during which alcoholic beverages
may be sold and the holidays when alcoholic beverages may not be sold for each
class of license.
 
Type of License      Hours               Days                  Holidays
Off-sale dealer      7:00 a.m. to 12:00  Sunday through        No Christmas Day
                     a.m.                Saturday              sales.
Retail on-sale       12:00 a.m. to 2:00                        No Christmas Day
liquor               a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  Monday through Sunday sales.
                     to 12:00 a.m.
Retail malt beverage 12:00 a.m. to 2:00
on-/off-sale and     a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  Monday through Sunday N/A
state farm wine      to 12:00 a.m.
Retail on-sale       12:00 a.m. to 2:00                        No Christmas Day
liquor (full         a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  Monday through Sunday sales.
restaurant licensee) to 12:00 a.m.
Retail on/off-sale   12:00 a.m. to 2:00
wine and cider       a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  Monday through Sunday N/A
                     to 12:00 a.m.
Special event
retail, on-sale
liquor, special
event retail malt    Set by Council, not
beverage on-/off-    to exceed times for                       N/A
sale and state farm  on-sale licensee
wine or retail on/
off-sale wine and
cider license
 
(Prior Code, § 3.02.11)
§ 110.026 RETAIL (ON-/OFF-SALE) MALT BEVERAGE AND STATE FARM WINE LICENSE
PROVISIONS.
   The City Council, through its authority under SDCL § 35-4-11, removes any
prior maximum number of retail (on/off) malt beverage and state farm licenses
established. In lieu of the provision disestablishing the maximum number of
malt beverage and state farm wine licenses, the City Council may, by resolution
passed before September 2, establish a limit on the number of licenses the
Council will approve for the ensuing calendar year. If the City Council does
not pass a resolution setting the number of licenses and/or fees as provided in
this section, then the most recent resolution passed under this section sets
the number and/or fees. If no prior resolution set the prescribed number or
fees, or the resolution has been repealed, then this section or any applicable
section under this chapter applies. Any on-/off-sale restaurant malt beverage
licenses issued by the city are hereby transferred to and now known as retail
(on-/off-sale) malt beverage and state farm wine licenses, and subject to the
license limitations provided by this section. All licensees shall be located in
an area zoned for commercial or agricultural use and with the proposed
premises, including a permanent structure of at least 1,200 square feet on
property owned or leased by the licensees.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.12) (Ord. 2024-04, passed 7-19-2024)
§ 110.027 AUTHORIZED NUMBER OF OFF-SALE LIQUOR LICENSES.
   In recognition of the authority granted by the legislature under SDCL § 35-
4-10, the Council has authorized the issuance of two off-sale licenses for the
sale of distilled spirits within the city. Both such license shall continue to
be held by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.13) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 12-2-2015)
§ 110.028 SALES ON SUNDAY OR MEMORIAL DAY PURSUANT TO STATUTE.
   Off-sale or on-sale licensees holding valid licenses within the city may,
pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-81.2, sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday and also on
Memorial Day within the municipality during hours otherwise allowed by state
statute.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.14) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.029 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Common Council may approve or disapprove an application for a license or
a special event license depending on whether the Council finds the applicant a
suitable person to hold the license and whether the Council considers the
proposed location suitable. The Common Council may, in its discretion, require
the applicant to appear personally at any meeting of the Council and to answer
any question which may be asked pertaining to the applicant or the place of
business which may in any way pertain to the carrying on of the business
applied for.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.15)
§ 110.030 CHARACTER REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE.
   Any licensee or special event license under this chapter and SDCL Title 35
must be a person of good moral character, who has never been convicted of a
felony. If the licensee is a corporation, the managing officers thereof must
have like qualifications.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.16)
§ 110.031 AREA LIMITED.
   The Common Council shall not approve any application for “on-sale” or “off-
sale” license to sell any alcoholic beverages in the city at any place of
business unless that place of business is located in an area zoned as a
commercial or agricultural area on the zoning use district map of the city. The
Common Council may approve a waiver of this requirement by approving a
temporary exemption for an off-sale license, or by approving an on-sale special
event license, for a period not to exceed 15 days, as provided for in §
110.023.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.17) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.032 KEGS OF MALT BEVERAGE; RETAIL SALE; RECORDS.
   (A)   No keg of malt beverage may be sold at retail in this state unless the
licensee who sold the keg records the name address and driver’s license number
of the person to whom the keg is sold and has provided for the identification
of the keg. Each licensee shall maintain such sales records for one year and
shall make the records upon request to any duly authorized officer or
representative of any city, county or state agency responsible for enforcing
this section or for enforcing state codified laws pertaining to consumption of
alcohol.
   (B)   The identification provided for in this section may not be permanent
or damaging to the structure of the keg. For the purpose of this section, the
term KEG means an eight- or 16-gallon reusable plastic or metal container.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.18)
§ 110.033 CONSUMING, BLENDING, POSSESSING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES;
DISPOSAL OF CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage upon
the premises of a licensed on-sale dealer if the alcoholic beverage was not
purchased from the on-sale dealer.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages in
any public place, other than upon the premises of a licensed on-sale dealer.
For the purpose of this section, the term PUBLIC PLACE means any place, whether
in or out of a building, commonly and customarily open to or used by the
general public, and any street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.19) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.034 OPEN CONTAINERS PERMITTED UPON APPROVAL.
   (A)   No regular on-sale malt beverage licensee may sell or allow to be
consumed any malt beverage outside the building of the licensed premises unless
the business operates out of a permanent structure and the consumption of the
malt beverage occurs in an outdoor designated area located on the licensed
premises of the licensee.
   (B)   (1)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted
on a sidewalk or walkway within a public right-of-way if that sidewalk area
abuts a licensed premises, provided that the license holder derives more than
50% of its gross receipts from the sale of food prepared for consumption on the
licensed premises. The sidewalk or walkway subject to a public right-of-way
shall be immediately adjacent to and abutting the licensed premises. This
section does not apply to any federal-aid eligible highway unless approved in
accordance with the applicable requirements for the receipt of federal aid and
does not waive the requirements set out in §
151.007.
      (2)   In place of the process described in §
130.024, an area for open container shall only be established as described in
this division (B). Upon receipt of a completed application and fee as shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, the Finance Officer will place
the request on the Council meeting agenda to set a public hearing as provided
by statute. The application to the City Finance Office shall be on a form
approved by that Office, accompanied by the required fee, and include or be
accompanied by the following information:
         (a)   The applicant’s name, address and phone number;
         (b)   A copy of the insurance coverage applicant has obtained for the
event;
         (c)   A statement of the purpose and community benefit for which the
closure is being requested;
         (d)   A detailed description of the street or other public area the
applicant is requesting be closed as an open container area; and
         (e)   The date and time for which the applicant is requesting closure
for an open container area.
      (3)   After completion of the public hearing the City Council may, by
resolution, close off an area of public right-of-way or public area as defined
by SDCL § 35-1-5.3 and designate it as an open container area for a special
event. In the event that any area of a public street is closed by such
resolution of the City Council, said area shall not be construed as a public
place, as that term is defined in §
110.033. The restrictions upon open containers set forth in this chapter shall
not be enforced within said area during the time frame of closure set forth in
the resolution. The time for consumption within the open container area, as
defined in the resolution, may not exceed the hours of consumption permitted
for on-sale licensees. The time frame may not exceed ten consecutive days.
   (C)   The Common Council may, in its discretion, for community designated
events, permit open containers in public places upon the terms and conditions
stated in its resolution which it finds are consistent with the laws of the
state and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.20) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.035 WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON PREMISES WHERE SOLD.
   All license holders shall post the following notice at all entrances to
their establishment in bold capital letters at least three-fourths of an inch
high.
 
It Is Unlawful to Enter this Establishment with Any Weapon.
 
(Prior Code, § 3.02.21) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.036 ANNUAL REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.
   Annually, the City Council shall review each completed application for malt
beverage and/or alcohol licenses. Issuance of any license or special event
license shall be subject to a determination by City Council as to whether or
not the permanent structure on the premises and the proposed location is
fitting for the type of business that has been presented and is proposed to be
operated at the legal description set forth in the application submitted
pursuant to §
110.015. The City Council shall take into consideration the location of any new
or transferred license and its location in relationship to any residentially
zoned area, school, daycare, church, place of worship and/or similar uses and
such other location issues as the City Council may deem appropriate in
reviewing and issuing a new or transferred license.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.22) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.037 SALES WITH LICENSE ONLY.
   Malt beverage and/or alcohol may be sold and/or consumed only at locations
shown on the license issued by the city and is on file with the City Finance
Officer and the State Department of Revenue. Property for which a permanent
license is in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be
permitted to continue their operations as they have in the past until said time
that the license has been transferred or revoked by the City Council. In
addition, these properties shall comply with the regulations, which were in
effect at the time of issuance of their license.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.23)
§ 110.038 ADDITIONAL FEE FOR VIDEO LOTTERY MACHINE HOLDERS.
   An additional license fee is hereby imposed in the amount as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for each video lottery machine on the
licensed premises, which fee shall be applicable to all classes of licenses
enumerated under SDCL § 35-4-2(4), (11), (14) and (17), which involve
convention facility, on-sale and malt beverage retailers; provided, that not
more than one fee shall be imposed per location, and the fee shall be paid at
the same time and in the same manner as the fees paid on licenses issued
pursuant to SDCL § 35-4-2. All fees received under this section shall be
deposited into the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.24)
§ 110.039 TRAFFIC IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall produce, transport, store or sell any alcoholic beverage
except as authorized under the provisions of this chapter and SDCL Title 35.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.25) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.040 PERSONS UNDER 21 BARRED FROM ON-SALE PREMISES.
   As prohibited by SDCL § 35-4-79, no on-sale licensee shall permit any person
less than 21 years old to loiter on the licensed premises or to sell, serve,
dispense or consume alcoholic beverages on such premises, unless the presence
of the person under the age of 21 is authorized by the exception language of
either SDCL §§ 9-1-1 or 9-1-1.1.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.26) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.041 VIOLATION AS GROUND FOR REVOCATION OF SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; MULTIPLE
LICENSES.
   (A)   The Common Council may recommend any license issued under this chapter
and/or SDCL Title 35 be revoked or suspended upon proof of violation by the
licensee, by the licensee’s agents or employees or by the manager or
contractual operators of retail establishments and their agents or employees
operating under a city license, of any of the following:
      (1)   Any provision of SDCL Title 35;
      (2)   Any rule promulgated pursuant to SDCL Title 35; or
      (3)   Any ordinance or regulation relevant to alcoholic beverage control
that has been adopted by the city.
   (B)   For any licensee with multiple alcoholic beverage licenses for the
same premises, upon suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter or SDCL Title 35, such licensee shall cease operation under all
alcoholic beverage licenses held by such licensee for the same premises for the
same period as the suspension or revocation.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.27) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
FULL-SERVICE ON-SALE AND MALT BEVERAGE RESTAURANT LICENSES
§ 110.055 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An applicant for a full-service restaurant on-sale license shall
provide sufficient documentation to the municipality with an application form
provided by the municipality to prove that the primary source of revenue from
the operation of the restaurant will be derived from the sale of prepared food
and nonalcoholic beverages and not from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   The supporting documentation concerning the primary source of revenue
submitted pursuant to this section is confidential.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.01) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.056 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. Any permanently installed counter within the restaurant area from which
alcoholic beverages are regularly served to customers by a person who is
tending bar or drawing or mixing alcoholic beverages.
   FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT. Any restaurant at which a waiter or waitress
delivers food and drink offered from a printed food menu to patrons at tables,
booths or the bar. Any restaurant that only serves fry orders or food such as
sandwiches, hamburgers or salads is not a FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT.
   RESTAURANT. Any area in a building maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where individually priced meals are prepared and served
primarily for consumption in such area and where not more than 40% of the gross
revenue of the restaurant is derived from the sale of alcohol or alcoholic
beverages. The RESTAURANT shall have a dining room or rooms, a kitchen and the
number and kinds of employees necessary for the preparing, cooking and serving
of meals.
   SPA AND/OR HEALTH AND BEAUTY ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment licensed under
SDCL Chapter 36-15, such as a nail or hair business.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.02) (Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 110.057 ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   The full-service restaurant on-sale licensee shall submit an annual
report and supporting documentation to the city on forms provided by the City
Finance Office of the annual sales of the full-service restaurant, which
includes an oath verifying the validity of the information provided in the
report.
   (B)   The report and the supporting documentation submitted pursuant to this
section are confidential.
   (C)   The report shall contain the annual gross sales of the licensee for
the following two categories:
      (1)   Food and nonalcoholic beverage sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic beverage sales.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.03) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.058 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   When renewing a full-service restaurant on-sale license, the city shall
condition the license renewal upon receiving documentation that not more than
40% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the full-service
restaurant is derived from the sale of alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.04) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.059 ONLY RETAIL, ON-SALE SERVICE PERMITTED.
   A full-service restaurant on-sale licensee may only serve alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption in the bar and dining room area of the
restaurant.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.05)
§ 110.060 FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSE FEE.
   As required by state law, the license fee charged for a full-service
restaurant on-sale license shall be at or above the current fair market value
for such license as determined herein.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the term CURRENT FAIR MARKET VALUE
means the documented price of the on-sale license most recently sold, through
an arm’s-length transaction, less the value of any real or personal property
included in the transaction, to determine the amount paid by the licensee for
the on-sale license. If there are no documented sales of on-sale licenses
contained in the records of the City Finance Office, the city may request from
any on-sale license holder within the city the date and price originally paid
for its on-sale license to determine current fair market value.
   (B)   Any form submitted to establish current fair market pursuant to this
provision shall be signed under oath and shall include the documents
establishing the amount originally paid for the on-sale license. Current fair
market value as determined by the Council shall be a minimum amount as shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for each person residing within
the city as measured by the last preceding decennial federal census.
   (C)   The license fee shall be established by Council resolution, including
its determination of current fair market value, to be adopted within 90 days of
a revision to this section. Subsequent changes in the license fee shall not be
made for a period of ten years from the effective date of adoption of the
Council resolution unless a population growth reported by the federal decennial
census requires an increase in the fee. A city licensee under this chapter may
contest the Council’s determination of current fair market value contained in
the Council resolution by using the appeal process.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.06) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.061 REGISTRY OF FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT ON-SALE LICENSEES.
   (A)   The City Finance Office shall notify each current on-sale license
holder of the existence of the registry and then maintain a registry of each
full-service on-sale restaurant license that is being offered for sale. The
city shall furnish a copy of the registry to anyone who requests a new-full
service restaurant on-sale license.
   (B)   After receiving this notification, the existing full-service
restaurant on-sale licensee is responsible for registering with the city that
the full-service restaurant on-sale license is for sale.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.07)
§ 110.062 ISSUANCE OF NEW FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSE RESTRICTED.
   The city may only issue a new license pursuant to this subchapter if no on-
sale license is on the registry or a person desiring to purchase an on-sale
license listed on the registry provides documentation showing that the person
is unable to purchase the on-sale license at the price established pursuant to
this subchapter and on terms satisfactory to both the potential buyer and
seller. The price of any on-sale license registered as “for sale” with the city
shall be sold at the current fair market price set by the city pursuant to a
resolution adopted in accordance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.08)
§ 110.063 SPA AND/OR HEALTH AND BEAUTY RETAIL ON-/OFF-SALE MALT BEVERAGE AND
WINE LICENSES.
   Spa and/or health and beauty establishments licensed under SDCL Chapter 36-
15 and in good standing with the state may apply for a retail on-/off-sale malt
beverage license. This shall be subject to the temporary use inspection period
and process as described in §
156.394.
(Prior Code, § 3.03.12) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS, ON-SALE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 110.075 MANDATORY COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL LICENSING LAWS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep for sale, exchange, barter or distribute
any alcoholic or malt beverage without having obtained a license pursuant to
the provisions of the State Liquor Control Law (SDCL Title 35) and this
chapter.
    (B)   Any person who intends to sell, keep for sale, exchange, barter or
distribute any alcoholic or malt beverage shall make an application for license
under provisions of the State Liquor Control Law (SDCL Title 35) and to the
City Finance Officer.
   (C)   All malt beverage and/or alcohol licenses may be issued only if the
proposed license is in compliance with in zoning requirements and all other
city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.01) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.076 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND/OR LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   All federal, state and local laws shall be complied with at all times.
   (B)   In the event a fight or civil disturbance occurs within the temporary
drinking establishment where police are called to assist, the establishment
shall temporarily cease selling of all malt beverage/alcohol until the
disturbance is under control and the City Police Department has granted
permission to reestablish sales.
   (C)   Beverage cans, trash and other debris which is collected during an
event shall be bagged and removed from the property on a daily basis to prevent
the accumulation of pests and to deter unwanted smell as required by §§
50.035 through
50.048.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit illegal nudity, lewd or
indecent acts, exhibitions or any other behavior in violation of §§
94.150 through
94.164 to take place within their establishment.
   (E)   Any structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or served shall
be constructed in compliance with this chapter and all city building and/or
fire codes and other applicable ordinances.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the distribution, sale
and/or consumption of malt beverage and/or alcohol by a minor in their
establishment.
   (G)   No person who has been issued a license for alcoholic beverages under
this chapter may permit any illegal activity within the licensed premises or on
adjoining property subject to the control of the licensee.
   (H)   No person who has been issued a malt beverage and/or alcohol license
shall permit prostitution as prohibited by SDCL Chapter 22-23. In addition to
the penalty set forth in this chapter, any persons who permits illegal
prostitution to take place within their drinking establishment shall be subject
to possible revocation or non-renewal of their malt beverage and/or alcohol
license.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.02) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.077 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All structures utilized for drinking establishments after the adoption
of this chapter shall comply with the current adopted addition of the
International Uniform Building Code as set out in
Chapter 150.
   (B)   As an exception to the above, establishments which are in existence at
the time of the adoption of this chapter will be permitted to continue their
use without complying with the current adopted building code, but at any time
said establishment becomes unsafe and/or a permit is taken out to remodel,
alter or add on to any portion of said facility, the entire establishment shall
be brought into compliance with the current adopted codes and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.03)
§ 110.078 WALL, FLOOR AND ROOF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any floor of an on-sale establishment shall be constructed of
elements, which are structural or non-structural in nature and covered by
material(s) which create a hard, non-absorbent surface, as required by the
Building Code adopted in §
150.025.
   (B)   Any roof of an on-sale establishment may not be occupied or utilized
as a floor. Any walls of an on-sale establishment shall be solid in nature with
the exception of areas for windows and exits. Walls shall run from grade to the
roof of the structure. Any walls shall be constructed to comply with the
requirements of the International Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.04) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.079 WINDOW REQUIREMENTS.
   For the purpose of this section, all requirements that apply to windows or
other openings in the walls of an on-sale establishment shall be those
established by the Building Code adopted in §
150.025.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.05)
§ 110.080 RESTROOM REQUIREMENTS.
   It is recognized by the City Council that during the Sturgis Motorcycle
Rally, on-sale establishments have a substantially larger need for sanitary
plumbing fixtures than during normal operations, and, in consideration of the
same, the following requirements are hereby established to determine the number
of permanent restroom fixtures and temporary restroom fixtures that will be
required of an on-sale establishment.
   (A)   The restrooms required for a licensed premises at which any alcoholic
beverage is served or consumed will be determined as follows (in no case shall
there be less than two permanent restroom fixtures for each sex).
      (1)   One restroom fixture shall be added for each sex per each
additional 50 occupants within the licensed premises. The occupancy load shall
be based upon the International Building Code wherein occupancy is determined
on the basis of one person per seven square feet within the licensed premises.
      (2)   When three or more fixtures are required for each sex, the women’s
restroom shall be required to have one additional fixture more than the men’s.
      (3)   All restroom’s hand sinks shall be installed at the ratio as
determined by the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   (B)   For determining the number of temporary restroom facilities to be
added during the period one week before the Rally and the official Rally
period, the occupancy rate for the licensed premises shall be determined as one
person per seven square feet. The same ratios as above shall then be applied,
and any additional fixtures required by the occupancy rate shall be provided in
the form of portable restroom facilities. Portable restroom facilities shall be
located upon the real property of the on-sale establishment as a condition of
meeting the requirements for the liquor license.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.06)
§ 110.081 EXIT REQUIREMENTS.
   All exits of any on-sale establishment must meet or exceed the requirements
which are laid out in the Uniform Building Code adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.07)
§ 110.082 OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS/LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   At no time shall the owner/operator exceed the occupant load, which is
issued by the Building Inspector and/or Fire Chief. Due to public safety
issues, if, at any time, the Chief of Police, the City Building Official, City
Fire Chief or their designees finds that the permitted occupant load has been
exceeded, he or she may have the sale of alcohol stopped until the occupant
load is decreased to the permitted occupant load.
   (B)   (1)   The occupant load for an on-sale establishment shall be
calculated as follows: Maximum occupant load: One occupant per each seven
square feet of the licensed premises.
      (2)   This formula will not include areas identified in the license
application such as restrooms, employee work or service areas or other areas,
which are not commonly visited by the public.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.08)
§ 110.083 INITIAL INSPECTION REQUIRED PRIOR TO SALES.
   Within 15 days after the first issuance of a license, and before the new
licensee may begin sale of alcohol, the owner shall be required to have the
establishment inspected by either the Chief of Police, the Building Inspector
or the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.09)
§ 110.084 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Chief of Police, Building
Inspector or Fire Chief made under this subchapter shall be entitled to have
said decision reviewed by the city. If after review, said person is
unsatisfied, he or she may appeal the decision to the City Council. The process
shall be as follows.
   (A)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review with
the city setting forth the basis for which he or she believes the Chief of
Police, Building Inspector or Fire Chief’s decision to be in error. The writing
shall also include the person’s name and mailing address.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall review
his or her decision and mail a written response to the aggrieved person within
20 days.
   (C)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the city
following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the Finance
Officer. There shall be a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the Finance
Office at the time of filing the notice of appeal.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall notify
the designated city official.
   (E)   After notification of the designated city official by the Finance
Officer, the appeal shall follow the appeal provision of Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.10) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by the fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution and/or incarceration in the County Jail for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
      (2)   In addition, any person holding a license under this chapter who is
found to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall face the
possibility of revocation or non-renewal of any license.
(Prior Code, § 3.01.03)
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
110.033 is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 3.02.19) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 11-5-2019)
CHAPTER 111: PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required; fee; term of license
   
111.03   Fixed premises
   
111.04   Bond
   
111.05   Suspension, revocation of license
   
111.06   Separate license and bond for each place of business
   
111.07   Change in location of licensed premises
   
111.08   Records required
   
111.09   Inspection of records or license and pledged property
   
111.10   Pawn tickets
   
111.11   Reports to the Chief of Police; duty of Police Department
   
111.12   Holding period; exceptions
   
111.13   Pawned articles to be held 40 days
   
111.14   Effect on a hold order
   
111.15   Accepting articles from other than lawful owner
   
111.16   Unlawful transactions
   
111.17   Concealing articles to prevent identification
   
111.18   Examination of premises by city police officer
Dealers in Precious Metals or Gems
   
111.30   Definitions
   
111.31   License required; fee; term
   
111.32   Fixed premises
   
111.33   Suspension, revocation of licenses
   
111.34   Separate license and bond for each place of business
   
111.35   Records required
   
111.36   Inspection of records or license and pledged property
   
111.37   Reports to the Chief of Police; duty of Police Department
   
111.38   Holding period; exceptions
   
111.39   Effect on hold order
   
111.40   Unlawful transactions
   
111.41   Concealing articles to prevent identification
   
111.42   Examination of premises by city police officer
   
111.43   Application to pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who:
         (a)   Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or
pledge of personal property, other than chooses in action, securities or
evidence of indebtedness; or
         (b)   Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied
agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price.
      (2)   Any PAWNBROKERS may effect the purchase of secondhand personal
property for resale purposes under the terms of this chapter by acquiring any
pawn ticket of his or her own issued by transfer.
   SECONDHAND GOOD DEALER. Any person, firm or corporation, other than a
pawnbroker or dealer in precious metals and precious gems, who purchases,
collects, trades, sells or deals in the following secondhand goods: business
machines, tape recorders and tapes, all radio transmitters and receivers,
musical instruments, cameras and camera accessories, power tools, sporting
goods, stereos, stereo equipment and records, tools and tool boxes, television
sets, weapons, bicycles, radios, microwave ovens and jewelry. This definition
shall exempt the following transactions:
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation selling new, unused articles and
any receiving or taking in used articles or trade from the purchasers of the
new articles against the purchase price of said new articles which were sold
for their market value;
      (2)   Any person collecting antique items for personal use only;
      (3)   Casual and occasional sales of used household goods by the owner
thereof to the public, on a non-receiving basis, if the seller, at the time of
sale, is not engaged for profit in the business of selling goods of that or a
similar nature; this category includes those sales commonly referred to as
garage sales;
      (4)   Any person, firm or corporation dealing exclusively in the resale
of used automobiles;
      (5)   Any person, firm or corporation that operates a junk yard for
wrecked automobiles;
      (6)   Transactions involving goods sold on consignment; and
      (7)   Transactions in secondhand goods at stores or events sponsored by
nonprofit corporations or associations or fraternal or religious organizations.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.01)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; TERM OF LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer without first obtaining a
license from the City Finance Officer. The verified application for such
license shall contain applicant’s name and residence; description
identification of the place where he or she intends to do business; description
of the goods he or she intends to handle; the Social Security number or tax
identification number of the applicant and other information required by the
City Finance Officer. Any persons applying for a pawnbrokers license or a
secondhand dealers license must, before their application will be considered,
contact the City Police Department and furnish adequate identification for the
purpose of a records check. No license under this chapter shall be issued to
any person who has been convicted of a felony; no license under this chapter
shall be issued to any corporation wherein one or more officers or directors of
which have been convicted of a felony.
   (B)   The annual license fee for a pawnbrokers license shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution, payable in advance.
   (C)   The annual license fee for secondhand dealers shall be set forth in
the city’s annual fee resolution, payable in advance.
   (D)   Any person having a business which encompasses more than one of the
three designated categories set forth in this chapter, and all businesses being
conducted on one premises, shall obtain all appropriate licenses, but the total
fee for licenses for the single premises shall not exceed the amount as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
   (E)   The term of the license shall be for one year.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.02) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 FIXED PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer unless said person has a fixed premises where said business is
conducted, either on a continuing basis or from time to time, and unless said
person has first obtained a license to engage in that business at that
premises.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, FIXED PREMISES shall include any non-
mobile premises where such business is conducted and said pawned or purchased
secondhand articles are held according to the provisions of §§
111.13, whether or not that premises remains in the same location during the
period the license is in effect.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.03) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 BOND.
   Each pawnbroker doing business in the city shall furnish a good and
sufficient bond, with a surety to be approved by the City Council, in the sum
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, conditioned for the
faithful observance of this chapter and conditioned for the safekeeping or
return of all articles held in pledge of such pawnbroker.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.04)
§ 111.05 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license issued to a licensee under this section, who shall have
violated the provisions of this chapter, may be suspended for a prescribed
period not to exceed 60 days, in the event of a failure on the part of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter after ten days’ written
notice.
   (B)   A license issued to a licensee under this section, who shall have
violated the provisions of this section, may be revoked by the Common Council
after ten days’ written notice and a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.05)
§ 111.06 SEPARATE LICENSE AND BOND FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Any person, firm or corporation conducting several or separate place of
business shall pay the appropriate license fees and procure the appropriate
licenses and bond for each place of business. The above mentioned proprietor’s
license shall be sufficient for all clerks, agents and employees engaged at the
place named in the license.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.06)
§ 111.07 CHANGE IN LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   If, during the effective period of a license issued under this
chapter, a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer changes the location of the licensed
premises within the city, such dealer shall inform the City Finance Officer of
such change of location and shall have the new premises to be licensed noted on
the license.
   (B)   There shall be no additional fee charged for changing the location of
the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.07)
§ 111.08 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep books or records of pawn tickets in a
manner satisfactory to the Chief of Police, where he or she shall accurately
and intelligently enter, in ink, in the English language, at the time of
purchasing or receiving and personal property, and after requiring and
observing identification from the person seeking to pawn the property, record
the following information:
      (1)   The name of the person from whom the property is purchased or
received, his or her place of residence and his or her date of birth;
      (2)   A detailed description of the item which shall include, if
available, the manufacturer’s name, style model number, serial number, engraved
initials or other identifying marks;
      (3)   The date and time of transaction;
      (4)   The amount necessary for redemption;
      (5)   The date when the article is to be redeemed; and
      (6)   Any mortgage or bill of sale taken or receipt of pawn ticket given.
   (B)   Every pawnbroker shall also record the date of disposition or
redemption from pawn of said article or any part or portion thereof. Said
disposition report shall be located in the same book and at the same place
where the receiving records of said article are located.
   (C)   Every secondhand dealer shall keep books or records for those articles
listed in §
111.01 in a manner satisfactory to the Chief of Police or his or her designee,
where he or she shall accurately and intelligently enter, in ink, in the
English language, at the time of purchasing or receiving any article or item,
the following information:
      (1)   The name of the person from whom the property was purchased or
received, his or her place of residence and his or her date of birth;
      (2)   Date and time of the transaction;
      (3)   A detailed description of the item which shall include, if
available, the manufacturer’s name, style model number, serial number, engraved
initials or other identifying marks;
      (4)   If the seller is not known personally to the dealer or the dealer’s
agent, the dealer is required to obtain the person’s driver’s license number
and the state of issuance or, if available, the identifying number from at
least one form of government issued identification; and
      (5)   The amount paid for the article.
   (D)   The records required by this section shall be maintained for one year
after the date of purchase or receipt and shall be made available for
inspection to the city police officers during reasonable business hours.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.08)
§ 111.09 INSPECTION OF RECORDS OR LICENSE AND PLEDGED PROPERTY.
   (A)   The books or records required by §
111.08 to be kept by pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall be open to the
inspection of city police officers during reasonable business hours.
   (B)   The licenses required in §
111.02, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall at all times be on display in
a conspicuous place and available for inspection by city police officers during
reasonable business hours. This section shall not apply when the license is
being taken to the city Finance Officer to have a change of location recorded.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.09)
§ 111.10 PAWN TICKETS.
   At the time of receiving a pledge and upon the subsequent renewal of a loan,
the pawnbroker shall deliver to the pledger or his or her agent a pawn ticket,
which pawn tickets shall be correspondingly serially numbered and shall contain
the following information: the name and address of the pawnbroker; a generic
description of the pledge with such particular details of description noted
whenever possible in order to distinguish the article or articles; the date and
time of the transaction; the amount, duration and terms of the loan. The
pawnbroker may insert on the pawn ticket any other terms, conditions and
information that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.10)
§ 111.11 REPORTS TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Police Department to periodically
contact the licensed premises under this chapter to inspect or obtain copies of
records required to be kept according to §
111.08 hereof, setting forth a description of the person by whom they were left
in pledge or sold.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the power and
authority to require such reports to be made in a manner and form subject to
his or her approval.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.11)
§ 111.12 HOLDING PERIOD; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any person licensed as a pawnbroker, who shall purchase any new or
secondhand goods of any individual not engaged in trade, shall keep the same
for inspection for ten days from the time of the transfer, except on written
release from the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The above mentioned
property shall be held during this period on the licensed premises or some
other secure location within the city and shall not be disposed of or altered
from the form in which it was received during this period.
   (B)   Any person licensed as a secondhand dealer who shall purchase any new
or secondhand goods stated in §
111.01 of any individual not engaged in trade shall either:
      (1)   Keep the same for inspection for ten days from the time of transfer
except on written release from the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The
above mentioned property shall be held during this period on the licensed
premises or some other secure location within the city and shall not be
disposed of or altered from the form in which it was received during this
period; or
      (2)   Keep the same for three working days, excluding Saturday, Sundays
and calendar holidays, after delivering the required records to the City Police
Department. The time period shall begin when said records are delivered to the
City Police Department. The above mentioned property shall be held during this
period in the licensed premises or some other secure location within the city
and shall not be disposed of or altered from the form in which it was received,
except on written release from the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   (C)   When articles are acquired by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in a
group, they shall be kept together for identification purposes and not
separated until the ten-day period has elapsed, unless released prior on
written authorization by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.12)
§ 111.13 PAWNED ARTICLES TO BE HELD 40 DAYS.
   Every article of any kind or description which is taken in pawn by a
pawnbroker shall be held by the pawnbroker for a period of 40 days, during
which time the same shall not be shown, either for sale or for inspection, to
any person, other than a city police officer, during reasonable business hours.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.13)
§ 111.14 EFFECT ON A HOLD ORDER.
   The Chief of Police or any authorized police officer may, by written order,
order a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to hold any specified article or
articles, deposited with or in custody of such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer,
for purposes of further investigation by the Police Department, when said item
or items are believed to be stolen. A hold order shall remain in effect for a
period of 30 days commencing the day on which the hold order was delivered to
the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. A hold order shall supersede the
provisions of §§
111.12 and
111.13, and no sale or other disposition may be made of said article or
articles while such hold order remains outstanding, unless released by officers
issuing the hold order.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.14)
§ 111.15 ACCEPTING ARTICLES FROM OTHER THAN LAWFUL OWNER.
   A pawnbroker who accepts in pledge any article as security for a loan from a
pledger who is not the owner thereof, obtains no property in the article either
by reason of maturation of the loan or by transference of the pawn ticket to
the pawnbroker by the pledger or holder thereof. Ignorance of the fact that the
pledged article was lost or stolen shall not be construed to affect the
question of title, and if the pawnbroker shall sell such article to a third
person, he or she shall remain liable to the original owner.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.15)
§ 111.16 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to accept any
articles in pawn or purchase any secondhand personal property by acquiring a
pawn ticket by transference from any person under 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.16) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.17 CONCEALING ARTICLES TO PREVENT IDENTIFICATION.
   No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall conceal, secrete or destroy, for
the purpose of concealing, any article purchased or received by him or her, for
the purpose of preventing identification thereof by city police officers.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.17) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.18 EXAMINATION OF PREMISES BY CITY POLICE OFFICER.
   No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer or any other personnel shall refuse,
resist or attempt to prevent any city police officer without a warrant from
examining the licensed premises occupied by the pawn broker or secondhand
dealer, or other secured premises within the city limits where property is
stored, during reasonable business hours for the purpose of discovering stolen
property.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.18)
DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS
§ 111.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CASUAL PURCHASES OF PRECIOUS METALS OR PRECIOUS GEMS. The occasional
purchase of precious metals or precious gems for the purchaser’s own use and
not for resale. Any purchase from a dealer in precious metals or precious gems
shall be considered a casual purchase.
   DEALER IN PRECIOUS METALS OR PRECIOUS GEMS. Any person who engages in a
business or purchasing or receiving, for resale, any precious metals or
precious gems which were previously sold at retail, or coins, with the
exception of gold coins and numismatic coins. This shall not include any person
who makes only causal purchases of precious metals or precious gems; nor any
person who purchases only at wholesale; nor any person who purchases only
occasionally at a coin show or antique show, the primary purpose of which is
showing, rather than buying or selling, the regulated articles; nor any sales
made in the administration of the estate or a deceased person; nor any person
who deals in recognized forms of investment fold, silver or platinum bars or
ingots, issued or produced by any recognized governmental authority or private
corporation, or banking institution, on which is tamped the name or initials of
the government, the private corporation or banking institution, the quantity of
metal contained in the bar or ingot and the government, corporation or bank
seal.
   NUMISMATIC COINS. Coins whose value is in excess of their legal tender value
on the date of the particular transaction.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or association, or any
other legal entity, or any agent or employee thereof.
   PRECIOUS GEMS. Diamonds, emeralds, rubies, sapphires and pearls, and any
other gem of similar value, and any article made, in whole or in part, of such
gems.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Gold, silver and platinum and any article made, in whole or
in part, of any such metals.
   REGULATED TRANSACTION. The purchase or receipt by a dealer, other than a
casual purchase, or any precious metal or precious gem previously sold at
retail, but shall exclude purchases at an occasional coin or antique show, the
primary purpose of which is showing, rather than buying or selling, the
regulated articles.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.19)
§ 111.31 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; TERM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, without first obtaining a
license from the City Finance Officer. The verified application for such
license shall contain applicant name and residence; description identification
of the place where he or she intends to do business; description of the goods
he or she intends to handle; the Social Security number or tax identification
number of the applicant and any other information required by the City Finance
Officer. Any persons applying for pawnbrokers license or a secondhand dealers
license must, before their application will be considered, contact the City
Police Department and furnish adequate identification for the purpose of a
records check. No license under this chapter shall be issued to any person who
has been convicted of a felony; no license under this chapter shall be issued
to any corporation wherein one or more officers or directors of which have been
convicted of a felony.
   (B)   The annual license fee for a dealer in precious metals or precious
gems license shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, payable in
advance.
   (C)   Any person having a business which encompasses more than one of the
three designated categories set forth in this chapter, and all businesses being
conducted on one premises, shall obtain all appropriate licenses, but the total
fee for licenses for the single premises shall not exceed the amount as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
   (D)   The term of the license shall be in accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.20) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 FIXED PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or
precious gems unless said person has a fixed premises where said business is
conducted, either on a continuing basis or from time to time, and unless said
person has first obtained a license to engage in that business at that
premises.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, FIXED PREMISES shall include any non-
mobile premises where such business is conducted and such precious metals or
precious gems are held according to the provisions of §
111.39, whether or not that premises remains in the same location during the
period the license in effect.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.21) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   A license issued to a licensee under this section, who shall have
violated the provisions of this chapter, may be suspended for a prescribed
period, not to exceed 60 days, in the event of a failure on the part of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter after ten days’ written
notice and a public hearing.
   (B)   A license issued to a licensee under this section, who shall have
violated the provisions of this section, may be revoked by the Common Council
after ten days’ written notice and a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.22)
§ 111.34 SEPARATE LICENSE AND BOND FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation conducting several or separate places
of business shall pay the appropriate license fees and procure the appropriate
licenses and bond for each place of business. The above mentioned proprietor’s
license shall be sufficient for all clerks, agents and employees engaged at the
place named in the license.
   (B)   If during the effective period of a license issued under this chapter,
a dealer in precious metals or gems changes the location of the licensed
premises within the city, such dealer shall inform the City Finance Officer of
such change of location and shall have the new premises to be licensed noted on
the license. There shall be no additional fee charged for changing the location
of the license premises.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.23)
§ 111.35 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every dealer in precious metals or precious gems shall keep books or
records of regulated transactions in a manner satisfactory to the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, where he or she shall accurately and
intelligently enter, in ink, in the English language, at the time of the
regulated transaction, and after requiring and observing identification from
the person seeking to sell the precious metal or precious gem, the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the person from whom the precious metal or precious gem
was purchased, his or her place of residence and his or her date of birth;
      (2)   Date and time of the transaction;
      (3)   A detailed description of the item which shall include, if
available, the manufacturer’s name, style model number, serial number, engraved
initials or other identifying marks;
      (4)   If the seller is not known personally to the dealer or the dealer’s
agent, the dealer is required to obtain the person’s driver’s license number
and the state of issuance or, if available, the identifying number form at
least one form of government issued identification; and
      (5)   The amount paid for the article.
   (B)   The records required by this section shall be maintained for one year
after the date of purchase or receipt and shall be made available for
inspection to city police officers during reasonable business hours.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.24) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.36 INSPECTION OF RECORDS OR LICENSE AND PLEDGED PROPERTY.
   (A)   The books or records required by this section to be kept by dealers in
precious metals and precious gems shall be open to the inspection of the city
police officers during reasonable business hours.
   (B)   The licenses required by §
111.31 for pawnbrokers and secondhand shall at all times be on display in a
conspicuous place and available for inspection by city police officers during
reasonable business hours. This division (B) shall not apply when the license
is being taken to the City Finance Office to have a change of location
recorded.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.25)
§ 111.37 REPORTS TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Police Department to periodically
contact the licensed premises under this chapter to inspect or obtain copies of
records required to be kept according to §
111.36, setting forth a description of the person by whom they were sold.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the power and
authority to require such reports to be made in a manner and form subject to
his or her approval.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.26)
§ 111.38 HOLDING PERIOD; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   All precious metals or precious gems purchased or received by a dealer
through a regulated transaction shall be identifiable to the record of that
transaction and shall held on the licensed premises of the dealer, or some
other secure location within the city, and shall not be disposed of nor altered
from the form in which it was received, except on written release from the
Chief of Police or his or her designee, for a period of either:
      (1)   Ten days from the date of the regulated transaction; or
      (2)   Three working days from the date of the regulated transaction if
dealer will deliver the required records to the City Police Department. The
three-working-day period shall commence at the time the records are delivered
to the City Police Department, excluding Saturdays, Sundays or calendar
holidays.
   (B)   When articles are acquired by a dealer in precious metals and precious
gems in a group, they shall be kept together for identification purposes and
not separated until the ten-day period or three-day period has elapsed, unless
released prior on written authorization by the Chief of Police of his or her
designee.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.27)
§ 111.39 EFFECT ON HOLD ORDER.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or any authorized city police officer may, by
written order, order a dealer in precious metals or precious gems to hold any
article or articles, deposited with or in custody of such dealer in precious
metals or precious gems, for purposes of further investigation by the police
Department when said item or items are believed stolen.
   (B)   A hold order shall remain in effect for a period of 30 days commencing
the day on which the hold order was delivered to the dealer in precious metals
and precious gems.
   (C)   A hold order shall supersede the provisions of this section, and no
sale or other disposition may be made of said article or articles while such
hold order remains outstanding, unless released by officers issuing the hold
order.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.28)
§ 111.40 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals and precious gems to
purchase any articles from an individual under the age of 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.29) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.41 CONCEALING ARTICLES TO PREVENT IDENTIFICATION.
   No dealer in precious metals or precious gems shall conceal, secrete or
destroy, for the purpose of concealing, any article purchased or received by
him or her, for the purpose of preventing identification thereof by city police
officers.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.30) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.42 EXAMINATION OF PREMISES BY CITY POLICE OFFICER.
   No dealer in precious metals and precious gems or any other personnel shall
refuse, resist or attempt to prevent any city police officer, without a
warrant, from examining the licensed premises occupied by the dealer in
precious metals and precious gems, or other secured premises within the city
limits where property is stored, during reasonable business hours for the
purpose of discovering stolen property.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.31)
§ 111.43 APPLICATION TO PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS.
   All provisions of this subchapter shall apply to a person licensed as a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer under this chapter, who is engaged in business
as a dealer in precious metals or precious gems, except that all the
appropriate licenses and bonds must be obtained, and, if more than one license
is obtained for one premises, the total license fees shall not exceed the
amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, as stated in
§
111.31(C) and (D).
(Prior Code, § 23.01.32)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to make the
required entries therein, as required in §
111.08, or shall intentionally or knowingly make any false or unintelligible
entry, or any entry which he or she has reason to believe is untrue, or who
shall fail to make the inquiries necessary to enable him or her to make such
entries or any of them, or who shall fail to produce his or her records when
requested by a city police officer during reasonable business hours, or who
shall destroy or willfully permit such records to be destroyed or lost, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.08)
   (C)   Any person who fails to keep such records or fails to make the
required entries therein, as required in §
111.35, or shall intentionally or knowingly make any false or unintelligible
entry, or any entry which he or she has reason to believe is untrue, or who
shall fail to make the inquires necessary to enable him or her to make such
entries or any of them, or who shall fail to produce his or her records when
requested by a city police officer during reasonable business hours, or who
shall destroy or willfully permit such records to be destroyed or lost, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 23.01.24)
CHAPTER 112: LOTTERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Scope and purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
Lottery Regulations Within the Corporate Boundaries
   
112.15   Permitted for restricted purposes
   
112.16   Who may conduct
   
112.17   Proceeds not to inure to any individual
   
112.18   Application fee
   
112.19   Payment of temporary vendor license fee
   
112.20   No professional person or organization employed to conduct
   
112.21   Local benefit by designation of local charity
   
112.22   Limited compensation for services rendered
   
112.23   Value of prizes
   
112.24   Notice to governing body
   
112.25   Application information and statewide filing requirements
   
112.26   Lease or agreement to provide equipment or services prohibited
   
112.27   Numbering of chances
   
112.28   Awarding of prizes
   
112.29   After-lottery report to Finance Officer
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth those regulations necessary for
the control of lotteries within the city.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.01) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOTTERY or LOTTERIES. A plan whereby, for a valuable consideration, money is
raised by selling chances to share in the distribution of prizes.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.02) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
LOTTERY REGULATIONS WITHIN THE CORPORATE BOUNDARIES
§ 112.15 PERMITTED FOR RESTRICTED PURPOSES.
   The game BINGO, as defined in SDCL § 22-25-23 or LOTTERY, as defined in SDCL
§ 22-25-24 may be permitted as provided in this chapter and in that event will
not be construed as gambling or as a lottery within the meaning of SDCL § 22-
25-1 or Title XIII.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.01) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.16 WHO MAY CONDUCT.
   (A)   The bingo game or lottery must be conducted by: a bona fide
congressionally chartered veterans organization; a nationally recognized
religious, charitable, educational or fraternal organization; a local civic or
service club; a political party; a volunteer fire department; or a political
action committee or political committee on behalf of any candidate for a
political office which exists under the laws of the state, which demonstrates
through its application that the proposed lottery or bingo will provide a
significant direct benefit to the community.
   (B)   The organization shall submit its application to the City Finance
Office in the manner and form required herein and must provide all the
information required by that office before the application may be accepted as
complete.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.02) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.17 PROCEEDS NOT TO INURE TO ANY INDIVIDUAL.
   The proceeds from any lottery or bingo game may not inure to the benefit of
any individual.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.03) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.18 APPLICATION FEE.
   Any application for a bingo or lottery activity proposing to award prizes
having a total value of less than the amount as shall be set forth in the
city’s annual fee resolution shall pay an application fee as shall be set forth
in the city’s annual fee resolution. Any application for a bingo or lottery
proposing to award prizes having a total value of more than the amount as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution shall pay an application fee
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.04) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.19 PAYMENT OF TEMPORARY VENDOR LICENSE FEE.
   Any applicant seeking to conduct such a bingo or lottery activity shall also
be subject to the requirements of
Chapter 113. In the case of any lottery or raffle application which is denied
by the City Council, and for which the applicant has paid the temporary vendor
license and special sanitation fee to the Finance Office, those fees will be
refunded after the time for reconsideration/appeal of the Council action has
expired.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.05) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.20 NO PROFESSIONAL PERSON OR ORGANIZATION EMPLOYED TO CONDUCT.
   No separate organization or professional person may be employed to conduct
the bingo game or lottery or assist therein.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.06) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.21 LOCAL BENEFIT BY DESIGNATION OF LOCAL CHARITY.
   Any applicant under this chapter not demonstrating in the application
submitted that its primary nonprofit organizational purpose is to provide
benefit to the community, or which does not have its organization headquarters
located within the city, shall demonstrate in its application it will meet the
significant local benefit requirement of §
112.16 by designating a qualifying local charity or nonprofit organization
located and operating within the greater community with which applicant shall
affiliate during the conduct of the bingo or lottery activity. Any such
application asserting that significant local benefit will occur through such
local affiliation shall show consent by the local affiliate by providing its
signature on the application, or providing similar documentation of consent by
the local affiliate, acceptable to the Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.07) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012; Ord. 2013-19, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 112.22 LIMITED COMPENSATION FOR SERVICES RENDERED.
   No compensation of any kind in excess of the state minimum wage per hour or
an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, whichever
is greater, in value may be paid to any person for services rendered during any
bingo session in connection with the conduct of the bingo game or for their
services in selling any lottery or raffle tickets in consideration of any
lottery. However, the provisions of this section do not apply to games or
lotteries conducted in connection with a civic celebration recognized by
resolution of the governing body of the municipality approving the application
to conduct a bingo or lottery within the municipal limits as one not subject to
the statutory limitation on compensation.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.08) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.23 VALUE OF PRIZES.
   No prize in excess of the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution is to be awarded at any one play of bingo, and no lottery prize
is to be awarded in excess of the amount established pursuant to state law,
SDCL § 22-25-25(5a) and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.09) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.24 NOTICE TO GOVERNING BODY.
   The organizations authorized under §
112.16, before conducting a bingo game, lottery or raffle, shall give 30 days’
written notice of the time and place thereof to the governing body of the
municipality of the intention to conduct such bingo game or lottery. The notice
shall be given by submitting an application, complete in form and content as
determined by the City Finance Officer, at least 30 days prior to the proposed
sale of tickets for the bingo or lottery. For the purpose of this section, to
be COMPLETE IN FORM AND CONTENT means the application must include written
documentation confirming the applicant is a qualified nonprofit I.R.C. § 501(c)
(3) organization as determined by the IRS, or include similar written
documentation of comparable nonprofit status from the Office of Secretary of
State of South Dakota, in addition to other information required by this
chapter or the Finance Office. After the complete application and required fee
has been submitted to the Finance Office, it shall be: reviewed by the Finance
Officer; and, if it meets the requirements of this chapter, it shall be
approved by the Finance Officer under the authority of SDCL § 22-25-25(6); or,
if an application is not approved by the Finance Officer, the applicant may,
upon written request to the Finance Officer in the manner established by that
office, obtain a review and reconsideration of the application at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council in the form of a resolution, whereby the
City Council shall either approve or reverse the decision of the Finance
Officer. If approved, the approval shall further state if the bingo or lottery
is subject to the statutory limitation on compensation as stated at §
112.19.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.10) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012; Ord. 2013-19, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 112.25 APPLICATION INFORMATION AND STATEWIDE FILING REQUIREMENTS.
   The application submitted to the Finance Office shall also state the prize,
the value of the prize, starting date, duration and termination date of the
bingo game or lottery, and all additional relevant information required by the
Finance Office form. However, any organization that conducts a lottery or sells
tickets or shares for a lottery, bingo game or raffle which are sold statewide,
which sale that has been approved by the office of the Secretary of State,
shall also provide written notice to the City Council of such lottery by filing
a complete, signed application with all required supporting documentation to
the City Finance Office at least 30 days prior to commencement of ticket sales,
pursuant to SDCL § 22-25-25(6).
(Prior Code, § 25.02.11) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012; Ord. 2013-19, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 112.26 LEASE OR AGREEMENT TO PROVIDE EQUIPMENT OR SERVICES PROHIBITED.
   No organization authorized to conduct a bingo game or lottery under this
chapter may enter into any lease agreement with any other person or
organization or provide equipment or services associated with the conduct of a
bingo game or lottery. However, this section does not apply to any lease or
agreement with a distributor licensed pursuant to SDCL §§ 22-25-28 through 22-
25-51, inclusive, to provide bingo or lottery equipment and supplies.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.12) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.27 NUMBERING OF CHANCES.
   All chances or tickets referred to in the definition of LOTTERY or LOTTERIES
shall be numbered consecutively, and the information of the value of the prize
and mathematical chance or potential likelihood of purchasing the winning
lottery ticket shall be available from each individual selling such lottery or
raffle tickets.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.13) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.28 AWARDING OF PRIZES.
   Any lottery where tickets are not sold statewide, pursuant to SDCL § 22-25-
25(6) and permitted under §
112.16, shall have its prizes awarded within the boundaries of the municipality
no later than 15 days after the termination of said lottery, except in cases
where the lottery is operated and the tickets are sold in other states.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.14) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.29 AFTER-LOTTERY REPORT TO FINANCE OFFICER.
   Any organization conducting a lottery under this chapter shall furnish the
City Finance Officer, within 20 days after the termination of said lottery, a
written report stating the total number of tickets sold, the price per ticket
sold, the location of the drawing, a statement of the value of each prize
awarded from that lottery, a statement of the name and address of the winner of
each prize awarded and a statement of the amount of direct benefit to a local
affiliate charity or nonprofit, if any. Upon receipt of a complete after-
lottery report, any applicant that paid an application fee as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution shall have an amount as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution of the application fee returned to
it.
(Prior Code, § 25.02.15) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state,
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. As a separate administrative penalty, if the City
Council concludes that an applicant has violated this chapter, it may refuse an
application from that entity or individual to conduct a subsequent raffle or
lottery within the city for a period not less than one year, but not longer
than two years, from the date of said violation.
(Prior Code, § 25.01.03) (Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-25-2006; Ord. 2012-06, passed
5-2-2012)
CHAPTER 113: LICENSING OF TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Scope and purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
Vendors, Transient Businesses, Trades and Merchants
   
113.15   Sales and marketing within the right-of-way
   
113.16   Peddling in parks
   
113.17   Licensing of vendors, transient businesses, trades and merchants
Peddlers and Solicitors
   
113.30   Peddler license required
   
113.31   Fee
   
113.32   Application for peddler license
   
113.33   Issuance
   
113.34   Prohibited conduct
   
113.35   Suspension of peddler license
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   SDCL Chapter 9-34 provides the authority for municipal licensing of
many non-traditional businesses which can have a negative impact the health and
public safety of residents of a municipality. That legislation specifically
allows municipalities to license and regulate activities such as exhibitions,
second hand stores, tattoo services, piercing services, fortune tellers and
mind readers, auctioneers, transient merchants, peddlers, solicitors,
pawnbrokers, ticket scalpers and food preparation and sales. The city,
population of about 6,700, is home to one of the largest tourist events in the
United States, the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally. The event has had an annual
attendance estimated to range from 250,000 persons to over 500,000 persons
participating. Tourists travel from across the United States and from other
parts of the world to be in the city’s community area each year for it. They
come to participate in the buying and selling of many and varied items, to
attend concert activities, to camp and to travel throughout western South
Dakota, and to meet others from around the world and socialize in a unique
tourist environment.
   (B)   The city is the epicenter of the Rally and faces significant
responsibilities in hosting this large event every year. The primary focus of
the municipal activities is to provide a safe, healthy and friendly atmosphere
that will allow the Rally to flourish and grow. To accomplish this aim, the
city incurs costs each year of amounts as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution. Those costs are incurred to provide needed trash
collection, recycling, water service, sewer service, adequate police and public
safety staff, necessary ambulances service and similar needed services. To
offset those very substantial costs and avoid an unfair burden on property tax
payers in the community, the city has adopted and subsequently revised this
chapter to follow that statutory authority to license and assess fees to those
who vend, sell, display and market during the annual Rally. It is the intent of
the Council, in following that statutory authority, that those who operate
temporary businesses and who are the primary beneficiaries of the business and
marketing that results from a stable Rally event will bear the majority of the
costs associated with providing and maintaining that safe venue each and every
year.
   (C)   The recording and production policy is as follows. It is the policy of
the city to ensure that filming, recording and related activities do not
unreasonably interfere with public health, safety or welfare or endanger any
property. It is intended that this chapter be construed as consistent with the
evolving technology of motion picture and television filming and production. It
is the policy of the city to encourage professional motion picture, television
production industry and digital recording entities to use city locations and
backdrops, services and crew members to support the economic development goals
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.01.01) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed
7-5-2018)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The activity of buying and selling.
   EVENT. An organized occurrence or happening where the city provides
extraordinary services, including, but not limited to, sanitation services, law
enforcement or traffic control. Includes, but is not limited to, the annual
Sturgis Motorcycle Rally.
   OPERATION. In action, functioning, conducting business as defined within
SDCL § 10-45-1 or acting as a retailer as defined within SDCL § 10-45-1.
   PEDDLER. Consistent with the authority of SDCL Chapter 9-34, to travel from
house to house (including apartment to apartment) or business to business for
the purpose of selling or soliciting the sale of goods, merchandise or
services, including food and beverages. PEDDLER sales do not include sales or
solicitations by a person who has been previously invited onto the premises by
a resident of the house or apartment. This definition does not include a sales
representative operating under a valid state sales tax license who calls
exclusively on retail merchants, manufacturers or public officials.
   VENDING AREA. The area in which all of the related and supportive activities
for the operation of a business granted a temporary business license under this
chapter can be found. The area shall include the area for keeping all
materials, equipment, inventory, components and other items related to the
temporary business if located on the same premises. This definition shall also
include any area used by the business to assemble, display, market, demonstrate
or provide a tryout of any of the goods or services displayed, offered for sale
or otherwise made available to consumers the licensed temporary business. The
definition shall also include the area for meeting with potential or actual
clients, buyers or customers, and shall also include the space needed to
prepare the goods or services for transfer to the client, buyer or customer, as
well as all of the area used in any manner for preparing, cooking, serving or
consuming any food or other consumable product offered for sale to purchasers
or given away at no charge to Rally attendees. The common area shared by
written agreement between three or more food vendors for their customers to be
seated at tables and eat the food products they have purchased from those
vendors shall not be included as VENDING AREA.
   VENDOR.
      (1)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership association, business,
service provider or retailer, as defined by SDCL § 10-45-1, or operating as a
retailer, as defined in SDCL § 10-45-1, and not exempt as defined in §
113.17, not operating throughout the year within the city and which, in
conjunction with an event where the city invests more than the amount as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution in hosting the event engages
in temporary or transient business in the city selling, marketing or displaying
goods, wares, merchandise or services, including automated teller services, or
a permanent business person, firm or corporation which is located within the
city limits away from its or its usual operating place of business and who, for
the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any room,
building, structure or space for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares,
merchandise or services during any days of the event. The person, firm or
corporation so engaged in business as defined by SDCL § 10-45-1, or operating
as a retailer, as defined in SDCL § 10-45-1, unless exempt as defined in §
113.17, shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section by reason of
association with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by
conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part
of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. This
definition shall include any person planning to film or record in public areas
within the city. The person shall file an application with the city as set
forth in this chapter. For all filming or recording activities not exempt as
listed in §
113.17, the application shall be accompanied with the required VENDOR license
fee established in §
113.17 and special sanitation fee and, if applicable, the mobile merchandising
fee and when necessary with a property use or recording agreement prepared by
the city.
      (2)   For the protection of the public health, safety and property of
residents and visitors, the city shall include in any such recording agreement
all of the terms and condition intended to protect the public interest and the
city’s separate interest, as they may exist. The charges and fees to be
included in each such agreement are intended to provide reasonable revenue to
the city the use, maintenance and upkeep of all public city resources provided
to the VENDOR (film) licensee as part of said recording agreement.
   YEAR. A 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 31.01.02) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018)
VENDORS, TRANSIENT BUSINESSES, TRADES AND MERCHANTS
§ 113.15 SALES AND MARKETING WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No person may display, market, offer in exchange for donation or sale, or
sell any goods, services or merchandise in person or from a cart, wagon,
automobile, truck or other vehicle in the streets, thoroughfares, or while
within any other public right-of-way of the city. This section does not apply
to the delivery of farm or garden products, where the order for same was placed
in advance, nor does it apply to drayage or the delivery of goods sold in the
regular course of an established business. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the city from entering into a contract for the sale of ice cream and
sundries for immediate sale on conditions agreed to by the Common Council, or
prohibit the city from entering into a lease agreement to allow the display or
sale of goods or services in the public right-of-way. A person within the
definition of vendor in §
113.02 may market or display (not sell) his, her or their products or services
on property open to the public and zoned for such marketing if they have
obtained a temporary vendor license and have paid the additional special
sanitation fee and also paid the additional public area merchandising fee as
shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. At no time is a
licensed vendor permitted to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic
flow.
(Prior Code, § 31.02.01) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed
7-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.16 PEDDLING IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to display, market, sell or offer to
sell to any person within any municipal park of the city, any goods, services,
wares, merchandise, books, pictures, novelties, souvenirs or trinkets or any
other article of commerce and trade, including goods of his or her own
production or manufacture. This provision shall not include sales by the city
or any organization having an approved lease agreement with the city nor shall
it prohibit such activities by a person occupying a portion of the park under a
valid concession or lease agreement with the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.02.02) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed
7-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.17 LICENSING OF VENDORS, TRANSIENT BUSINESSES, TRADES AND MERCHANTS.
   (A)   Vendor license required. Any firm, person or corporation which intends
to operate a temporary business as set forth in the definition of vendor in §
113.02 within the corporate limits of the city in conjunction with an event
where the city invests more than the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution in hosting the event shall be required to purchase a
vendor license for each structure, stand, tent, vehicle, booth, location or
place which is used by such merchant for the sale or distribution of goods. The
person so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section by
reason of association with any local operating business, dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary or transient business
in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant, auctioneer or business. The vendor license must be posted in each
individual vendor location during operation.
   (B)   Application. To obtain a license, an applicant shall file, in the
office of the City Finance Officer, a verified application stating his or her
name and residence, description and identification of the place in which he or
she proposes to do business, dates of operation, name, address, phone number
and email address of property owner where business will take place and, the
description of the goods he or she intends to handle. The applicant’s valid
state sales tax number shall be included as part of the application, and any
application submitted without a valid sales tax license number will not be
processed for issuance of a temporary vendor license. A State Department of
Health license, when required for the applicant’s business, shall also be
presented at the time of application.
   (C)   Fee and duration of license.
      (1)   A temporary business shall pay a vendor license fee based on
location and size of the overall vending area, as set forth below, together
with the special sanitation fee at the rate established and required by Chapter
50 for each 12-consecutive-day period, or portion thereof, in any calendar
year. The combined fee shall be paid at the Finance Office at the time the
application is submitted for approval. The Finance Officer shall note on the
license the time period for which it is effective. A business may purchase only
two vendor licenses per location per 12-month period.
      (2)   The license fee for each vending area, for payment of both the
vendor license fee and the special sanitation fee, shall be as follows:
         (a)   ATM machine/equipment, area of 25 square feet or less: the fee
shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution;
         (b)   Vending area of 100 square feet or less: the fee shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution;
         (c)   Vending area of 101 to 400 square feet: the fee shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution;
         (d)   Vending area of 401 to 800 square feet: the fee shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution;
         (e)   Vending area of 801 to 1,200 square feet or less: the fee shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution; and
         (f)   Vending area of more than 1,200 square feet: the fee shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
      (3)   Each vending area separated by a distance of three feet or more
from another vending area shall be subject to a separate license fee.
Regardless of any shared resources, expenses or any corporate affiliation or
other cooperative business activities, each temporary business shall be
required to obtain a separate temporary business license.
   (D)   Issuance. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the fee
described in this section and final approval, the Finance Officer shall issue a
license to the applicant to operate as a vendor at a place described in the
application and for the time for which the license fee has been paid in
advance. Any applicant that has had his, her or their license issued who
subsequently changes location and submits an amended application to show that
change shall be charged a supplemental administrative fee as shall be set forth
in the city’s annual fee resolution to obtain an amended license. Any vendor
that changes location without obtaining an amended license as provided herein
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
113.99. This supplemental administrative fee shall also apply to organizations
which are exempt from the vendor license fee but are subject to the special
sanitation fee imposed by §
50.046. Upon receipt of completed application, the city may deny issuance of a
vendor license if:
      (1)   The applicant fails to meet any condition imposed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or this subchapter;
      (2)   The proposed vendor activities are described in a manner that
indicates they will be conducted in a manner or location not meeting the
health, zoning, fire or building and safety standards established by the
ordinances of the city, or otherwise be conducted in apparent violation of any
state or federal laws or regulations; or
      (3)   The application submitted appears to contain false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the application other documents submitted as
part of the application process.
   (E)   Prohibition of sale of glass beverage containers and products. All
vendors licensed under this chapter, and business as defined by SDCL § 45-10-1,
or operating as a retailer as defined in SDCL § 45-10-1, shall be strictly
prohibited from offering for sale or making available to the public any
beverage in a glass container which would allow consumption of the beverage
outside of the licensed vending area of the vendor.
   (F)   Exemptions from the vendor license fee. The exemptions to the
requirement to purchase a vendor license are stated in divisions (F)(1) through
(F)(7) below. Regardless of any shared resources, expenses, corporate
affiliation or relationship, other cooperative business activities or any
contract or agreement between businesses, each temporary business shall be
required to obtain a separate business vendor license. Each vending area
separated by a distance of three feet or more from another vending area shall
be required to obtain a separate license fee. All sale, display, marketing or
similar activities that are not specifically described within the following
exemptions shall not qualify for an exemption from the vendor license fee:
      (1)   Sales where the applicant has demonstrated by verifiable
documentation that the proceeds are to be used exclusively for religious,
charitable or benevolent purposes. Written proof of such religious, charitable
or benevolent nonprofit status as declared by the IRS (i.e. I.R.C. § 501(c)(3)
documentation) and compliance with the notice provisions of SDCL § 22-25-25(7)
when required, must be presented when the application is submitted. These
exclusions still must comply with the special sanitation fee outlined in
Chapter 50;
      (2)   Sales to wholesale or retail merchants, by sample, for future
delivery made by representatives or established wholesalers or manufacturers;
      (3)   The sales of fruits, vegetables or farm or garden products in their
natural state;
      (4)   Sales by youths aged 15 years and under of lemonade and like items,
and incidentals occurring at and within the boundaries of property at they
reside, shall be exempt from the temporary vendor license and special
sanitation fees;
      (5)   Parking lots on private property, when vendor license application
states that parking of vehicles is the only sales or marketing activity to be
conducted on the premises identified in the vendor application, shall be exempt
from the temporary vendor license and special sanitation fees;
      (6)   A business which has submitted a complete application as required
by this section, which shall include: copies of applicant’s sales tax returns
for the location within the city at which the vendor seeks exemption; proof
documenting that applicant has paid aggregate municipal sales tax from January
1 through July 31 of the calendar year for which the vendor permit application
is submitted, and that such tax payments by applicant equal or exceed the
amount of the combined vendor license and special sanitation fees which
applicant would otherwise be required to pay under division (D)(2) above; and
verification by applicant that it also operates in all other respects in
compliance with all state and federal laws and local ordinances, then that
applicant is exempt from payment of the vendor license and special sanitation
fee required by division (D) above;
      (7)   An automated teller service(s) provided by a bank or credit union,
licensed by the state, through equipment located upon its own business
premises;
      (8)   Retailers that are selling or displaying merchandise on the same
parcel as a permanently established retailer within the city limits that sells
the same products within its establishment on a year-round basis; and
      (9)   (a)   The following activities are exempt from the vendor license
(film and recording) requirement:
            1.   The filming, videotaping or digital recording of images within
the city solely for personal use of the recorder, to be done without
interference with any other use of public rights-of-way or public property
within the city;
            2.   The filming, videotaping or digital recording of images within
the city for intended use in a criminal investigation proceeding; or
            3.   Filming, videotaping or digital recording of images within the
city for public news broadcast or distribution.
         (b)   Although not required to obtain a film permit, any person
engaged in any activity listed above is required to comply with general
regulations governing public safety and health.
   (G)   No transfer of vendor permit or recording agreement. A permit issued
to any person pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
transferred to any other person nor apply to any other location(s) than that
specified in the permit application without the written consent of the
designated city official or as allowed by this chapter. Failure to comply with
this section shall constitute good cause to revoke or suspend the permit.
   (H)   Suspension or revocation of a vendor license.
      (1)   Any vendor license issued pursuant to this subchapter may be
suspended or revoked if the city or a designated official determines:
         (a)   The vendor license activities are being or will be conducted in
violation of any condition required for issuance of the vendor license;
         (b)   The vendor license activities are being or will be conducted in
violation of any provision of this chapter, or in apparent violation of state
or federal laws or regulations;
         (c)   The vendor license activities are being or will be conducted in
a manner which poses a threat to public health, safety, welfare or property; or
         (d)   The vendor license was issued in error or contrary to law.
      (2)   Except for situations of emergency, notices of suspension or
revocation shall be in writing and shall specifically set forth the reasons for
the revocation. In an emergency requiring immediate suspension or revocation,
the city or a designated official may notify the vendor license holder verbally
of the suspension or revocation. A suspension or revocation may be appealed as
provided herein.
   (I)   Refund fee for transient merchant license. The city is hereby
authorized to refund a temporary vendor license fee, provided that written
notice from the applicant requesting that the license be cancelled is received
at the City Finance Office within 30 days of the conclusion of the event. The
city will decide on each individual request. Should a request be denied, the
applicant may appeal the denial to the City Council. In addition, a vendor may
request a refund of the vendor fee by November 15 of each year of the event if
the municipal sales tax paid as described in §
113.17 from January 1 through July 31 and September 1 through October 31 is
equal to or greater than the vendor fee that was paid for the event.
   (J)   Required documentation of sales activities.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of every vendor license holder to maintain
the necessary records to comply with the minimum state requirements of sales
tax reporting and municipal ordinances as applied to a business operator or
retailer, as defined in SDCL § 10-45-1, as well as a sales tax licensee.
Evidence and documents to show proof of compliance with these requirements
shall be provided by the retailer, business operator or licensee immediately
upon the request of any authorized representative of the State Department of
Revenue, any law enforcement officer or any municipal official appointed by the
city to enforce this chapter. The records to be maintained are the following:
         (a)   Sales receipts that are sequentially numbered with duplicate
copies recorded during or immediately upon completion of each transaction, in
the form of cash register tape, written or printed credit card receipts or
handwritten sales receipts that identify the item sold, the sale price, the tax
charged and the time and date of the transaction;
         (b)   Inventory records, including a statement of beginning inventory
of merchandise, for a minimum of three years preceding the date of inspection
of the transaction record, consistent with the requirements of SDCL § 10-45-85;
and
         (c)   A written list of suppliers, including names, addresses and
phone numbers of the supplier, for all suppliers used by the licensee for the
three years preceding the date of inspection of the supplier list, consistent
with the requirements of SDCL § 10-45-87.
      (2)   A violation of this provision shall follow the penalties described
in §
113.99.
   (K)   Appeal. Upon the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit under
this subchapter, the applicant is prohibited from conducting filming,
videotaping or producing motion pictures within the city until such time as an
appeal has been heard and the denial has been reversed as provided herein. Any
person aggrieved by the action of the city in the denial of a license
application shall have the right of appeal. Such appeal shall be taken as
provided for by
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 31.02.03) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 113.30 PEDDLER LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, under the authority of SDCL Chapter 9-34, to
engage in peddler (door to door) sales within the city without first obtaining
a peddler license from the Department of Planning and Permitting.
   (A)   The duration of a peddler license shall be 12 consecutive days, and a
qualified applicant may apply for and purchase additional licenses.
   (B)   Each natural person engaging in peddler sales within the city shall be
required to have a separate peddler license, whether acting for himself or
herself or as an agent or representative of another.
   (C)   No peddler license shall be issued to a corporation, partnership,
association or other legal entity.
   (D)   Every person having a peddler license issued under this subchapter
shall display his or her peddler license upon the request of any person or any
representative of the city. Failure to do so upon request shall be an offense
subject to the penalties of this chapter as in addition to those prescribed in
Chapter 37.
   (E)   No peddler license is required for those persons, specifically
authorized by a I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization in good standing, to
conduct door to door sales activities on behalf of that organization, when
those sales activities are done in full compliance with the requirements of §
113.34.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.01) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.31 FEE.
   The application fee for a peddler license shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution and shall be submitted by the applicant with the
application form.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.02) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018)
§ 113.32 APPLICATION FOR PEDDLER LICENSE.
   (A)   An applicant for a peddler licenses shall complete an application
containing all required information as provided under this subchapter. Failure
to provide any of the required information or providing false or misleading
material information in connection with the application for a peddler license
is a violation of this subchapter and may result in denial of the application,
forfeiture of the application fee in addition to other penalties for a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The information to be provided shall include the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s driver’s license showing his or her name, date of
birth, local and permanent address and photo identification of the applicant;
      (2)   Applicant’s valid state sales tax license or a legible copy, phone
number and vehicle license number applicant will use during the license period;
      (3)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor
or violation of any state or federal law or municipal ordinance or code other
than traffic offenses; the nature of all convictions; the date of all
convictions; the punishment or penalty assessed therefor, if previously
convicted; and the place of conviction;
      (4)   Whether the applicant intends, upon any sale or order, to demand,
accept or receive any payment or deposit of money prior to delivery of the
goods or services sold;
      (5)   The kind of goods, wares, merchandise or services the applicant
intends to peddle within the city if licensed;
      (6)   The last three cities or towns wherein the applicant has worked
before coming to the city;
      (7)   The name of the entity, permanent address, entity’s telephone
number and entity’s federal EIN that the applicant represents, if any;
      (8)   The 12-day period during which the applicant seeks to engage in
business within the city; and
      (9)   Written confirmation that applicant understand the conduct
prohibited under the terms of this subchapter as set out in §
113.34.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.03) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018)
§ 113.33 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application, city staff shall, within two
business days, confirm that it is accurate and complete in all respects,
confirm that applicant has not had a license for such sales revoked in the past
and confirm that the applicant is not a defendant in any pending criminal or
civil claim related to any activities subject to a peddler license.
   (B)   If the applicant is so qualified, the license shall be issued.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.04) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018)
§ 113.34 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   Following the issuance of a peddler license, any of the following behaviors,
in addition to a violation of state statute or city ordinance, shall be a valid
reason to suspend a peddler license.
   (A)   Peddler sales shall be permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Sunday, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the resident.
   (B)   A peddler shall not make false or fraudulent statements concerning the
quality or nature of his or her goods, wares, merchandise or services for the
purpose of inducing another to purchase the goods, wares, merchandise or
services.
   (C)   A peddler selling or soliciting the sale of goods, merchandise or
services shall remain at any house or residence for a period longer than
permitted.
   (D)   A peddler who enters upon premises owned or leased by another shall
leave immediately after having been notified by the owner or possessor of the
premises, or his or her agent, to leave the premises.
   (E)   A peddler shall not enter upon any private premises when the premises
are posted with a sign stating “No Peddlers Allowed,” “No Soliciting” or words
to that effect.
   (F)   Sales of products which violate any provisions of city ordinances or
state law.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.05) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.35 SUSPENSION OF PEDDLER LICENSE.
   In addition to the penalties authorized pursuant to
Chapter 37, any peddler license issued under the provisions of this subchapter
may be suspended for any material violation of any provision of this chapter,
state law or other city ordinance, by the Code Enforcement Officer or a city
police officer after consideration of a credible report of the alleged
violation. Upon suspension, the peddler license shall be immediately
surrendered, and failure to do so shall be an additional offense and subject to
the penalties prescribed in §
113.99 and also those in
Chapter 37. An appeal to the city of a suspension may be had by licensee as
provided for in §§
37.55 through
37.61.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.06) (Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06, passed 7-5-2018)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   A violation of this chapter may occur daily and shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of 80% of the combined cost of a vendor license
and the special sanitation fee, plus a separate administrative fee as shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, to be paid before a vendor
license can be issued to the vendor in violation. To avoid additional civil
penalty fees for each separate day of operation violation of this chapter, the
vendor shall be required to obtain a valid vendors license from the City
Finance Office within 12 hours of the issuance of the citation. No right to
appeal this penalty to the City Council shall exist until the full payment of
the penalty assessed against the vendor has been paid to the city and verified
by the Finance Office. Any vendor exercising the right to appeal this penalty
provision shall file its request for refund within 30 days of the issuance of
the license, and the vendor may appear in person at the time of the public
hearing before the Council, or may be represented by an attorney licensed to
practice in the state. In addition to statements by the vendor during such
public hearing, the Council shall consider and determine the credibility of any
written material in regard to the appeal submitted to the Council prior to the
close of the public hearing.
      (2)   The penalty for a violation of this chapter for an ATM as
identified in §
113.17(C) shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
      (3)   Any vendor found to be operating without a vendor license and
special sanitation fee twice within a 24-month period shall be prohibited from
obtaining a vendor license in the future unless the vendor license application
is accompanied by combined payment of the administrative penalty and
administrative fee set forth in division (A)(2) above, for each separate
violation of this chapter. Any person or entity who is required to obtain a
vendor license and special sanitation fee and who knowingly allows an
unlicensed vendor to conduct or engage in business on property they own or
which is subject to their control shall be prohibited from obtaining a vendor
license for a period of 400 days after the date of violation.
      (4)   In addition to the civil penalty and administrative fee set forth
above, a violation of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor, punishable by the
maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state, pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-
2.
      (5)   In addition, any violation of the provisions of this chapter may
result in the revocation and/or suspension of any license issued pursuant to
any section of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 31.01.04)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
113.30 through
113.35 shall be subject to a penalty pursuant to division (A) above in addition
to the general penalty provisions contained in
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 31.03.07)
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-25-2017; Ord. 2017-05, passed 5-31-2017; Ord. 2018-06,
passed 7-5-2018)
CHAPTER 114: TRANSIT OPERATORS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Scope and purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
Transit License Application and Regulation
   
114.15   License; application; false statements
   
114.16   Expiration of license
   
114.17   Annual inspection and verification required
   
114.18   Transit business license required
   
114.19   Application
   
114.20   Application; investigation; issuance
   
114.21   Fee
   
114.22   License number to be displayed on vehicle
   
114.23   Rate schedule
   
114.24   Payment of fare
   
114.25   Driver’s license required
   
114.26   To be carried on person and exhibited upon request
   
114.27   Smoking prohibited
   
114.28   Transporting intoxicating liquor prohibited
   
114.29   Air transit prohibited
   
114.30   Suspension; revocation
Pedicabs
   
114.45   Definitions
   
114.46   License required
   
114.47   License fee
   
114.48   License term
   
114.49   Number of licenses
   
114.50   License lottery
   
114.51   Conditional temporary licenses
   
114.52   License application
   
114.53   Insurance required
   
114.54   Pedicab inspections
   
114.55   Pedicab vehicle operation
   
114.56   Operating restrictions and conditions
   
114.57   Revocation or suspension of license
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow the city to provide a limited
framework of regulations to ensure that transit operators accepting fares for
services originating and/or terminating within the city or when a paying
passenger enters or exits a vehicle are providing an acceptable level of safe
and affordable service that will meet transit needs of the community.
(Prior Code, § 37.01.01) (Ord. 2013-08, passed 7-18-2013; Ord. 2014-04, passed
3-19-2014)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR TRANSPORT SERVICE. Any transit service providing observation,
sightseeing or passenger transportation or delivery services originating or
terminating with the city limits of and within the immediate airspace over the
city, in a manner not specifically authorized or approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
   DIGITAL NETWORK. Any online-enabled application, software, website or system
offered or utilized by a transportation network company that enables a
prearranged ride with a transportation network company driver.
   DRIVER. One who actually engages in the driving of a vehicle for hire.
   ENGAGING IN BUSINESS. Any person shall be deemed to have engaged in the
business of operating a vehicle for hire under §§
114.15 through
114.57 if he or she keeps or maintains any such vehicle for the purpose of
engaging in a vehicle for hire business or if he or she accepts or permits any
employee to accept any money or other thing of value from any such passenger
for transportation in such vehicle. Accepting such a passenger under the guise
that such transportation is purely gratuitous, and that no payment of
compensation or consideration is required shall not be deemed to remove such
transaction from the effect of this chapter. In any case where the driver or
any person in charge of any such vehicle does in fact accept any money or other
thing of value, even though the money or thing of value is accepted or
purported to be accepted as a gift or present or purported gift or present,
such gift or present, or such purported gift or present, shall constitute prima
facie evidence of an intent to accept compensation or hire for such
transportation.
   OPERATING. A person is operating a transit business within the meaning of
this chapter if any fare or transportation service, whether on a public right-
of-way or in airspace over the city, of any kind or nature which originates
within the city.
   OPERATOR. A person engaged in operating a taxicab or transit business.
   PEDICAB. A non-motorized three-wheel bicycle used to carry passengers for
hire or similar vehicle with an electric motor that meets the requirements or
characteristics of an electric-assisted bicycle. If this vehicle is powered
completely or in part by the physical effort of the driver, it shall also be
required to meet the slow-moving vehicle equipment requirements set forth at
SDCL Chapter 32-15.
   PEDICAB BUSINESS. The business of operating a pedicab for hire for the
recreation or physical transportation of the general public.
   PEDICAB DRIVER. Any person who operates, drives or propels a pedicab.
   PEDICAB DRIVER LICENSE. A license granted to operate a pedicab within the
boundaries of the city.
   PERSONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is used by a transportation network company
driver to provide a prearranged ride and is owned, leased or otherwise
authorized for use by the transportation network company driver. The term does
not include any taxicab, limousine or for-hire vehicle.
   PRE-ARRANGED RIDE. The provision of transportation by a driver to a rider,
beginning when a driver accepts a rider’s request for a ride through a digital
network controlled by a transportation network company, continuing while the
driver transports a requesting rider and ending when the last requesting rider
departs from the personal vehicle. The term does not include transportation
provided through a shared expense carpool or vanpool arrangement or by using a
taxicab, limousine or other for-hire vehicle.
   SEATING CAPACITY. The number of persons, not including the driver, who can
be conveniently seated in a taxicab without crowding.
   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle for carrying passengers, with a seating capacity
for seven persons or less, not including the driver, not traveling any definite
or prescribed route, operated by a driver and carrying or accepting passengers
for hire. The term TAXICAB shall not include funeral cars or ambulances.
   TRANSIT BUSINESS LICENSE. The license under §§
114.15 through
114.30 which shall be issued to an applicant when the application which he or
she has submitted is approved as provided for in this chapter.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC). A corporation, partnership, sole
proprietorship or other entity that uses a digital network to connect
transportation network company riders to transportation network company drivers
who provide prearranged rides and that does not control, direct or manage the
personal vehicles or transportation network company drivers that connect to its
digital network, except where agreed to by written contract.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER. A person who receives connections to
potential riders and related services from a transportation network company in
exchange for payment of a fee to the transportation network company and who
uses a personal vehicle to provide a prearranged ride to riders upon connection
through a digital network controlled by a transportation network company in
return for compensation or payment of a fee.
    TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY RIDER. A person who uses a transportation
network company’s digital network to connect with a transportation network
driver who provides a prearranged ride to the person in the driver’s personal
vehicle between points chosen by the person.
   VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Any vehicle licensed or registered under this chapter,
including, but not limited to, bus or motorbus, pedicab, taxicab, limousine or
Transportation Network Company drivers.
(Prior Code, § 37.01.02) (Ord. 2024-02, passed 4-3-2024)
TRANSIT LICENSE APPLICATION AND REGULATION
§ 114.15 LICENSE; APPLICATION; FALSE STATEMENTS.
   Any transit operation license issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be revoked by the Finance Office, Police Department or Code Enforcement
Office by giving notice to the license holder upon discovery of any false,
material statement or document submitted as part of or in support of the
application for the license. After notification, the licensee may appeal the
revocation under the procedure established in §§
37.55 through
37.61.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.01)
§ 114.16 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Any transit business license issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall expire on January 31 of the licensing year for which the license was
issued. A licensing year, for the purposes of this section, begins February 1
and ends January 31 of the next calendar year, unless sooner revoked, canceled
or otherwise terminated. After a completed application is submitted to the City
Finance Office, the applicant will be notified within ten business days if the
license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.02)
§ 114.17 ANNUAL INSPECTION AND VERIFICATION REQUIRED.
   When submitting an application or renewal for a transit operation license,
or applying to add another vehicle to operate during the license period, the
applicant/operator shall document that each vehicle has been inspected and that
at the time the application is submitted the operator shall provide a separate
verification that each vehicle sought to be licensed meets all state laws for
all safety standards for equipment specifications, lighting and brakes.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.03)
§ 114.18 TRANSIT BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a transit business
without a transit business license set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.04) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.19 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a transit business license to operate
a taxicab or transit business in the city shall make application in writing, or
by using Citizenserve, to the Finance Office in the general form required to
obtain all information necessary for consideration for the issuance of a
transit operation license, which shall include the following additional
information:
      (1)   Business name, applicant’s name, phone number, street address and
mailing address, email address;
      (2)   Previous experience in the business, if the applicant has not been
licensed before;
      (3)   Number of vehicles to be operated within the city; and
      (4)   A list of driver’s names will be provided to the Finance Office.
   (B)   The owner will also sign an affidavit which shall include the
following information.
      (1)   The applicant and the operator are licensed drivers and is in good
standing with the law.
      (2)   The applicant and operator will abide by all state and city laws
governing the transit business.
      (3)   Each vehicle sought to be licensed is covered by liability
insurance with a minimum amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution limit of liability and medical cost coverage.
      (4)   Each vehicle proposed to be licensed has been inspected and that on
the date of application that vehicle meets all applicable laws of the state
concerning equipment, lights, tires and all other safety-related equipment.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.05)
§ 114.20 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE.
   The application for a taxicab driver’s license shall be investigated by the
Chief of Police upon request of the Finance Office. That investigation report
may recommend to approve or deny the application, based on the results of the
investigation and applicant’s submitted information. Any denial is subject to
appeal to the City Council as set forth in
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.06)
§ 114.21 FEE.
   For each applicant applying to have one to four vehicles authorized to
operate within the city under this subchapter, the fee submitted with the
application shall be as set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for each
vehicle. To have five or more vehicles authorized to operate within the city,
the fee shall be as set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.07)
§ 114.22 LICENSE NUMBER TO BE DISPLAYED ON VEHICLE.
   Each vehicle operated by a business with an approved application as outlined
in §
114.19 shall maintain a copy of the approved license within the vehicle at all
times. In addition, each vehicle shall be clearly identified with signage of
not less than two square feet that includes the name of the approved business.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.08)
§ 114.23 RATE SCHEDULE.
   Each vehicle of any type licensed and operated under this subchapter shall
post the standard transit rates in a legible and readable manner, with letters
at least two inches tall, in a location clearly visible to all passengers
within the vehicle, the standard rates which will be charged to transport
passengers for a stated distance or to a stated destination.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.09)
§ 114.24 PAYMENT OF FARE.
   Each passenger must pay the fare to the operator based upon the registered
rate displayed on the transit vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.10)
§ 114.25 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive, or be engaged or employed in the business of driving
or operating, upon the streets of the city, any transit vehicle without having
in their possession a valid state driver’s license, or a driver’s license
recognized as valid under state law.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.11) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.26 TO BE CARRIED ON PERSON AND EXHIBITED UPON REQUEST.
   The operator of each vehicle shall come to City Hall to pick up his or her
license and receive the official City Seal on the license. He or she must
provide his or her valid driver’s license at this time. Each operator of a
vehicle licensed under this subchapter shall have his or her valid driver’s
license in his or her possession along with the city issued taxi/transit
operator license which has affixed the City Seal whenever he or she is
operating, occupying or in control of a licensed transit vehicle and shall
exhibit the same for inspection whenever the operator is directed to do so by a
law enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.12)
§ 114.27 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   All vehicles operated under a transit business license within the city shall
not permit passengers or operators to smoke, chew or otherwise utilize tobacco
or similar unsafe products while operating or occupying the licensed vehicle,
as required by SDCL §§ 34-46-13 and 34-46-14.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.13) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.28 TRANSPORTING INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.
   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be subject to revocation at
any time by the Common Council, if any taxicab operated or used by the licensee
shall be used for the delivery or transportation of intoxicating liquor in a
manner that is in violation of state law or state regulations. All
transportation of alcoholic beverages require a transportation license issued
by the ATF and is required to be displayed in any vehicle visible to the public
and law enforcement. Upon the revocation, the license fee paid shall be
retained by the city.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.14) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.29 AIR TRANSIT PROHIBITED.
   No person or business shall be permitted to operate an air transit or air
sightseeing business within the airspace over or within the municipal limits of
the city, except as specifically approved by a regulation, rule or decision of
the Federal Aviation Administration.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.15) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.30 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   Any license issued under this subchapter may be revoked, for cause, by the
Council, after notice to the holder of the license and an opportunity for
hearing before the Council. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to
suspend any license issued under this subchapter for good cause pending a
hearing before the Council. The power to suspend the license shall be exercised
only if it shall appear to the Chief of Police that there is probable cause to
believe that the holder of the license has committed a crime involving moral
turpitude. The holder of any license suspended by the Chief of Police shall,
after such notification, have the right to appeal the suspension under the
procedure established in §§
37.55 through
37.61. As used herein, the term CHIEF OF POLICE shall include the Chief of
Police and any subordinate officer temporarily acting as the officer in charge
of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 37.02.16)
PEDICABS
§ 114.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDICAB. A non-motorized three-wheel bicycle used to carry passengers for
hire or similar vehicle with an electric motor that meets the requirements or
characteristics of an electric-assisted bicycle.
   PEDICAB BUSINESS. The business of operating a pedicab for hire for the
recreational or physical transportation of the general public.
   PEDICAB DRIVER. Any person who operates, drives or propels a pedicab.
   PEDICAB DRIVER LICENSE. A license granted to operate a pedicab in the city.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.01)
§ 114.46 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may operate a pedicab or engage in any pedicab business without
obtaining a pedicab driver license.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.02) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.47 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual licensing fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution per pedicab.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.03)
§ 114.48 LICENSE TERM.
   Any pedicab license issued under this subchapter becomes effective on
February 1, or on the date the license granted, and expires on January 31 of
the following year unless sooner revoked, canceled or otherwise terminated.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.04)
§ 114.49 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The annual number of pedicab licenses is limited to ten. In the event the
numerical cap is lowered to an amount less than the number of existing
licenses, no existing license will be prevented from continuing operation
during the license term. This exception does not prevent a license from being
suspended or revoked for cause.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.05)
§ 114.50 LICENSE LOTTERY.
   Pedicab license applications will be accepted according to the following
special procedures. These procedures will apply whenever a pedicab license
becomes available.
   (A)   When a pedicab license becomes available, whether because of the end
of the licensing term, or because of revocation, the city will publish an
invitation for applications on the city’s website stating the deadline to
apply, and the location applications may be submitted. No application will be
accepted prior to the publication of the invitation or after the deadline
established in the invitation.
   (B)   Applications submitted to an invitation must be submitted in writing
and sealed. An applicant may not supplement his, her or their application after
the deadline has passed.
   (C)   Only one application is allowable per pedicab. If more than one
application is submitted for a pedicab, then this submittal will be deemed a
fraudulent application and removed from the lottery. In addition, all other
applications from the violating pedicab business or individual will be deemed
invalid and removed from the lottery regardless whether they are valid or not.
Serial numbers/vehicle identification numbers (VINs) provided in the
applications will be reviewed from all submitted applications following the
lottery, and if any other application shares the same serial number/VIN, then
any license awarded will be forfeited.
   (D)   Once the application deadline has passed, the Finance Officer or
designee will randomly give each sealed application a number. The Finance
Officer or designee will enter these numbers into a random number generator,
such as www.random.org, to randomly draw the numbers. The Finance Officer or
designee will randomly draw ten numbers from the pool of sealed applications
using the random number generator. The Finance Officer will open the
applications in the order drawn and review each application for completeness.
Complete applications drawn will be granted a license. If an application is
incomplete or invalid, this application will be removed from competition and a
new application will be selected from the remaining undrawn applications.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.06)
§ 114.51 CONDITIONAL TEMPORARY LICENSES.
   The city may issue additional conditional temporary pedicab licenses beyond
the ten yearly licenses provided in §
114.49. No conditional temporary pedicab license may be issued to operate
between July 15 and August 15. Any pedicab applying for a conditional temporary
license must submit an application as provided under §
114.50. Additionally, any pedicab must abide by all regulations, including, but
not limited to, insurance, inspection and other requirements as provided in
this subchapter unless expressly provided. Conditional temporary licenses are
only valid for five days. A pedicab may receive multiple conditional temporary
licenses in a year. The fee for a conditional pedicab license shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per license.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.07)
§ 114.52 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a pedicab license under this subchapter will be made
on forms provided by the Finance Officer and will contain such information as
deemed necessary. The Finance Officer may require applications be submitted
through Citizenserve.
   (B)   The application may require the following information:
      (1)   Business name, applicant’s name, phone number, street address and
mailing address, email address;
      (2)   Previous experience in the business, if the applicant has not been
licensed before;
      (3)   A list of all driver’s names which may operate the licensed pedicab
and copies of all driver’s licenses; and
      (4)   The application must contain a photo of the pedicab and a photo of
the serial number/VIN located on the pedicab.
   (C)   The pedicab owner/operator will also sign an affidavit which shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The applicant, operators and drivers are all licensed drivers and
are in good standing with the law;
      (2)   The applicant has not submitted more than one pedicab license
application for the pedicab associated with this application;
      (3)   The applicant, operators and drivers will abide by all state and
city laws governing the use of pedicabs, taxis and bicycles on the public
streets;
      (4)   The applicant, operators and drivers are all over 18 years old;
      (5)   The applicant, operators and drivers have not been convicted of a
felony within the past five years;
      (6)   The applicant, operators and drivers each have no more than three
moving violations within the past three years;
      (7)   The applicant, operators and drivers each have not been convicted
of careless driving, reckless driving or driving under the influence within the
past three years;
      (8)   Each pedicab sought to be licensed is covered by liability
insurance with a minimum amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution limit of liability and medical cost coverage; and
      (9)   Each pedicab proposed to be licensed has been inspected and that on
the date of application that vehicle meets all applicable laws of the state
concerning equipment, lights, tires and all other safety-related equipment.
   (D)   A supplement affidavit attesting to the above requirements must be
submitted if any additional drivers not identified in the application are
allowed to operate the pedicab. The failure to supplement the affidavit may
result in immediate revocation or suspension of the pedicab license.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.08)
§ 114.53 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each pedicab sought to be licensed must be covered by liability
insurance with a minimum amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution limit of liability and medical cost coverage.
   (B)   Proof of insurance coverage must be provided to city before operating.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.09)
§ 114.54 PEDICAB INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Annual inspections. Any pedicab operating in the city must be
inspected annually by the City Police Department. The City Police Department
may designate minimum safety standards for equipment and defects. Any pedicab
inspected which does not meet the minimum safety standards as determined by the
City Police Department will be classified as “out of service” and may not
operate until such defects are cured.
   (B)   Periodic inspections. The City Police Department, or inspection
designee, reserves the right to examine and inspect each and every licensed
pedicab, including driver credentials, at any reasonable time. The intent of
such inspection is to ensure compliance with the rules established in this
subchapter.
   (C)   Seizure of license. Failure to submit a pedicab to an annual or
periodic inspection, or classification of a pedicab as “out of service,” may
result in the seizure of a pedicab license by the city. The city may hold a
seized license until the pedicab is inspected and found to be in a safe
condition. In the event of such a seizure, the inspector will immediately
notify the licensee in writing, specifying in detail the cause for seizure and
stating that the licensee has a right to a city review of the seizure. If the
city affirms the seizure, the aggrieved party may utilize the appeal process as
provided in §§
37.55 through
37.61.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.10)
§ 114.55 PEDICAB VEHICLE OPERATION.
   Every pedicab must be operated in compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local traffic laws, and in a manner so as to assure the safety of
person and property. The pedicabs applicant, operators and drivers are solely
responsible for being aware of and obeying all laws, ordinances and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.11)
§ 114.56 OPERATING RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS.
   All pedicabs must abide by the following operating restrictions and
conditions. The failure to strictly follow these restrictions and conditions
may result in the immediate revocation or suspension of the pedicab license.
   (A)   No pedicab will be operated upon a public sidewalk.
   (B)   No pedicab will use any public street or other public property as a
waiting area unless such area is a legal motor vehicle parking area, or is a
designated pedicab waiting area. No pedicab may wait in a designated taxi or
rideshare drop-off or pickup location.
   (C)   All pedicabs, when operating between dusk and dawn, must make use of
working battery powered lights. Each pedicab must be equipped with at least one
headlight capable of projecting a beam of white light for a distance of 300
feet and two red taillights mounted on the right and left, respectively, on the
rear exterior of the vehicle. Taillights must be plainly visible from all
distances within 500 feet to the rear of the pedicab.
   (D)   All pedicabs must be equipped with a front and rear braking system
which is operated by the pedicab driver from their normal position of operation
while driving the pedicab and be capable of causing a fully loaded passenger
compartment to come to a complete stop.
   (E)   All pedicabs must be, at all reasonable times, subject to inspection
by the City Police Department. All pedicabs must pass inspection before
operation.
   (F)   All pedicabs must display a valid license issued by the city on the
pedicab.
   (G)   Pedicab drivers must have in their possession both a valid driver’s
license and proof of insurance while in control of any pedicab and must make
these documents available to law enforcement or a city inspector.
   (H)   All pedicab drivers must obey and comply with any lawful order or
discretion of any law enforcement officer, traffic control agent or city
inspector and must refrain from the use of any profane language or from
interference with such officials while in the performance of their duties.
   (I)   No pedicab driver may consume alcoholic beverages, or any other mind-
altering substance while on duty or allow any occupant of the pedicab to drink
alcoholic beverages or possess an open container of alcoholic beverages.
   (J)   No pedicab driver may allow a passenger to stand up while the pedicab
is in motion.
   (K)   No pedicab driver may permit more passengers to be carried in a
pedicab than the pedicab is designed to accommodate, with the exception that
children under 40 pounds may be seated upon the lap of another passenger.
   (L)   No pedicab driver may allow a passenger or other individual to drive
his or her pedicab unless that individual is identified in the application as
an authorized driver.
   (M)   Pedicabs may operate on city parks and recreation property only with
prior written approval from the Public Works Director.
   (N)   Pedicabs are prohibited from blocking traffic, waiting for passengers
or picking up/dropping off passengers on Main Street.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.12) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.57 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   Any violation of any federal or state law or ordinance may result in the
revocation or suspension of any pedicab license. Additionally, if the applicant
holds more than one license, the city may revoke or suspend all licenses held
by the applicant. Additionally, any applicant who has his or her license
revoked or suspended may be denied future licenses. The license holder has no
property rights or entitlement in a pedicab license.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.13)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   As provided for at SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2), any person found to
be guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a maximum punishment of a fine as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 37.01.03)
   (B)   In addition to any penalty provided under federal law, state law or
ordinance, any pedicab applicant, operator or driver who violates any traffic
law, city ordinance, inspection requirement or operation condition while
operating a pedicab may result in the seizure of the pedicab license.
Additionally, any pedicab driver operating a pedicab without a license may be
subject to arrest and the pedicab towed or seized. All laws, ordinances and
regulations may be enforced by any law enforcement officer, designated
inspector and the City Code Enforcement Officers.
(Prior Code, § 37.04.14)
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 4-3-2024)
CHAPTER 115: AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Definitions
License Requirements
   
115.15   License requirements generally; exceptions
   
115.16   Application; fee
   
115.17   Application; investigation; review of findings
   
115.18   License; issuance; required findings; term
   
115.19   No transfer
   
115.20   Defacing prohibited
   
115.21   Rate schedules
   
115.22   Renewal of license
   
115.23   Revocation of license
Ambulance Vehicles, Drivers and Attendants; Requirements and Standards
   
115.35   Ambulance vehicle standards
   
115.36   Ambulance equipment standards
   
115.37   Drivers and attendants; information record
   
115.38   Equipment, premises and records to be available for inspection
   
115.39   Obedience to traffic laws, ordinances and regulations
   
115.40   Transporting patients; attendant required
   
115.41   Going to scene of accident without request
   
115.42   False statements or misrepresentations of fact in carrying on business
   
115.43   Refusal of service
 
   
115.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see SDCL Chapter 34-11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle that is
specifically designed or constructed and equipped, and is intended to be used
for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients, except
any such motor vehicle owned by, or operated under the direct control of the
United States.
   ATTENDANT. A trained and/or qualified individual responsible for the
operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the
attendant also serves as driver.
   ATTENDANT-DRIVER. A person who is qualified as an attendant and a driver.
   CITY. City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   DRIVER. An individual who drives an ambulance.
   LICENSE OFFICER. The City Finance Officer
   PATIENT. An individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose or
organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the
United States.
(Prior Code, § 38.01.01) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
§ 115.15 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish,
operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to
be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon
the streets, alleys or any public way or place of the city, unless he or she
holds a currently valid license for an ambulance service as required by SDCL
Chapter 34-11, as well as a license issued pursuant to this subchapter. No
license shall be issued under this subchapter to any new applicant unless the
Common Council shall find that additional ambulance service is required by
public convenience and necessity, as shown by reliable dispatch records or
comparable documentation showing that those ambulance services licensed prior
to the pending application are unable to respond within the required time
limits. In the absence of such findings, any new applicant shall be denied. The
city shall not be exempt from licensing requirements under this subchapter for
the operation of its municipal ambulance service. However, any ambulance
service in operation at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is
passed shall have 45 days after the effective date of said ordinance to submit
its completed application.
   (B)   No such licenses shall be required for an ambulance which:
       (1)   Is an ambulance operated by an agency of the United States;
      (2)   Is an ambulance operated from a location or headquarters outside of
the city in response to a request from the County Dispatch to transport
patients when any ambulance service licensed by the city is unable to provide
the needed response; or
      (3)   Is an ambulance otherwise exempt under the authority of SDCL § 34-
11-9.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.01) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.16 APPLICATION; FEE.
   Applications for ambulance licenses hereunder shall be made upon the forms
as may be prepared or prescribed by Finance Officer and shall contain:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and of the named owner of the
ambulance service;
   (B)   The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant
does business and proposes to do business;
   (C)   A complete copy of the state application and all associated
certificates as described in SDCL § 34-11-3 submitted by applicant to obtain
the state license for the proposed ambulance service;
   (D)   The location and description of the place or places from which it is
intended to operate to provide service to residents of the city;
   (E)   Documentation confirming that the applicant and all vehicles for which
applicant seeks authority to operate within the city are currently licensed by
the state and in compliance with all ambulance vehicle and equipment laws and
requirements set by the state, accompanied by such other information as the
Finance Officer shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of
compliance with this subchapter;
   (F)   An accompanying license fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution; and
   (G)   A copy of applicant’s business license application under
Chapter 156 to conduct business in the city.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.02) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.17 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; REVIEW OF FINDINGS.
   The Finance Officer shall within ten business days after receipt of an
application for an ambulance license as provided for herein, review the
application to determine if it is complete and, if not, to request the
additional information from the applicant. Upon receipt of the complete
application and any supplemental information requested, the Finance Officer
shall report his or her findings to the city and make a recommendation
regarding whether the application as submitted meets all the requirement of
this chapter, for approval by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.03) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.18 LICENSE; ISSUANCE; REQUIRED FINDINGS; TERM.
   Upon a finding that all state and city requirements for licensure have been
met and the approval of the City Council, the Finance Officer shall issue an
ambulance license to any applicant so approved. The license shall be valid for
a period of one year unless earlier suspended, revoked or otherwise terminated
at the Common Council’s sole discretion. No operator may provide ambulance
service unless both the driver of the ambulance and the attendant on duty in
the ambulance possess certification and licensure as required by the state and
the city.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.06) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.19 NO TRANSFER.
   Any change of ownership of a licensed ambulance shall terminate the license
and shall require a new application and a new license and conformance with all
the requirements of this subchapter as upon original licensing.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.07) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.20 DEFACING PROHIBITED.
   No official entry made upon a license may be defaced, removed or
obliterated.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.08) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.21 RATE SCHEDULES.
   The applicant and any operator of an ambulance service licensed under this
chapter shall file with the Finance Office, annually and whenever changed, a
schedule of rates for ambulance services. The applicant and any operator of an
ambulance service licensed under this chapter shall in addition maintain within
the ambulance vehicle and within each place of business a schedule of such
rates. It is unlawful for any owner, driver or attendant of any ambulance to
charge in excess of the rates as may be set forth in the rate schedule.
(Prior Code, § 38.05.01) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.22 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Renewal of any license hereunder, upon expiration for any reason or after
revocation, shall require conformance with all the requirements of this
subchapter as upon original licensing.
(Prior Code, § 38.05.02) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.23 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Common Council may and is authorized to suspend or revoke a license
issued hereunder for failure of a license to comply and to maintain compliance
with the requirements of state law and state regulations or for violation of
any provisions, standards or requirements of this subchapter. Within 30 days
after a suspension, the license shall be afforded a hearing, after reasonable
notice. The Common Council shall, within 30 days after conclusion of the
hearing, issue a written decision (which shall include written findings) as to
the suspension of the license. The written decision shall be promptly
transmitted to the licensee to whom it refers.
(Prior Code, § 38.05.03) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
AMBULANCE VEHICLES, DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS; REQUIREMENTS
AND STANDARDS
§ 115.35 AMBULANCE VEHICLE STANDARDS.
   Each ambulance service shall, at all times when in use operation as such,
meet the minimum standards for equipment, operation, training and professional
behavior as prescribed by the state in SDCL Chapter 34-11 and related ARSD
Article 44:05.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.04) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.36 AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required equipment in each ambulance shall meet the minimum standards
as established by SDCL Chapter 34-11 and related ARSD Article 44:05.
   (B)   Each operator of an ambulance service licensed under this chapter
shall comply at all times with all subsequent regulations governing the
operation, the vehicles, the equipment and employees as may be established by
the state.
(Prior Code, § 38.02.05) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.37 DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS; INFORMATION RECORD.
   (A)   Generally. For each driver and attendant employed by a licensed
ambulance service or any applicant for a license who may be present at any time
in the city as part of their employment duties hereunder, in addition to the
documents required for the ambulance service license application, there shall
be submitted upon such forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the City
Finance Office the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s full name, current residence and all places of
residence for five years previous to submission of the information to the
Finance Office;
      (2)   Written confirmation that the employee meets all the minimum
standards as established by SDCL Chapter 34-11 and related ARSD Article 44:05;
and
       (3)   Such other information as the City Finance Officer shall deem
reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 38.03.01)
   (B)   Information record review. The Finance Officer shall, within ten
business days after receipt of an application as provided for herein, review
the information provided and notify the licensed ambulance service if it
appears that any such driver and/or attendant fails to meet any of the minimum
standards established by SDCL Chapter 34-11 and related ARSD Article 44:05.
(Prior Code, § 38.03.02)
(Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.38 EQUIPMENT, PREMISES AND RECORDS TO BE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION.
   Each licensed ambulance, its equipment and the premises designated in the
application, and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such,
shall be open to inspection upon request by the city a designated official
during business hours of operation. Any initial, semiannual or other ambulance,
equipment and premises inspection reports as provided for by state law or
regulations shall be filed by the operator with the City Finance Office and
shall be prima facie evidence of compliance or noncompliance with, or violation
of, the provisions, standards and requirements provided for by state law or
regulation, for the licensing of ambulances. Upon suspension, revocation or
termination of an ambulance license hereunder, the ambulance shall cease
operations as such.
(Prior Code, § 38.04.01) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.39 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The driver of an ambulance, when responding to an emergency call or
while transporting a patient, shall comply with all the requirements for safe
emergency vehicle operation as established by state law at SDCL Chapter 32-31.
   (B)   Those provisions shall not relieve the driver of an ambulance from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall the
provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his or her reckless
disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 38.04.02) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
§ 115.40 TRANSPORTING PATIENTS; ATTENDANT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry for hire any person in any ambulance
upon the streets of the city unless there shall be an attendant in the
ambulance in addition to the driver thereof.
(Prior Code, § 38.04.03) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.41 GOING TO SCENE OF ACCIDENT WITHOUT REQUEST.
   It is unlawful for any person licensed under this subchapter to go to the
scene of any accident unless a request for ambulance service to a specific
location has been communicated to the licensed ambulance service by the law
enforcement dispatch service serving the county.
(Prior Code, § 38.04.04) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.42 FALSE STATEMENTS OR MISREPRESENTATIONS OF FACT IN CARRYING ON
BUSINESS.
   It is unlawful for any licensee under this subchapter to make any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in carrying on the business for which
the license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 38.04.05) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.43 REFUSAL OF SERVICE.
   After having received a call from the law enforcement dispatch serving the
county, it is unlawful for any licensed ambulance service to refuse the service
for any reason except where aid is declined by the patient or for other reasons
beyond the control of the operator.
(Prior Code, § 38.04.06) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating, or failing to comply with, the provision of any
section of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and as
provided for by SDCL § 22-6-2, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
maximum fine in an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days or to both such
fine and imprisonment as provided therein.
(Prior Code, § 38.01.02) (Ord. 2013-12, passed 9-3-2013)
CHAPTER 116: CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
116.01   Intent
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   Cannabis establishment license required
   
116.04   Number of licenses restricted
   
116.05   Application process
   
116.06   Transfer or modification of license
   
116.07   License to remain active
   
116.08   Fees established
   
116.09   General obligations of licensee
   
116.10   Fire and building regulations
   
116.11   Financial responsibility
   
116.12   Unauthorized conduct relating to cannabis
   
116.13   Signage and advertising
   
116.14   Suspension and revocation
   
116.15   Liability and indemnification
   
116.16   Compliance with other applicable laws
   
116.17   Issuance of local medical cannabis establishment permits and/or
licenses
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 INTENT.
   The City Council hereby enacts the following licensing ordinances in order
to ensure that cannabis establishments within the municipal boundaries of the
city operate in a manner which complies with state laws and regulations,
protects the health, safety and welfare of the general public, prevents
potential conflicts and issues arising from ownership and employees, recognizes
certain safety and security considerations and minimizes risk of unauthorized
use or access of cannabis by the general public.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-1) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless an
alternative definition is explicitly stated in this section, this chapter
utilizes the definitions for cannabis-related terms which are defined by SDCL §
34-20G-1.
   APPLICANT. A person or entity seeking or renewing a cannabis establishment
license.
   CANNABIS or MARIJUANA. All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether
growing or not, in its natural and unaltered state, except for drying or curing
and crushing or crumbling. The term includes an altered state of marijuana
absorbed into the human body. The term does not include fiber produced from the
mature stalks of such plant, or oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant.
The term does not include the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of that
plant, including the seeds thereof and all derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids,
isomers, acids, salts and salts of isomers, whether growing or not, with a
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than 0.3% on a dry
weight basis.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY. A licensed entity that acquires, possesses,
cultivates, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or sells cannabis and
related supplies to a cannabis establishment.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A licensed entity that acquires, possesses, stores,
delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses cannabis,
cannabis products, paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials.
   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis testing
facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility or a cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE or LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to this
chapter for the purpose of operating a type of cannabis establishment.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. A licensed entity that acquires,
possesses, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or sells
cannabis products to a cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY. A licensed entity authorized to analyze the
safety and potency of cannabis.
   CITY. The City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   FINANCE OFFICER. The Finance Officer of the City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   LICENSEE. A person, people or entity in possession of a cannabis
establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY. An entity engaged in diagnosing, treating, caring
for or counseling people requiring mental health services, including substance
abuse disorders, but which does not regularly provide other types of personal
health services.
   RETAIL AREA. The area of a cannabis establishment where a customer can view
and/or purchase cannabis or cannabis products.
   SECURED AREA. All parts of a cannabis dispensary except an unsecured waiting
room where people may gather before entering the verification lobby or after
leaving the secured exit.
   SECURED EXIT. The controlled location of a cannabis dispensary located
between the retail area of a cannabis dispensary and the non-secured area or
exterior with a secured door at both its entrance and exit which allows
eligible persons to exit the retail area.
   STATE. The State of South Dakota.
   VERIFICATION LOBBY. The controlled location of a cannabis dispensary located
between the non-secured area or exterior of a cannabis dispensary and the
retail floor with a secured door at both its entrance and exit which allows
eligible persons to enter the retail area.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-2) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.03 CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Classes of license. Each cannabis establishments shall have its own
class of license. The four license classes are Cannabis Cultivation License,
Cannabis Dispensary License, Cannabis Product Manufacturing License and
Cannabis Testing License.
   (B)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
create or operate a cannabis establishment in the city without first having
obtained a license from the city and a registration certificate from the state
for each cannabis establishment to be operated in connection with such
business. Such license and certification shall be always kept current, and the
failure to maintain a current license and certification shall constitute a
violation of this section.
   (C)   Multiple licenses. A person or entity who intends to conduct
activities which would meet the definition of multiple cannabis establishments
must, prior to operating such cannabis establishments, obtain a license for
each class of cannabis establishment. A person or entity may hold more than one
class of license except when otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
   (D)   License location. Each license shall authorize a single cannabis
establishment to operate at a single location. Licenses of different classes
may overlap except when otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
   (E)   License duration. Each license issued is effective from January 1
through December 31, regardless of the time of year such license is approved.
Each license expires at 11:59:59 p.m. on December 31 unless, prior to the
expiration, the City Council has approved, or conditionally approved, the
renewal of such license for the following calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-3) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 NUMBER OF LICENSES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   The number of cannabis establishment licenses shall be restricted by
license class. For cannabis dispensary licenses, the number of licenses is
limited to two. The city may hold both cannabis dispensary licenses and operate
such dispensaries in any manner provided by state law. For all other cannabis
establishment licenses, the number of licenses is unlimited. The numerical
limits for each class of cannabis establishment may be altered at any time by
resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   In the event the numerical cap is lowered to an amount less than the
number of the existing licenses in that class, no existing licensee shall be
prevented from continuing operation during the license term, requesting
modifications to application information, from renewing such license for
consecutive, subsequent years, or from transferring such license, on the basis
that the numerical limit would otherwise prohibit the issuance of a license to
a new applicant. However, this exception shall not prevent a license from being
suspended or revoked, nor shall it prevent a license from not being renewed or
a transfer approved, based upon grounds other than the numerical limit being
exceeded.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-4) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.05 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Application for license. An applicant must submit a signed
application, using the city’s online portal, to the Planning and Permitting
Office using the form established by the city. Such application must include:
      (1)   The legal name of the applicant;
      (2)   The physical address of the applicant;
      (3)   The name and date of birth of each principal officer and board
member of the applicant entity;
      (4)   Previous experience operating a legal cannabis establishment, if
any;
      (5)   Summary of operating procedures, including procedures to ensure
accurate recordkeeping, adequate security measures, sufficient fire and
building code considerations, and compliance with all other requirements of
this chapter;
      (6)   Confirmation that none of the principal officers or board members
has served as a principal officer or board member for a medical cannabis
establishment that has had governmental license or certification revoked in any
jurisdiction;
      (7)   Confirmation that none of the principal officers or board members
is under 21 years of age;
      (8)   Confirmation that the applicant has conducted a background check
into the criminal history of each principal officer, board member, agent,
volunteer or employee involved in the operation at the time of application;
      (9)   Proof that at least one principal officer is a resident of this
state;
      (10)   Payment of the applicable license fee;
      (11)   A copy of the applicant’s sales tax license;
      (12)   Proof that all property taxes, business improvement district taxes
and pending assessments relating to the cannabis establishment location have
been paid;
      (13)   Proof of financial responsibility in the amounts and manner
established in this chapter below;
      (14)   A sworn statement that the application contains no false
statements made or omissions of any material matter in any application for a
license;
      (15)   The applicant’s notarized signature; and
      (16)   An application submitted by the city is entitled to preference.
   (B)   Action by City Council.
      (1)   The City Council will consider a completed application at the next
available City Council meeting following submittal, provided that such
application must be submitted at least 15 days in advance of a City Council
meeting. Applications are generally processed on a first come, first served
basis except as further provided by this chapter.
      (2)   The City Council may approve or deny an application in full or on
condition. Such action of the City Council must take place within 30 days after
the application’s first presentment to the City Council.
      (3)   If approved, the Mayor and Finance Officer will endorse the
application and notify the applicant of approval within three days of the City
Council’s approval. If the Council imposes any conditions, such conditions
shall be listed on the license at the time of issuance. No approved application
shall become effective, and no license shall be issued until the applicant
provides to the Finance Officer a copy of the applicant’s certificate of
registration from the state relating to the cannabis establishment for which
the license was approved.
      (4)   If denied, the City Council must state the basis on which the
application was denied, which may include, but is not limited to, incorrect
application information, missing required application criteria, insufficient
detail in application, nonpayment of any obligation, proposed activity would
violate city ordinance (including zoning), proposed activity would violate
state law or regulations, no license available due to maximum number already
issued, proposed location not zoned properly, proposed location does not comply
with an applicable buffer zone, or concerns over potential building, fire or
nuisance code issues.
   (C)   Special procedures for capped licenses.
      (1)   For license classes where the Council has established a numerical
cap, applications shall be accepted by the special procedures provided in this
section.
      (2)   These special procedures shall apply whenever a license becomes
available in a capped license class.
      (3)   When such availability occurs, the city shall publish an invitation
for applications on the city’s website stating the deadline to apply and the
location where applications may be submitted. No application for a capped
license class will be accepted prior to publication of the invitation nor after
the deadline established in the invitation.
      (4)   Applications submitted pursuant to an invitation must be submitted
in writing and sealed. An applicant may not supplement his or her application
after the deadline has passed.
      (5)   Once the deadline has passed, the Finance Officer shall open the
applications and review each application for completeness. Complete
applications shall be forward to the City Council. Applications which are only
substantially complete shall be forwarded to the City Council to determine
whether such applications contain sufficient information for further
consideration.
      (6)   The Finance Officer shall determine by lottery the order in which
the City Council considers the applications, however an application submitted
by the city must be considered before the consideration of any other
application.
      (7)   The merits of the applications will then be considered by City
Council. The City Council will approve or deny applications in the established
order but may review all applications before deciding on any individual
application. The City Council will approve or deny the applications in order
until all applications have been acted on or the numerical cap has been
reached. If the numerical cap has been reached and there are still applications
which have not been acted on, such undecided applications shall be deemed
rejected.
      (8)   If no applications are received following an invitation for
applications, or if the numerical cap is not reached pursuant to an invitation
for applications, these special rules shall no longer apply, and applications
may be received, processed and considered on a first come, first served basis
beginning at open of business the day following the City Council meeting at
which the last application was acted upon pursuant to the invitation for
applications. Such applications must be delivered in writing to the Finance
Office no earlier than the time specified above and applications received
before such time are deemed rejected.
      (9)   If the numerical cap is then reached while using the first come,
first served system, and a license subsequently lapses making a license
available, these special procedures shall apply to issuing the license.
   (D)   Renewal process.
      (1)   A person or entity operating pursuant to a license must apply for
renewal of such license at least 45 days but not more than 90 days prior to the
expiration of such license using the form provided by the City Finance Office.
Such application must include payment of the renewal application fee.
      (2)   The City Council will consider renewal applications using the same
factors and time lines applicable to new applications. In addition, the City
Council may consider in approving, denying or conditionally approving a renewal
application, any changed information from prior applications, concerns over
actual operations or violations, nonpayment of obligations or any on other
information reasonably related to the continued operation of the cannabis
establishment.
      (3)   Preference may be granted to existing license holders based on a
dispensary’s community involvement, facility upkeep and investment, days and
hours of operation and history of interactions with law enforcement.
      (4)   The renewal application must specify if any information has changed
from its prior application.
      (5)   The renewal application must be accompanied by all payments
relating to the renewal application as well as a copy of the licensee’s state
certification.
      (6)   The renewal application must re-confirm or prove all the
requirements applicable to new applications remain met.
      (7)   An applicant is not entitled to renewal of their license and the
license will only be renewed by City Council after consideration of the facts
and circumstances pertaining to each individual license. An applicant does not
have a protected property interest in a license issued by the city pursuant to
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-5) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.06 TRANSFER OR MODIFICATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license shall be transferred or modified except with the approval
of the City Council.
   (B)   Prior to any transfer of a license from a licensee to an unaffiliated
person, people or entity, the licensee and the proposed transferee must
complete a transfer application. Such transfer application must include all
information required for a new application as to the proposed transferee and
pay a transfer application fee. The City Council shall then approve, deny or
conditionally approve the proposed transfer using the same factors and
timetables as apply to renewal applications. A transferred license is subject
to all provisions and time lines applicable to a new or renewed license.
   (C)   Prior to any modification of ownership or management of a licensed
cannabis establishment, the licensee must provide 30 days’ notice to the
Finance Officer in writing of the proposed changes.
   (D)   Prior to any modification of location or layout of a licensed cannabis
establishment, the licensee must provide 30 days’ notice to the Finance Officer
in writing of the proposed changes.
   (E)   In relation to a change in ownership, management, location or layout,
the Mayor may approve minor changes administratively and charge an
administrative modification fee. However, if the Mayor determines the proposed
changes are not minor and substantially alter the operation of the cannabis
establishment as previously approved, the Mayor shall direct the matter to be
placed on the agenda of the next available City Council meeting. The City
Council shall then approve, deny or conditionally approve the proposed changes
using the same factors and timetables as apply to renewal applications. For
changes referred to the City Council, applicant shall also pay a full
modification fee.
   (F)   Transfers or modifications of a license shall not extend the term of
any license so modified or transferred.
   (G)   Transfers, modifications and renewals occurring simultaneously for the
same license require separate applications and payment of separate fees.
However, the City Council may waive one or more, but not all, of the fees and
consider the matters as a joint application.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-6) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.07 LICENSE TO REMAIN ACTIVE.
   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter must remain in continuous,
active use. A license that is not being actively used for a period of more than
14 consecutive days or for 28 cumulative days per year may be deemed inactive
by the City Finance Officer. Active use includes times when the licensee is
open and available to conduct business but such business cannot occur due to
factors outside of the control of the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-7) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.08 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   Fees relating to cannabis establishment licenses are established as provided
by this section. The fees apply to each class of cannabis establishment license
unless expressly stated otherwise. All amounts set for fees in this section may
be modified at any time by resolution of the City Council. The types and
amounts of fees are as follows.
 
Administrative            The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
modification fee          resolution
Full modification fee     The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                          resolution
New cannabis              The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
establishment application resolution
fee
Renewal cannabis          The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
establishment application resolution
fee
Transfer cannabis         The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
establishment application resolution
fee
 
(Prior Code, § 39-1-8) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.09 GENERAL OBLIGATIONS OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   The following obligations shall apply to each licensee and cannabis
establishment.
      (1)   Each licensee must keep any information stated in an approved
application current and up to date.
      (2)   Each licensee must maintain any eligibility criteria or
certifications required by this chapter for an application.
      (3)   All cannabis establishments must conduct all business activities
within an enclosed structure except such loading and unloading which is
incidental to such indoor activities.
      (4)   No cannabis or related paraphernalia may be displayed or kept in a
business so as to be visible from outside the cannabis establishment.
      (5)   No cannabis establishment may emit any gas, vapors, odors, smoke,
dust, heat or glare that is noticeable at or beyond the property line of the
cannabis establishment. Sufficient measures and means of preventing the escape
of such substances from a cannabis establishment must be provided at all times.
If any gas, vapors, odors, smoke, dust, heat or glare or other substances exit
a cannabis establishment, the owner of the premises and the licensee are
jointly and severally liable for such conditions and are responsible for
immediate, full clean-up and correction of such condition. The licensee must
properly dispose of all such materials, items and other substances in a safe,
sanitary and secure manner and in accordance with all applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations.
      (6)   Each licensee must retain all books and records necessary to show
fully the business transactions of the licensee for a period of the current tax
year and the three immediately prior tax years. Such records shall be
maintained in a manner which, if released to the city, would not contain
information protected by state law. Such records must be provided to the city
upon request.
      (7)   No cannabis establishment may employ any person who is not at least
21 years of age.
      (8)   Each licensee must provide adequate security to prevent criminal
activity on cannabis establishment premises, including parking areas.
      (9)   A licensee must pay all delinquent court judgments arising out of
his or her dispensary and dispensary operations.
      (10)   A licensee must not permit the general public to access any part
of a cannabis establishment except where such access is permitted by law. A
licensee must put in place reasonable security measures to prevent such access.
      (11)   A licensee must operate as provided in the application, comply
with any conditions attached to his or her license and comply with all state
and local laws.
      (12)   A person or entity may not take any actions for which a license is
required without holding both a license issued under this chapter and a
corresponding state license.
   (B)   Additional requirements for cannabis dispensaries.
      (1)   No cannabis dispensary may share any physical location with any
other type of business or land use type. A cannabis dispensary may only sell
cannabis, cannabis products and paraphernalia aiding in the consumption of
these items and may not sell any other item or service.
      (2)   Entry to a cannabis dispensary must be restricted. Each cannabis
dispensary must have a verification lobby and secured exit. The verification
lobby and the secured exit must be separate from each other.
      (3)   When granting access to non-employees, the licensee shall unlock
the entry door to the verification lobby, allow the person or people to enter
the verification lobby and then verify that each person in the verification
lobby is legally permitted to access and purchase cannabis or cannabis
products. If any person is found to be ineligible, that person must leave the
verification lobby before the verification lobby exit door is opened into the
retail area. Once all individuals in the verification lobby have been confirmed
to be eligible to enter the retail area, the entry door to the verification
area must be closed and locked. Then the door of the verification lobby into
the retail area may be unlocked and the individuals may enter the retail area.
The exit door of the verification lobby must be locked after all individuals
leave and before allowing other individuals into the verification lobby. At all
times, the exit door of the verification lobby is unlocked the entry door to
the verification area must be closed and locked.
      (4)   Individuals must leave the retail area through a secured exit. The
entry door to the secured exit must remain locked until needed for use. The
licensee shall then unlock the entry door to the secured area to allow
individuals to enter the secured exit from the retail area, ensure that the
entry door is closed and locked and then unlock the exit door of the secured
exit. Once all individuals have left the secured exit, the exit door to the
secured exit must be closed and locked.
      (5)   A licensee must not permit a non-employee to access any secured
area of a cannabis dispensary other than the verification lobby, retail area
and secured exit.
      (6)   A cannabis dispensary may be open to the public only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.
      (7)   A cannabis dispensary must not maintain any quantity of cannabis in
excess of the amount permitted by state law.
      (8)   All sales of cannabis must be made in person, directly to the
purchaser, within the retail area of the cannabis dispensary. No sales may be
made via telephone, internet or other means of remote purchase. Deliveries must
occur in person to the purchaser at the time of purchase within the retail area
of the medical cannabis dispensary. No drive-up windows or other similar
delivery process may be allowed.
      (9)   All cannabis dispensaries licensed under this chapter must maintain
their medical cannabis dispensary and premises within the following minimum
requirements.
         (a)   Every dispensary licensee must inspect his or her premises from
lot line to lot line, all adjacent streets, sidewalks and alleys adjoining
their premises, and sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet of such premises lot
lines and shall remove any litter and debris found there on a daily basis to
prevent the accumulation of litter and debris and the accidental or
uncontrolled release of cannabis or cannabis products.
         (b)   All solid waste and recyclable materials must be stored in
refuse containers made of metal or approved plastic and shall be equipped with
secure lids or covers, and such covers must remain closed to prevent the
intrusion of storm water or vermin.
         (c)   Refuse storage containers must be enclosed on all four sides by
screening compatible with the principal structure and not less than two feet
higher than the refuse container or must be otherwise effectively screened from
the street and adjacent properties.
   (C)   Crossover of other cannabis establishments.
      (1)   A cannabis testing facility may share a physical location with
testing facilities that are authorized to handle other types of controlled
substances.
      (2)   A cannabis testing facility, cannabis cultivation facility and a
cannabis product manufacturing facility may share a physical location and the
licensed area for each may overlap each other. However, a cannabis testing
facility may not share a physical location with other types of cannabis
establishments if the cannabis testing facility conducts activities other than
cannabis testing.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-9) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.10 FIRE AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Licensees must comply with all applicable provisions of the city’s
fire and building codes.
   (B)   The Building Code Official is authorized to require and apply
standards applicable to any use and occupancy classifications to a cannabis
establishment regardless of the cannabis establishment’s classification when
application of such other standard is substantially related to mitigating a
unique hazard presented by a cannabis establishment.
   (C)   The Fire Code Official is authorized to require and apply standards
applicable to any use and occupancy classifications to a cannabis establishment
regardless of the cannabis establishment’s classification when application of
such other standard is substantially related to mitigating a unique hazard
presented by a cannabis establishment.
   (D)   All cannabis cultivation facilities, cannabis product manufacturing
facilities and cannabis dispensaries must be equipped with a fire sprinkler
system throughout the entire licensed area.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-10) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.11 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   An applicant or licensee must file with the City Finance Officer
certificates or policies of insurance issued by a responsible insurer in the
amounts and for the purposes established below. The applicant must list the
city as an additional insured on each policy.
   (B)   The applicant or licensee must maintain a commercial general liability
policy, or equivalent, with a limit of not less than an amount as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for each occurrence. If such
insurance contains a general aggregate limit, it must be no less than double
the occurrence limit.
   (C)   Upon request, the city may demand, and the applicant or licensee must
provide proof of any other type of insurance required by law.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-12) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.12 UNAUTHORIZED CONDUCT RELATING TO CANNABIS.
   No person may engage in any of the following conduct:
   (A)   Undertake any task under the influence of cannabis when doing so would
constitute negligence or professional malpractice;
   (B)   Possess cannabis or otherwise engage in the medical use of cannabis in
any correctional facility;
   (C)   Smoke cannabis on any form of public transportation, or in any public
place or any place that is open to the public, or on the property of any
cannabis establishment; or
   (D)   Operate, navigate or be in actual physical control of any motor
vehicle, aircraft, train or motorboat while under the influence of cannabis.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-13) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.13 SIGNAGE AND ADVERTISING.
   (A)   Cannabis establishments must apply for a sign permit with the Planning
and Permitting Department. All such meet the standards established in the city
code.
   (B)   A cannabis establishment may not advertise in a manner that is
misleading, deceptive, false or is designed to appeal to minors.
   (C)   The owner or operator of a cannabis dispensary must post in a
conspicuous location a legible sign containing the following warnings:
      (1)   A warning that the use of cannabis may impair a person’s ability to
drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery and that it is illegal under state
law to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery when under the influence of
or impaired by cannabis;
      (2)   A warning that possession and distribution of cannabis is a
violation of federal law;
      (3)   A warning that consumption of cannabis on the property of a
cannabis establishment is prohibited by law; and
      (4)   A warning that the smoking cannabis in public or on any form of
public transportation is prohibited by law.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to
advertise any cannabis establishment or any cannabis product anywhere within
the city where the advertisement is in plain view of, or in, a place open to
the general public, including advertising utilizing any of the following media:
any billboard or other outdoor general advertising device, as defined by the
zoning code; any sign mounted on a vehicle; any hand-held or other portable
sign; or any handbill, leaflet or flier directly handed to any person in a
public place, left upon a motor vehicle or posted upon any public or private
property. The prohibition in this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any sign located on the licensed premises of a cannabis
establishment which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location
of the premises and which otherwise complies with this code and any other
applicable city laws and regulations; or
      (2)   Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine or other
periodical of general circulation within the city or on the internet.
   (E)   A cannabis establishment must not distribute or allow the distribution
of any cannabis without charge within a cannabis establishment or at any other
place for purposes of promotion, advertising or any other purpose.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-14) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.14 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   A license may be revoked or suspended for, among reasons, the
following:
      (1)   Violation of any provision of this chapter;
      (2)   The license has been deemed inactive;
      (3)   Nonpayment of any obligation, including utilities;
      (4)   Failure to maintain proof of financial responsibility;
      (5)   Inadequate or faulty security measures or surveillance cameras; and
      (6)   Public safety concerns have been identified which may or may not
rise to the level of a violation.
   (B)   Upon determination by the Mayor that grounds exist for the suspension
or revocation of a license, a notice of suspension or revocation shall be
physically delivered and posted at the licensed location. Such notice shall
state the grounds for the suspension or revocation, the time and date of a
hearing with the City Council if the licensee wishes to contest the suspension
or revocation, and whether or not the license is temporarily suspended pending
the outcome of such hearing. Upon issuance of the notice, the Mayor shall
direct that a hearing be scheduled for the next available City Council meeting
to consider the suspension or revocation of the license.
   (C)   In deciding whether a license will be suspended or revoked, the City
Council shall consider all facts and circumstances relating to the grounds
alleged in the notice to warrant suspension or revocation of the license. At
the close of the hearing, the City Council may uphold the suspension or
revocation or reverse the suspension or revocation. If the suspension or
revocation is reversed, the City Council may impose any additional conditions
on the license which are reasonably calculated to ensure that the aggrieved
conduct does not reoccur.
   (D)   In the event a licensee’s state certification is suspended or revoked,
the licensee’s city license shall automatically be suspended until such time as
the state certification returns to good standing. If such state certification
status persists long enough for the city license to be deemed inactive, such
inactivity may serve as independent grounds for revocation of the city license.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-15) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.15 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee,
the licensee’s employees and all principal officers and board members thereof,
waive and release the city, its officers, elected officials, employees,
attorneys and agents from any liability for injuries, damages or liabilities of
any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of business owners,
operators, employees, clients or customers for a violation of state or federal
laws, rules or regulations.
   (B)   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, each licensee
agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, elected
officials, employees, attorneys, agents and insurers against all liability,
claims and demands on account of any injury, loss or damage, including, without
limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness,
disease, death, property loss or damage or any other loss of any kind
whatsoever arising out of or in any manner connected with the operation of the
cannabis establishment that is the subject of the license.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-16) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.16 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
   (A)   Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, any law or
regulation adopted by the state governing the cultivation, production,
possession or distribution of cannabis use shall also apply to cannabis
establishments licensed by the city.
   (B)   If the state prohibits the sale or other distribution of medical
cannabis through cannabis establishments, any license issued hereunder is
revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress on
behalf of the licensee.
    (C)   The issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter does not create
an exception, defense or immunity for any person or entity in regard to any
potential criminal liability the person or entity may have under federal law
for the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of cannabis.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-17) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 116.17 ISSUANCE OF LOCAL MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT PERMITS AND/OR
LICENSES.
   (A)   Application for local permit/license. A medical cannabis establishment
desiring to operate in the municipality shall be required to apply for a permit
and/or license from the municipality. Applications for a local permit and/or
license to operate a medical cannabis establishment, as defined by SDCL § 34-
20G-1, shall not be accepted until the State Department of Health has
promulgated regulations as required by SDCL § 34-20G-72. Any application
received prior to such regulations being promulgated shall be denied.
   (B)   Prohibited public use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person to smoke marijuana, as such activity is defined in state statute, within
any area or on any property owned by the city, or public right-of-way, or other
property generally open to or used by members of the general public.
   (C)   Immediate effect. This chapter is necessary to protect and immediately
preserve the public health, safety, welfare, peace and support of the municipal
government and its existing public institutions pursuant to SDCL §§ 9-19-13 and
11-4-3.1.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-21-2021) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity violating a provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions of Chapter 94.
   (B)   No person while acting as an agent of a licensee shall take any
action, or fail to take any action, that would cause a licensee to violate the
provisions of this chapter. Such person causing a violation shall be subject to
the general penalty provisions of Chapter 94.
   (C)   In addition to any other remedy, the City Attorney may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation of this chapter. Continued violations of this chapter are
deemed to be a public nuisance. Such application for relief may include seeking
a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction.
   (D)   In the event of a violation, suspension or revocation where the
licensee may no longer legally possess cannabis, cannabis products or other
restricted items, the licensee shall be responsible to pay the costs incurred
by the city for securing, storing, safeguarding, transferring or disposing of
any cannabis, cannabis products or other restricted items.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-18) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-18-2021)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Scope and purpose
   
130.002   Definition
Offenses Against Public Peace
   
130.015   Disorderly conduct
   
130.016   Disorderly assembly
   
130.017   Causing or engaging in riot
   
130.018   Resisting, assisting to resist, escaping from or assaulting an
officer
   
130.019   Impersonating an officer
   
130.020   Lurking about premises
   
130.021   Hindering or molesting passersby
   
130.022   Playing in streets
   
130.023   Trespass and unauthorized use of property
   
130.024   Open containers
   
130.025   Noise regulation and limitation
   
130.026   Motorcycle and automobile dynomometers
   
130.027   Pedestrian interference and aggressive solicitation
Minors
   
130.040   Curfew
   
130.041   Responsibility of parent, guardian, custodian
   
130.042   Responsibility of others
   
130.043   Loitering about schools
Gambling and Swindling
   
130.055   Gambling prohibited
   
130.056   Maintaining gambling places
   
130.057   Maintaining or possessing gambling devices
   
130.058   Present in gambling room
   
130.059   Soliciting another to gamble
   
130.060   Permitting or renting premises for gambling purposes
   
130.061   Swindling
   
130.062   Gameskeeper
Offenses to Property
   
130.075   Malicious destruction of property
   
130.076   Injury to trees and plants
Weapons
   
130.090   Carrying, discharging firearms
   
130.091   Concealed weapons
   
130.092   Carrying; persons under 18
   
130.093   Reckless discharge prohibited
   
130.094   Hunting within the city limits
 
   
130.999   Penalty
§ 130.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth certain unlawful actions and the
penalty therefor, violation of which shall be enforceable within the city and
one mile thereof.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.01) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006)
§ 130.002 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place whether within or without a building commonly and
customarily open to or used by the general public and any street, highway,
alley or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.02) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006)
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
§ 130.015 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall intentionally cause serious public inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm to any other person or creates a risk thereof by:
   (A)   Engaging in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior or inciting
others to do the same;
   (B)   Making unreasonable noise or inciting others to do the same;
   (C)   Disturbing any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful
authority or inciting others to do the same; or
   (D)   Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.01) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.016 DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   No person may cause a risk to public safety, peace, health or welfare,
or create a risk of significant public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to any
member of the public by joining, being a part of or remaining at a disorderly
assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY means an assembly
of three or more persons, some or all of whom are engaged in conduct which
threatens or creates a risk to the public peace, safety, health, welfare or
convenience through:
      (1)   Fighting;
      (2)   By displaying violent or threatening behavior toward any person;
      (3)   By loud or profane language;
      (4)   By unreasonable noise;
      (5)   By obstructing or interfering with usual vehicular or pedestrian
traffic; or
      (6)   By littering or breakage of any item of private or public personal
property.
   (C)   A disorderly assembly of persons is prohibited and any law enforcement
officer shall have the authority to disperse those persons assembled and to
require them to leave or remove themselves from the place of assembly. Any
person present at or participating in a disorderly assembly who fails or
refuses to leave, vacate or disperse from the place after having been commanded
to do so by a law enforcement officer shall be guilty of disorderly assembly.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.02) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.017 CAUSING OR ENGAGING IN RIOT.
   No person shall cause or engage in a riot or incite a mob to destroy
property or injure persons, nor shall any person commit or suffer to be
committed in any house or building or premises by him or her occupied any
rioting, quarreling, fighting, reveling, drunkenness, loud or boisterous
conduct calculated to or which disturbs the neighborhood or annoys any person.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.03) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 130.018 RESISTING, ASSISTING TO RESIST, ESCAPING FROM OR ASSAULTING AN
OFFICER.
   No person shall in any way willfully resist, or aid or assist any person to
resist or to escape from any law enforcement officer, or to assist any person
to assault any law enforcement officer, or shall in any way interfere with a
law enforcement officer, in making an arrest or in the discharge of his or her
duties.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.04) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.019 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   No person not duly authorized to exercise the duty conferred by ordinance
upon police officers of this city shall wear a police officer’s badge, or
represent himself or herself as being a police officer, or attempt to exercise
the duties of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.05) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.020 LURKING ABOUT PREMISES.
   No person shall lurk or wait or conceal himself or herself in or about any
house or other building, or in or about any yard, street, alley or other public
place, who being so found shall be unwilling or unable to give an explanation
for his or her conduct consistent with a legitimate purpose.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.06) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.021 HINDERING OR MOLESTING PASSERSBY.
   No person shall upon any street, or at the entrance of any building on any
such street, alley or sidewalk, wrongfully hinder, impede or molest any
passerby, or use any rude, obscene, vulgar, indecent or threatening language to
any passerby, or by any indecent act, gesture or noise molest, annoy or insult
or put in fear any person passing or attempting to pass on such street, alley
or sidewalk, or through the entrance to such buildings.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.07) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2011-04, passed
8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.022 PLAYING IN STREETS.
   No person shall fly any kite, play any game or engage in any exercise which
obstructs or interferes with the use of the streets for traffic or passage, or
endangers the safety and lives of those thereon.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.08) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2007-07, passed
3-31-2007; Ord. 2011-04, passed 8-3-2011; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013)
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.023 TRESPASS AND UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall lodge, use, enter or occupy any barn, garage, shed,
shop or other house or building or structure, or enter or remain in such a
building or structure surreptitiously without permission of the owner or person
entitled to possession. No person shall lodge, use, enter or occupy any
automobile, truck, railroad car or other vehicle or structure, or enter or
remain in any such vehicle or structure surreptitiously, without permission of
the owner or person entitled to possession.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly enter upon any privately owned real property
which is not open to the use of the public, unless he or she has first obtained
the consent of the owner or person in possession or control thereof.
   (C)   Any person who, knowing that he or she is not privileged to do so,
enters or remains in any place where notice against trespass is given by:
actual communication to the person who subsequently commits the trespass;
posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of trespassers;
or fencing or other enclosure which a reasonable person would recognize as
being designed to exclude trespassers, is guilty of trespass.
   (D)   No person shall camp or otherwise lodge in any public way, park public
place or on any property owned by the public which is not specifically
designated as an area authorized for camping or other lodging, unless
authorized by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.09) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2013-17, passed
11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.024 PROHIBITED ACTS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall consume, mix or blend any alcoholic beverage with any
other beverage, regardless of whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage,
in any public place, excluding the property of the municipal park and excluding
upon the premises of a licensed on-sale dealer, where such alcoholic beverages
were purchased from such dealer for on-sale purposes.
   (B)   No person shall possess in any public place, other than upon the
premises of a licensed on-sale dealer, any glass, can, bottle or other
container, containing an alcoholic beverage on which the seal has been broken.
   (C)   No person shall throw, cast or otherwise put in motion any bottle,
can, glass or any other container at any other person or vehicle, whether
moving or parked, or dispose of or deposit any bottle, can, glass or other
container upon any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or park.
   (D)   The City Council may by resolution, after a duly noticed public
hearing, close off an area of a public street for special events. In the event
that any area of a public street is closed by resolution duly passed by the
City Council, said area shall not be construed as a public place, as that term
is defined in §
130.002, and the restrictions upon open containers set forth in this section
shall not be enforced within said area during the time frame of closure set
forth in the resolution. The time frame of the closure set forth in the
resolution may not exceed 24 hours, and the hours of authorized consumption
shall not exceed those permitted for on-sale licensees.
   (E)   (1)   Any person requesting the closure of an area of a public street
may do so by making application to the City Finance Office on a form to be
provided by the city and paying a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution. Said application shall include and/or be accompanied by
the following information:
         (a)   The applicant’s name, address and phone number;
         (b)   A detailed description of the area of street the applicant is
requesting be closed;
         (c)   The date and time for which the applicant is requesting closure;
and
         (d)   The purpose for which the closure is being requested.
       (2)   Upon receipt of an appropriately completed application and fee,
the Finance Officer shall set a public hearing and give notice of the hearing
by publishing notice of public hearing in the official newspaper at least ten
days prior to the date of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.10) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2007-19, passed
8-18-2007; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.025 NOISE REGULATION AND LIMITATION.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to
protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, quiet and
tranquility for the citizens of the city and persons or visitors frequenting
the city through the reduction, control and prevention of noise which is
disruptive and constitutes an annoyance to such citizens and persons. The city
recognizes and acknowledges the topography of the city and that businesses are
located primarily along the streets and highways which travel through the
bottom of the valley of the city and that sound and noise rising from such
highways and streets is easily heard and echoes above such streets and alleys
to the surrounding area where most of the citizens of the city reside. The city
acknowledges and recognizes that the Sturgis Rally has created a certain
business environment which now dominates the business community of the city.
This environment has also greatly increased the number of visitors and tourists
visiting the city and greatly increased both vehicle traffic and pedestrian
traffic and general noise level on the streets and sidewalks of the city.
   (B)   General restrictions.
      (1)   A person or property owner may not:
         (a)   Make or permit any disruptive noise or use sound equipment in
public or outside between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
         (b)   Operate construction equipment, tools or conduct construction
activities between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; or
         (c)   Operate sound equipment in a vehicle causing any disruptive
noise or a discernable vibration 20 feet from the vehicle.
      (2)   In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in division (A)
above, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud or unusual noise so as to disturb the peace of the public,
any neighborhood, any business operation, family, lawful assembly of persons or
a person by committing any act or acts of disturbance within the limits of the
city. (Animal noise, see also § 92.079.)
   (C)   Excessive vehicle noise and dynamic engine braking. It is unlawful for
any person within the city limits of the city to make, or cause to be made,
loud or disturbing or offensive noise with any mechanical devices operated by
compressed air and used for purposes of assisting braking such as dynamic
engine braking devices. (Commonly referred to as “Jake” brake; see also §
71.024 regarding Exhibition Driving, or §
71.045 regarding noise regulation and muffler cut-out.)
   (D)   Requirements for use of outdoor sound amplification equipment. As
provided in this subchapter, any person, partnership, association, corporation
or business desiring to use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system
or other sound amplifying equipment outdoors, or indoors but designed to
project the sound outdoors, shall not be permitted. This subchapter shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   Authorized parades, such as high school homecoming;
      (2)   The activities and events of the Sturgis Motor Cycle Rally, but
only for the seven days of the “Official Rally Dates” and three day before and
three days after those dates, and only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m.;
      (3)   Other events as allowed by the city in approving a special event
application, for the times and dates established by the city;
      (4)   Athletic games or contests, such as football games, softball games,
baseball games, soccer games, rodeos, bicycle races and other similar events;
      (5)   Performances, shows or entertainment presented to the general
public, in compliance with all city ordinances, on private property;
      (6)   Emergency vehicles and for emergency purposes, such as police, fire
and ambulance sirens or warning devices and loudspeakers used in connection
with crimes, disasters or emergencies;
      (7)   An employee of a governmental entity engaged in the employee’s
official duty; or
      (8)   A person operating a bell for or participating in a scheduled
religious worship activity.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.11) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2013-17, passed
11-20-2013; Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-16-2014) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.026 MOTORCYCLE AND AUTOMOBILE DYNAMOMETERS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle or automobile dynamometer within
the city without first obtaining a permit from the City Police Department.
Application for said permit shall be made to the City Police Department.
   (B)   Any applicant shall provide the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of responsible person;
      (2)   Desired location of the dynamometer;
      (3)   Name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the
dynamometer is proposed to be placed; and
      (4)   The dates the dynamometer will be in operation.
   (C)   There shall be no fee for any permit issued pursuant to this section.
The Chief of Police and the Building Inspector shall perform an investigation
based upon the information provided by the applicant to determine whether the
permit should be issued. Said investigation shall include observing the
proposed location, including its distance from any residential district;
interviewing the responsible person to determine if all steps have been taken
to minimize the noise created by the dynamometer, and checking for any prior
complaints involving the applicant.
   (D)   Any dynamometer shall only be operated between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
   (E)   The permit issued pursuant to this section shall be presented to the
Finance Officer before issuance of any vendor/transient merchant license for
any business involving a dynamometer.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.12) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2010-07, passed
7-21-2010; Ord. 2013-17, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.027 PEDESTRIAN INTERFERENCE AND AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall interfere with pedestrian traffic or
free movement of pedestrians within the city, nor interfere with vehicle
traffic within the city by solicitation, Aggressive solicitation or through any
other prohibited activity. It is the city’s intent to fairly and reasonably
balance the need provide for safe pedestrian and traffic movement with interest
of the public in the exercise of those rights secured by the Constitution of
the State.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVELY BEG. To beg with the intent to intimidate another person
into providing money or goods.
      AGGRESSIVE MANNER.
         (a)   Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person
before, during or after soliciting them, or acting in any other manner intended
or reasonably likely to cause reasonable persons to fear bodily harm to
themselves or another, or reasonable fear of damage to or loss of property, or
conduct otherwise intended or likely to cause a person to be intimidated to
give money or anything of value in response;
         (b)   Continuing to solicit (from) a person after the person has given
a negative response to the act of solicitation;
         (c)   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another
person without that other person’s consent while in the course of soliciting;
         (d)   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free
passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing
a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical
contact;
         (e)   Using violent or threatening gestures toward the person
solicited;
         (f)   Following the person being solicited, with the intent of asking
or intimidating that person so that the person will give over money or other
item of value;
         (g)   Speaking at a volume unreasonably loud, under the circumstances;
or
         (h)   Soliciting money or a thing of value from a person waiting in
line for entry to building or waiting in line for any other purpose.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. A device linked to an account record of a
financial institution which allows a person or customer to carry out
transactions at the device, including, but not limited to, deposits,
withdrawals, fund transfers, balance inquiries, payment of loan or other
obligations or similar activities.
      BEG. To ask for money or goods for the benefit of another, whether by
words, bodily gestures signs or any other means.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any bank, credit union, savings and loan or other
similar business.
      INTIMIDATE. To engage in conduct or actions which would make a reasonable
person fearful for their safety or feel compelled to act against their wishes.
      OBSTRUCT PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC. To walk, stand, sit, lie or
place an object or the person’s body in such a manner as to inhibit or
interfere with passage by another person or vehicle, or to require another
person or driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.
Acts authorized as an exercise of the person’s recognized constitutional right
to exercise freedom of speech or expression, and acts authorized by a permit
issued pursuant to the exceptions listed in division (D) below, do not
constitute OBSTRUCTION OF PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
      PEDESTRIAN. Any person moving or traveling on foot, including any person
wearing roller skates or roller blades, riding on a skateboard or riding on an
electric personal assistive device.
      PUBLIC PLACE. An area generally visible to public view and includes
alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks
and streets open to the general public, including those facilities or
establishments that serve food or provide entertainment, and including the area
of doorways and entrances to those areas or establishments and the grounds
immediately surrounding the same. It includes, but is not limited to, property
to which a governmental entity has title or the right to exclusive use or
possession, or other property or locations to which the public or a substantial
group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, any street,
highway, parking lot, playground, transportation facility, school and school
property, place of amusement, park or plaza.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway improved and paved and
ordinarily used for authorized vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder. A limited access highway may include within it two or more such
separate ROADWAY areas.
      SIDEWALK. The area outside the public right-of-way and the area of a
roadway paved with concrete or a similar surface, as set forth in Chapter 151,
intended for use by pedestrians to travel.
      SOLICITING. To ask for money, objects of value or a transfer or exchange
of any benefit, with the intention that the money, object of value or benefit
be transferred, or commence to be transferred, at that time and at that place.
Included in this definition is the use of the written, spoken or printed word,
bodily gestures, signs or any other means of communication with the purpose of
obtaining the prompt transfer, donation or exchange of said money, object of
value or benefit or otherwise soliciting the immediate sale of goods or
services by the person so communicating.
   (C)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place
at any time.
      (2)   No person shall solicit, on any private or residential property,
without first having obtained the permission from the owner, lessee or other
person lawfully in possession of that property.
      (3)   No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any entrance or exit of
any financial institution or 20 feet of any automated teller machine without
the consent of the owner or lessee the property or another person legally in
possession of the premises.
      (4)   No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor
vehicle.
      (5)   No person shall solicit any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle
on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying or reserving a public
parking space or directing the operator or occupant to a public parking space.
      (6)   No person shall solicit in any manner while under the influence of
an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance.
      (7)   No person shall solicit by stating that funds are needed to meet a
specific need, when the solicitor has the funds to meet that need, does not
intend to use the funds to meet that need or does not have that need.
      (8)   No person shall solicit in any public transportation vehicle or at
any bus stop or in any public parking lot or public structure.
      (9)   No person shall solicit within six feet of an entrance to a
building.
      (10)   No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any pay telephone,
provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other
facility, the distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the
telephone booth or facility.
      (11)   No person shall solicit in any manner or fashion at any time
before sunrise or at any time after sunset.
      (12)   No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any public restroom
facility.
      (13)   No person shall interfere with a pedestrian, and such interference
has occurred if, in a public place where the person may otherwise be present,
that person:
         (a)   Obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic as set defined in
division (A) above; or
         (b)   Acts in a manner that is to beg aggressively, as defined in
division (A) above.
      (14)   No person shall solicit at any time or in any manner in the area
between the sidewalk and the nearby roadway. If no authorized sidewalk is fully
located within eight feet of the edge of the roadway, then no person shall
solicit at any time or in any manner within eight feet of the edge of the
roadway.
   (D)   Exemption. By resolution, the City Council may, in the exercise of its
discretion, temporarily suspend the provisions imposed by §
130.026 so as to permit an authorized charitable fund raising event.
(Prior Code, § 13.02.13) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2013-17, passed
11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
MINORS
§ 130.040 CURFEW.
   No minor under the age of 16 years shall be abroad upon any public place
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day unless
accompanied by some adult person having him or her in charge, or unless upon
some errand or legitimate business by written permission or direction of a
parent, guardian or employer, or, being upon such errand, to loiter on the way
or make any undue noise, or to disturb the peace and quiet of the city; and any
such minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to arrest.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.01) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.041 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT, GUARDIAN, CUSTODIAN.
   No parent, guardian or person having the custody or control of any minor
under the age of 16 years shall allow such minor to loiter in any drinking
resort, public dance hall, public pool room, bowling alley or other place where
the minor’s presence is prohibited by law; or to allow any minor under the age
of 16 years to be abroad in or upon any public place between the hour of 10:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by a parent or
guardian or unless such minor child be on an errand or legitimate business by
written permission of such parent, guardian or an employer.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.02) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.042 RESPONSIBILITY OF OTHERS.
   (A)   No person operating any places of amusements, entertainment,
restaurants, cafés, theaters or other public places shall allow any minor under
the age of 16 years to enter or remain in such place of amusement and
entertainment, restaurant, café, theater or other public place during the hours
prohibited under this subchapter.
   (B)   No owner or operator of any motor vehicle to shall allow any minor to
be in or ride in such motor vehicle during the hours prohibited by this
subchapter.
   (C)   However, the provisions of this section do not apply when the child is
accompanied by a parent, guardian or custodian if such minor child be on an
errand or legitimate business by written permission of such parent, guardian or
employer.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.03) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.043 LOITERING ABOUT SCHOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall loiter, idle, wander or play on or within 150 feet of
any public, private or parochial school, college or seminary grounds, or
buildings, either on foot or on any vehicle, without having some lawful
business therein or in connection with such school or the employees thereof.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes
and activities of any school;
       (2)   Annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any
school, while in any such building or on any such school grounds;
      (3)   Conduct himself or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner
in speech or behavior in or about any school building or school grounds; or
      (4)   Park or move a vehicle within 150 feet of or on the grounds of any
school, for the purpose of annoying or molesting the students or employees
thereof; or in an effort to induce, entice or invite students into such vehicle
for immoral purposes.
(Prior Code, § 13.03.04) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
GAMBLING AND SWINDLING
§ 130.055 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall, within the city, or within one mile from the outer
boundaries of said city, play at roulette, chuck-luck, poker, faro, keno or any
other gambling game or game of chance upon which money or any article of value
is staked.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.01) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.056 MAINTAINING GAMBLING PLACES.
   No person shall, either as owner, agent, tenant or superintendent, keep any
building, tent, booth or shanty or any other place in the city, or within one
mile of the outer boundaries thereof, where roulette, chuck-luck, poker, faro,
keno or other game of chance for articles of value is practiced or carried on,
and no owner, agent, tenant or superintendent of any such building, part of
building, tent, booth or shanty or any other place, shall knowingly let or
allow it to be used for any kind of gambling or for playing any games of chance
for money or other articles of value or for the purpose of cheating, defrauding
or swindling persons.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.02) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.057 MAINTAINING OR POSSESSING GAMBLING DEVICES.
   No person shall maintain, possess, keep or exhibit, in this city, or within
one mile from the outer boundaries of said city, any slot machine wherein the
gain by chance is involved, or any table, cards, dice, establishment, device or
apparatus whatever, useful, used or intended to be used in playing any game of
cards, faro, dice or other gambling game or games of chance for money or other
articles of value, or used to cheat, defraud or swindle persons.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.03) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.058 PRESENT IN GAMBLING ROOM.
   No person shall be present at any place where gambling, as described in §
130.055, is taking place with his or her knowledge.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.04) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.059 SOLICITING ANOTHER TO GAMBLE.
   No person shall solicit, encourage or persuade another person to visit a
place where gambling is taking place.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.05) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.060 PERMITTING OR RENTING PREMISES FOR GAMBLING PURPOSES.
   No person shall permit or rent a room, building or any portion thereof,
which is owned by him or her or in his or her possession or under his or her
control, to be used for the purpose of gambling.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.06) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.061 SWINDLING.
   No person shall engage in, practice or employ any game, trick, scheme or
device with intent to heat, defraud or swindle any person.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.07) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.062 GAMESKEEPER.
   No person shall within this city, or within one mile from the outer
boundaries thereof, act as gamekeeper or have charge of and manage any gambling
game or games of chance upon which money or other articles of value are staked,
or act as doorkeeper, solicitor, runner, agent or abettor of or for any house
wherein any gambling game or games of chance for money or other articles of
value are practiced or allowed to be practiced or carried on.
(Prior Code, § 13.06.08) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
OFFENSES TO PROPERTY
§ 130.075 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall willfully, maliciously or wantonly destroy, injure, deface
or remove, without a right to do so, any private or city property or buildings.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.01) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.076 INJURY TO TREES AND PLANTS.
   No person shall willfully, maliciously or wantonly, injure, deface, destroy,
uproot or cut down any tree, shrub, grass or flower being or growing upon or
along any street, alley, highway or in any public park, or upon any public
grounds within the city. Nor shall any person willfully injure or destroy any
cultivated fruits or vegetables, crops, shrubs, trees, flowers, grass, hedges
or vines, nor injure or carry off any of the products thereof which are the
property of another, unless permission from the owner has been secured.
(Prior Code, § 13.05.02) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
WEAPONS
§ 130.090 CARRYING, DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   No person, except an officer of the law in the performance of his or her
duty, shall discharge any firearm within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.01) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.091 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   No person, except an officer of the law, or a person licensed under state
law or a nonresident of the state possessing a valid permit issued in another
state as recognized pursuant to SDCL § 23-7-7.4 shall carry concealed about his
or her person any pistol or other firearm, sling shot, brass knuckle or
knuckles of other material or any dagger, Bowie knife, kirk knife or other
dangerous or deadly weapon, or any instrument or device which when used is
likely to produce death or great bodily harm.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.02) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.092 CARRYING; PERSONS UNDER 18.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall carry, discharge or shoot off any
gun, pistol, rifle, air gun, carbon dioxide gun, bow or any other firearm, or
use for any purpose any such device for throwing or forcing through the air
missiles or projectiles of any character, upon the street or about or within
the city, unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.03) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2007-08, passed
3-31-2007) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.093 RECKLESS DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall recklessly discharge or shoot off any air gun, carbon
dioxide gun or bow or use in a reckless manner any of the aforementioned for
any purpose such as throwing or forcing air missiles or projectiles of any
character within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.04) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2007-09, passed
4-21-2007) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.094 HUNTING WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS.
   No person shall be allowed to hunt within city limits. However, subject to
the rules and regulations of the United States government and consistent with
the purposes of Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, 43 U.S.C. §§
1701 et seq., governing the administration of the public lands, archery only
hunting is permitted where required by federal regulation on land owned by or
under the control of the United States government and located inside the city
limits.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.05) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006; Ord. 2015-14, passed
12-2-2015) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any
costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 13.01.03) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 5-20-2006)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
152.   CITY BEAUTIFICATION AND REGULATION OF ADVERTISING
      
153.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Scope and purpose
   
150.002   Definitions
   
150.003   Stop work order
   
150.004   Stair railings and grates
   
150.005   Permit to place building material on street
   
150.006   Removal of decaying or burned building
   
150.007   Use of concrete and other debris as fill on publicly dedicated
rights-of-way prohibited
   
150.008   Operation of construction equipment or vehicle equipped with
outriggers
   
150.009   Outdoor light fixtures
   
150.010   Appeal process
Building Code and Construction Standards
   
150.025   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.026   Manual of Construction Guidelines
   
150.027   Additions, alterations and repairs
   
150.028   Maintenance
   
150.029   Historic preservation
   
150.030   Alternate materials and methods of construction
   
150.031   Modifications
   
150.032   Tests
Building Inspector and Building Permits
   
150.045   Establishment of the office of Building Inspector
   
150.046   Authority of Building Inspector to enforce
   
150.047   Right of entry
   
150.048   Liability
   
150.049   Cooperation of officials and officers
   
150.050   Permit required
   
150.051   Application for permit
   
150.052   Fees
   
150.053   Permits issued; expiration; viewing
   
150.054   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.055   Temporary structure permit required
   
150.056   Requirements for temporary structures
   
150.057   Exempt temporary structures
   
150.058   Temporary secondary retail structure permit
Contractors; Licensing and Registration
   
150.070   Construction contractors
   
150.071   Electrical contractors
   
150.072   Plumbing contractors
   
150.073   Landscape contractors
   
150.074   Revocation of licenses
Building and Structure Moving
   
150.085   License required
   
150.086   Application for license
   
150.087   Insurance required
   
150.088   Fee
   
150.089   Permit required before moving
   
150.090   New building or mobile home
Public Excavations
   
150.105   License required for excavators
   
150.106   Application for excavation construction license
   
150.107   Excavation license term and renewal
   
150.108   Insurance required for excavation
   
150.109   Digging permit fees
   
150.110   Permit required before each excavation
   
150.111   Excavation near streets
   
150.112   Obstruction of sewer pipes, manholes, water mains or appurtenances
   
150.113   Excavation must be refilled
   
150.114   Failure to comply
   
150.115   Applicability to utility companies
   
150.116   Barricades, guards, lights and the like required
Fences
   
150.130   Material requirements
   
150.131   Height, setback and construction requirements
   
150.132   Fence permit
   
150.133   Unsafe or hazardous fences
Erosion Control
   
150.145   Purpose and application
   
150.146   Grading permit required
   
150.147   Application for grading permit
   
150.148   Exceptions
   
150.149   Fees
   
150.150   Grading permit issued
   
150.151   Expiration of grading permit
   
150.152   Best management practices applicable to all land disturbances
   
150.153   Erosion control plan requirements
   
150.154   Final stabilization generally
   
150.155   Final stabilization for residential construction
   
150.156   Final stabilization for agricultural purposes
   
150.157   Additional requirements
Low Water Crossings
   
150.170   Minimum standards for low water crossings within the city
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the building of structures within
the city and to provide reasonable standards to protect property and public
welfare by regulating the design, construction, materials, location and
maintenance of all buildings within the city. The purpose of this chapter also
includes setting forth the licensing requirements for certain contractors and
adopting certain uniform codes and regulations in the area of construction.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARSD. Administrative Rules of South Dakota.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Control measures which reduce or prevent
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. Any person appointed by the city, including any
designees to perform this duty as provided by this chapter.
   CITY CODES. The current editions of any International Building Code or
International Residential Code as adopted by the city, or the Codified Law of
South Dakota.
   CLEARING. Any activity that causes the removal of the vegetative surface
cover.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of construction, including, but not limited to, the
rough framing, remodeling, modification, shingling, siding, new construction,
concrete, alteration, addition, repair, improvements or erection of buildings,
erection or installation of signs requiring a permit under the provisions of
Chapter 152, electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, or installation of all
construction required to possess a permit within the city.
   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. The city approved specifications for the
installation of streets, water, sewer and storm sewer improvements within the
public right-of-way or established utility easements.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person engaged in or performing construction activities, as
defined in this chapter, or who oversees and/or participates in the act of
commercial or residential construction and/or excavation on property other than
that owned and occupied by that person, them as their primary residence, or
occupied by the person as a qualified owner, and who is responsible to the
owner for completion of the work. This definition includes any person who is
engaged in the act of residential construction and/or excavation, not under
contract with a general contractor, on any property other than that owned and
occupied by them as their primary residence or for which the person is a
qualified owner. This definition shall include any person who provides
contracted construction activities for a fee.
   DRAINAGE WAY. Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the city.
   ELECTRICIAN. Any person who is licensed by the state and the city to perform
electrical work which includes, but is not limited to, running conduit,
installing wiring, terminating wiring and installing electrical fixtures or
motors.
   EROSION CONTROL PLAN (ECP). A plan prepared for a specific site which
dictates the specific measures and controls and their application sequence for
the control of sediment and erosion on the site.
   FENCE. A barrier, railing or other upright structure enclosing an area of
ground to mark a boundary, control access or prevent escape (including all
appurtenances, members and support structures to the FENCE itself). Includes
hedges and lawn ornaments.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. The return of a construction site to a finished
condition in which all final improvements and vegetation has been placed and
are functioning as planned in accordance with the stormwater pollution
prevention plan and erosion control plan submitted and approved for the site.
   FLAME-RETARDANT OR FLAME-RESISTANT TARP. A tarp that has a physical marking
or tag attached to it which shows that the tarp has been tested and declared
flame-resistant and/or flame-retardant. Tarps not bearing this physical
insignia shall not be considered FLAME-RETARDANT or FLAME-RESISTANT.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. Any person who oversees and/or participates in the act
of construction and/or excavation on property other than that owned and
occupied by them as their primary residence and who is responsible for the
final product.
   GRADING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for construction, excavation,
grading, clearing and any other land-disturbing activity.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any activity that involves grading, clearing or
the moving of topsoil, rock or any other natural surface from a property.
   MUNICIPALITY. Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the International
Building Code, the International Residential Code, the International Fire Code
or the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code, it shall be held to mean
the City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except
days that are nationally recognized as a holiday.
   OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES. Include, but are not limited to, lighting for
billboards, street lights, shopping center parking area lights, externally or
internally illuminated on-site or business advertising signs and area type
lighting.
   PERIMETER CONTROLS. Erosion control measures that protect neighboring
properties from stormwater runoff and sedimentation.
   PERMANENT BARRIER. A wall or fence which has been constructed as a permanent
attachment to property and is a minimum five feet in height and has openings
which are no larger than four inches in any direction.
   PERMANENT BUSINESS. A business use which is in physical operation and open
to the public for a period equal to or greater than five months from January 1
through December 31 of the current year and resides at a fixed location within
the city, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 156.
   PERMANENT STRUCTURE. A structure that is designed or intended for support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of person or property. Said structure shall
have a permanent roof that is supported by columns or walls and is maintained
for 365 days a year and built in compliance with the Building Code for which
the occupancy of the structure is being used.
   PLUMBER. Any person who is licensed by the state and the city to perform
plumbing work which includes, but is not limited to, gas piping, water and
sewer piping, installation of plumbing fixtures, including water heaters and
reparation of piping or plumbing fixtures.
   QUALIFIED OWNER. A person holding an ownership interest, as demonstrated by
the records of the Equalization Office, Office of Secretary of State, IRS
records and documents or other comparable evidence of ownership, in the
property listed as the work site in the permit application and for which the
exemption is claimed.
   SD DANR. The State Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
   STABILIZATION. The use of practice and methods that prevent exposed soils
from eroding, including, but not limited to, grass, trees, sod, mulch or other
materials which prevent erosion and assist the soil in the retention of
moisture.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan prepared for and
approved by the SD DANR required to obtain a stormwater permit for construction
which disturbs more than one acre of land or Industrial activities having a
Standard Industrial Code (SIC) between 20 and 39.
   STURGIS BUILDING CODE. The most recent building code adopted by the city as
identified in §
150.025.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. Any person who is engaged in the act of construction and/or
excavation under supervision of a general contractor on property other than
that owned and occupied by them as their primary residence. If the
SUBCONTRACTOR is not under supervision of a general contractor, the
SUBCONTRACTOR becomes the general contractor.
   TEMPORARY BUSINESS. A business use which is in physical operation and open
to the public at one or more locations for a period less than five months from
January 1 through December 31 of the current year even though the business may
have a permanent or fixed location within the city. This period of operation
excludes the period of the annual Motorcycle Rally.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Any vending stand, reviewing stand, canopy tent or
other miscellaneous structure which is intended for use on a temporary basis.
Also includes any accessory structures of 144 square feet or less.
   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
streams and other bodies of water delineated by the city.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All waters within the jurisdiction of the state,
including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural
or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering
upon the state, but not waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds,
lagoons or treated water distribution systems designed to meet the requirements
of the Clean Water Act other than cooling ponds, as defined by 40 C.F.R. §
423.11(m).
   WATERWAY. A channel that directs surface runoff water to a watercourse or to
a public storm drain.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.003 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector, Engineer or Public Works Inspector/
Director finds a site maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or
other pertinent laws and ordinances, the City Engineer, Building Inspector, the
Planning and Permitting Director or the Public Works Director is authorized and
directed to issue a stop work order for the site.
   (B)   Any stop work order shall be in writing and issued to the permittee or
assigned contractor(s). Upon issuance, the cited work shall immediately cease.
The stop work order shall state the reasons for the order and the conditions
under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
   (C)   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served a stop
work order, except for the work required by the order, shall be considered to
be in violation of this chapter and subject to any applicable penalty set forth
herein.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 STAIR RAILINGS AND GRATES.
   The owner of any building in the city that has a stairway leading from an
adjacent sidewalk to the cellar or basement of the building shall guard such
stairway with a substantial railing not less than three feet high. The entrance
to such stairway shall be at right angles to the street from which such entry
is made. Any person who has any permanent opening in any sidewalk for the
purpose of letting light into any basement or cellar or for any other purpose
shall guard the same with a substantial cover.
(Prior Code, § 2.13.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.005 PERMIT TO PLACE BUILDING MATERIAL ON STREET.
   No person shall deposit and keep lumber, stone, brick or other materials for
building in any public street, road or alley without a permit. Any person
desiring to do the above mentioned shall make written application to Department
of Planning and Permitting. The Department of Planning and Permitting shall
have the power to issue a permit granting the permit holder the authority to
keep lumber, stone, brick or other materials for building in the requested
public area for a period not to exceed six months. The issuing of a permit
shall also be subject to such other conditions or limitations as the Department
of Planning and Permitting may deem necessary under the circumstances. Before
issuing any permit, the Department of Planning and Permitting shall take into
consideration the free flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the proper
drainage of water and the safety of persons and property and reasonable input
from other city staff.
(Prior Code, § 2.13.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.006 REMOVAL OF DECAYING OR BURNED BUILDING.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, any structure within the
city shall have been damaged by fire, building collapse, decay or otherwise to
the extent of 50% of the value thereof, it shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector to report the structure to the Planning and Permitting Director. The
report shall be in writing and include a description of the structure, its
location, the circumstances of damage, decay or dilapidation and the name of
the owner, if known. The Department of Planning and Permitting shall issue a
notice be posted on a conspicuous location within the subject property, such as
the front door. Notice is also to be sent via USPS first-class mail upon the
owner, requiring said owner to respond in writing within 15 days and
documenting what his or her intent for rehabilitation of the structure is and
mitigating short-term attractive nuisance concerns. In case the owner does not
respond within 15 days, then said notice shall be published in the official
city newspaper once in the issue of such newspaper. The property owner has 15
days following publication to respond in writing documenting what their intent
for rehabilitation of the structure is and mitigating short-term attractive
nuisance concerns. Upon completion of such publication and due proof thereof,
placed on file with the Finance Officer, service of said notice shall be deemed
valid and complete. If no response has been made by the property owner within
15 days of publication, the city will issue penalties under this chapter and/or
pursue other remedies under Chapter 94 or through applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.13.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.007 USE OF CONCRETE AND OTHER DEBRIS AS FILL ON PUBLICLY DEDICATED
RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use concrete, asphalt, wood, tree limbs or other solid
debris as fill in on publicly dedicated rights-of-way, streets or alleys within
the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.13.04) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.008 OPERATION OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT OR VEHICLE EQUIPPED WITH
OUTRIGGERS.
   (A)   All construction equipment or vehicles equipped with outriggers being
used for construction purposes on the bituminous or concrete surface streets
and alleys of the city shall have rubber padded or flat metal surface thereon.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use construction equipment or vehicles
equipped with outriggers having metal studs, lugs or an equivalent hard
material upon the bituminous or concrete surfaced streets or alleys of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 2.13.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.009 OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES.
   (A)   All outdoor light fixtures shall be shielded in a manner that directs
light downward and limits direct line of sight of a fixture’s lamp to the
property upon which the fixture is installed. Outdoor light fixtures may not
exceed the height of the nearest streetlight.
   (B)   All parking areas are subject to the lighting standards contained in
this section.
   (C)   Building accent and landscaping lighting is permitted, provided the
light is targeted at the feature to be illuminated and reflected light is the
only upward lighting that occurs. Bridge, flag, fountain, statue, monument and
similar public artwork and feature lighting is permitted, provided such
lighting does not cause the spilling of direct light to other properties or
public ways.
   (D)   Installation of freestanding, outdoor light fixtures more than four
feet tall require a building permit.
   (E)   Installation of sports complex light poles require a building permit
but are not subject to the other provisions of this section.
   (F)   Seasonal decorations illuminated for no longer than 60 calendar days
are not subject to this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.13.07) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.010 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision made by the Building Inspector or
other department head under this chapter shall be entitled to have said
decision reviewed by the city before any appeal to the City Council.
   (B)   The process shall be as follows.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector,
designee or other department head under this chapter shall first file a written
request for review with the city setting forth the basis for which he or she
believes the decision to be in error. The writing shall also include the
person’s name and mailing address.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall review
the decision and mail a written response to the aggrieved person within 20
days.
      (3)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the
city following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the City
Finance Office. There shall be no fee assessed for filing the appeal.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council and a public hearing shall be held at a regularly
scheduled Council meeting within 30 days after the date said appeal was filed.
The City Finance Office shall provide notice to the person, at the mailing
address he or she has provided, specifying the time, date and location of the
hearing.
      (5)   The City Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days of the hearing. The Council may affirm or reverse the
decision of the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 2.14) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-
17-2022)
BUILDING CODE AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 150.025 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   The city hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment,
use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, within
its jurisdiction, including permits and penalties, the following Codes,
referred to as the Sturgis Building Code:
   (A)   The 2021 (IRC) International Residential Code Chapters 1-10, 12-16, 18
and 33 and Appendices AB, AC, AE, AV, AQ, AJ, but not including Section 313 in
its entirety. The following portions as are herein modified and listed.
Subsection 3.02 and the related information and explanation shown at figure
301.2(4) amended to require a structure be designed to meet or exceed a 40-
pound ground snow load: and figure 302.13 residential basements finished less
than 50% shall not be required to have 1/2” gypsum board installed on the lid
throughout: and figure 905.1.2 Ice and water barrier membrane required;
   (B)   The 2021 (IBC) International Building Code Chapters 1-12, 14-26,28,
30-35, including Appendix G Flood-Resistant Construction, Appendix I patio
covers, Appendix J Grading;
   (C)   The 2021 International Fire Code (designated as the Sturgis Fire Code)
with the following amendments. Chapter 24 Flammable Finishes amended by
deleting Section 2401.3 permits, Chapter 25 Fruit and Crop Ripening amended by
deleting Section 2501.2 permits, Chapter 26 Fumigation and Thermal Insecticidal
Fogging amended by deleting Section 2601.2 permits, Chapter 27 Semiconductor
Fabrication Facilities amended by deleting Section 2701.5 permits; and
   (D)   The 2021 International Property Maintenance Code, including Appendix
A: Boarding Standard, except any section which addresses appeals. Chapter 2.13
applies to any appeal from an alleged violation of this code. Additionally, the
Property Maintenance Code is adopted with the following amendments provided
below.
      (1)   The purpose of the Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the city
is to provide standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public
welfare by regulating, governing and controlling the use, occupancy, conditions
and site maintenance of all property, buildings and structures within this
jurisdiction. Additionally, the Property Maintenance Code provides for a just,
equitable and practicable method whereby buildings or structures, which from
any cause endanger the life, limb, morals, property, safety or welfare of the
general public or their occupants, may be repaired, vacated or demolished. A
copy of the code shall be on file in the office of the City Building Inspector,
or the Planning and Permitting Department.
      (2)   Amendments to the 2021 Property Maintenance Code are as follows.
         Sec. 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Sturgis, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
         Sec. 103.1 Creation of Agency. The Planning and Permitting Department
including all approved designees, is in charge of application and enforcement
of this Code, and is known as the “code official” as referenced in the Code.
         Sec. 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 8 inches.
         Sec. 304.14 Insect Screens. The period of time to require insect
screens is hereby amended to be April 1 to September 30, inclusive.
         Sec. 602.3 Heat Supply. The period of time to require the heating
supply to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F is hereby amended to be
September 1 to April 30, inclusive.
         Sec. 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. The period of time to require the
heating supply to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F is hereby amended to
be September 1 to April 30, inclusive.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2019-02, passed
2-5-2019; Ord. 2021-03, passed 8-3-2021; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022; Ord.
2022-08, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 150.026 MANUAL OF CONSTRUCTION GUIDELINES.
   The city or a designated official shall be authorized to prepare and compile
a Manual containing guidelines for compliance with this chapter and the
building codes adopted herein. A copy of said Manual shall be available for
review on the city website. Copies of the Manual shall be printed at the cost
of the person requesting said copy from the Building Inspector’s Office.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.027 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS.
   Any additions, alterations and/or repairs to an existing nonconforming
building less than 50% of the value of the structure, street and/or utilities
may be made without requiring the existing building, street or city utilities
to meet the provisions of this chapter, provided that any addition, alteration
or repair conforms to the provisions in the Manual for new construction and
does not make the existing installation unsafe. A variance may be granted by
the City Council, acting as the Board of Adjustment, with the Planning
Commission first providing a recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.028 MAINTENANCE.
   Following approval through the building permit process, all devices or
safeguards required by this chapter or any other state law or city ordinance
shall be maintained in conformance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.04) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.029 HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
   (A)   After receipt of the permit application and with prior written
authorization of the Building Inspector, repairs, alteration and additions
necessary for preservation or continued use of the building may be made even if
these repairs, alteration and additions are not in conformance to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Inspector’s authorization is conditional upon the
following:
      (1)   Completion of all requirements of SDCL § 1-19A-11.1;
      (2)   The building or area having been designated by action of the
legally constituted authority of the jurisdiction as having special historical
or architectural significance;
      (3)   Any unsafe conditions are corrected; and
      (4)   The restored building or area will not be more hazardous, based on
life, safety, fire safety and sanitation regulations, than the existing
construction.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.05) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.030 ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of
other materials or methods of construction not specifically prescribed by this
chapter, provided any alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the
Building Inspector. The city may require sufficient evidence or proof be
submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. All
alternate materials or methods of construction must meet or exceed the
requirements of this subchapter or the applicable codes adopted by the city and
the state.
   (B)   All construction materials to be used shall be new material unless
certified by an engineer and with the prior approval of the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.031 MODIFICATIONS.
   When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector may grant modifications to a
permit for individual cases upon receipt of a written request and after a
proper review has been completed by the Planning and Permitting Department.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.07) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.032 TESTS.
   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any provision of
this chapter or any evidence that material or construction does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter or to industry standards, the Building
Inspector may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of
the property owner and at no expense to the city. All tests shall be made by an
approved agency and all reports shall become property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.08) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
BUILDING INSPECTOR AND BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.045 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   There shall be designated a Building Inspector, who shall perform those
duties and hold such authority as herein set forth, subject to the supervision
of the city, and Planning and Permitting Director. The city may designate
someone within the city with the duties of Building Inspection. The Building
Inspector may request that the city appoint any number of technical officers,
deputy inspectors and other employees as is necessary to assist the Building
Inspector with enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.046 AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR TO ENFORCE.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall enforce all provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the
construction, alteration, removal and demolition of all buildings and
structures within the city.
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall make an examination of any and all plans
and specifications for structures to be built within the city, or alterations
to be made in or upon any existing structures which will materially change said
structures, in order to determine if said plans, specifications or alterations
are in conformance with this chapter.
   (D)   The Building Inspector shall make an examination of all applications
for building permits and shall determine after said examination whether or not
a permit should be granted to such applicant.
   (E)   The Building Inspector shall have the authority to issue building
permits after the completed application has been determined in accordance with
this chapter, and after all required fees have been received.
   (F)   The Building Inspector shall have the authority to deny issuance of
any permit. Said denial may be based upon failure to comply with any applicable
provision of this chapter, or any provision of any applicable building code or
manual.
   (G)   The Building Inspector shall have the authority to order the removal
of any existing building or structure which was unlawfully built or which in
the opinion of the Building Inspector is dangerous and/or a safety hazard to
the public.
   (H)   The Building Inspector shall have the authority to require specific
testing and inspections in connection with the performance of construction work
within the city.
   (I)   The Building Inspector shall have the authority to issue a stop work
order.
   (J)   The Building Inspector may be authorized to enforce the ordinances
listed under
Chapter 37.
   (K)   The Building Inspector shall be subject to the supervision of the
city, and the Planning and Permitting Director, and hold any and all other
duties and powers as specifically granted by any ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.047 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, or other city official, shall have the
authority to enter upon property for the following reasons: an inspection is
required under this chapter, or to enforce the provisions or this chapter; when
the Building Inspector or other city official has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is
contrary to or in violation of this or any chapter of this code which makes the
building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous.
   (B)   In exercising the aforementioned authority, the Building Inspector or
designated city official shall take all reasonable steps possible to do the
following:
      (1)   Enter the building or premises at a reasonable hour;
      (2)   In the event the premises is occupied, present his or her
credentials to the occupant and request entry; and
      (3)   In the event the premises is unoccupied, make reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or
premises, if known, and request entry.
   (C)   In the event, entry is refused, the Building Inspector or city
official, shall proceed with any and all recourse and remedies provided by law
to secure entry.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.048 LIABILITY.
   The Building Inspector must act in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter, or any other applicable law
or ordinance. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building,
premises or contracting on city land for damages to persons or property caused
by defects, nor shall the Building Inspector or the city be held as assuming
any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this chapter or
any permits or certificates issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.05) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.049 COOPERATION OF OFFICIALS AND OFFICERS.
   The Building Inspector may request, and shall receive, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the city so far as it is required for
discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other applicable laws or
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.050 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before any persons may erect or cause to be erected or constructed a
building or structure within the city, or cause any alterations to any existing
building or structure within the city, including the demolition of a building
or structure, they must obtain a permit from the Building Inspector if
improvements or alterations are valued more than the amount as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. Labor costs for outside contractors
are included in the valuation for building permits. must be included in the
value. Labor costs involving a contractor consist of all estimated contractual
labor costs associated with a project.
   (B)   An alteration of a building or structure shall for the purpose of this
chapter include, but is not limited to, a change to or removal of any
partition, interior or exterior wall, ceiling, windows, structural member of
roof system or floor, any roof replacement, any deck replacement, any siding
replacement and placement of any hard surface material, including concrete or
asphalt, or any digging or excavation within any right-of-way or any public
easement.
   (C)   A permit is not required for the following:
      (1)   Retaining walls that are not over four feet in height measured from
grace on the exposed side to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge;
      (2)   Painting, papering, tiling, floor coverings, countertops, other
similar finishing work; soffit, gutters, facia; bathroom fixtures, such as
vanity, toilet, bathtubs, showers; and other minor ongoing maintenance type
repairs, including, but not limited to, storm door installation and
replacement, minor deck and siding repairs and residential exterior door
replacement and repair as long as there is no change in door dimensions;
      (3)   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 144
square feet;
      (4)   Residential use playground equipment;
      (5)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support; and
      (6)   Other projects approved by the Planning and Permitting Department
and Building Inspector which do not have potential to affect the integrity of a
structure.
   (D)   Any building permit exception or exemption shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.07) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.051 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   To obtain a permit from the Building Inspector, the applicant must
make application to the Building Inspector using CitizenServe.
   (B)   He or she shall include with said application the following
information:
      (1)   Detailed site plan in one-fourth inch scale and relevant elevation
drawings;
      (2)   The name of the owner of the real property to be improved;
      (3)   The name of all contractors doing the work;
      (4)   If a contractor license exemption is claimed by applicant on the
basis that the work described in the application is at applicant’s primary
residence, so state;
      (5)   If a contractor license exemption is claimed by applicant on the
basis the applicant is a qualified owner of commercial property, so state;
      (6)   For an applicant claiming the qualified owner exemption from a
contractor license, provide proof of insurance consistent with the requirements
of §
150.070;
      (7)   The parcel number given to the property by the county;
      (8)   The general description of the improvement and what type of
building improvement is to be made;
      (9)   Plans for the installation of plumbing, electrical wiring,
mechanical and the like in commercial class construction; and
      (10)   Such other information the Building Inspector or designee may
request so that they may determine if said improvement complies with the
ordinances of the city and the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.08) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.052 FEES.
   (A)   Upon making application for a permit, any applicant shall pay the
appropriate permit fee to the city. If, for any reason beyond the applicant’s
control, he, she or it does not construct the proposed project for which the
permit was issued, the amount of the permit less an administrative fee as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution may be refunded to the
applicant.
   (B)   The amount of an applicant’s permit fee shall be determined by
reference to the following schedule. All such fees shall be paid to the
Building Inspector or designee who shall remit the fees to the Finance Officer
to be deposited into the General Fund of the city.
Permit Fee Schedule
Total Valuation Fees
Permit Fee Schedule
Total Valuation        Fees
$701 to $2,000         The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
$2,001 to $25,000      The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
$25,001 to $50,000     The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
$50,001 to $100,000    The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
$100,001 to $500,000   The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
$500,001 to $1,000,000 The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
$1,000,001 and up      The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                       resolution
 
(Prior Code, § 2.03.09) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.053 PERMITS ISSUED; EXPIRATION; VIEWING.
   (A)   Permit issued.
      (1)   The Building Inspector, upon receiving said application and fee,
shall examine the same. If the application is completed, the proper fee is paid
and the improvement conforms to the ordinances and laws of this city, the
Inspector shall issue a permit to the applicant, which shall entitle the
applicant to proceed with the improvement.
      (2)   If the Building Inspector, upon examination of the application,
finds that the application is not complete, or other information is necessary
before a decision can be rendered thereon, the Building Inspector may request
the additional information from the applicant without the necessity of
obtaining a new application or fee.
      (3)   If the Building Inspector finds that the improvement applied for
does not conform to the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, he or
she shall reject the application by noting that fact upon the application and
returning one copy of the application to the applicant. The other copy of the
application shall be retained in the files of the Building Inspector.
      (4)   The Building Inspector may deny a permit for a location identified
on the application if any arrears on payment for any city bills, such as
utility bills, miscellaneous bills or special assessments, including, but not
limited to, nuisance-related special assessments, apply to the identified land.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.10)
   (B)   Expiration of permit.
      (1)   Any permit issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
expire within one year following the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Any permit issued under this chapter for building of a residence
shall expire one year (365 days) from the date of issuance. Any permit issued
under this chapter for the purpose of constructing any commercial building
shall expire two years (730 days) from the date of issuance. No building shall
be erected, repaired, altered, moved or demolished under authority of any
expired permit. If the improvement is not completed on the expiration date, a
new application for a permit to complete such structure may be made under the
same procedure set forth herein for obtaining the original permit.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.11)
   (C)   Viewing permits. The public may view a permit which has been lawfully
issued through the city’s online application portal.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.12)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 150.054 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No owner may cause or allow a newly constructed or remodeled building
to be occupied or allow the premises of a remodeled building to be occupied,
after a change of occupancy classification as defined in the Building Code has
occurred, unless the owner shall first obtain a certificate of occupancy from
the Building Inspector. Upon completion of the building, remodeling or prior to
change of occupancy, if the building is found to be in compliance with the city
ordinances and laws of the state by the Building Inspector, the certificate of
occupancy shall be provided. No person shall permit a newly constructed or
remodeled structure with a change of classification use to be occupied without
first obtaining an occupancy certificate as provided herein.
   (B)   A partial certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Inspector for no longer than 180 days.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.13) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.055 TEMPORARY STRUCTURE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Temporary structures, such as vending stands, reviewing stands,
canopies, tents and miscellaneous structures may be erected in areas zoned
Highway Service and General Commercial, provided that a special temporary
structure permit is obtained for each temporary structure. Said permit shall be
issued by the Building Inspector for a period not to exceed 30 days per
location. This 30-day time frame shall include set up and tear down time.
Temporary greenhouses may exceed the 30-day maximum; however, no temporary
greenhouse may exceed 90 days per location.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, LOCATION shall be the site on which
the temporary structure is first constructed or placed. A temporary structure
may not be disassembled and reconstructed or moved to a different location on
the same property or parcel of land, or an adjacent parcel of land, after an
initial permit is issued for the structure.
   (C)   No vendor, solicitor, temporary merchant or landowner shall begin to
erect or allow the erection of a temporary structure, as defined in this
chapter, for use during the Motorcycle Rally more than seven days prior to the
beginning date of the temporary vending permit establishing the location of the
temporary structure, or leave it erected more than four days after the
expiration of the temporary vending permit. Furthermore, the vendor, solicitor,
temporary merchant or landowner shall be permitted to operate a temporary
business from the temporary structure only during the specified dates of the
temporary vending permit and shall not be required to obtain a temporary
structure permit so long as the business is in compliance with all other city
ordinances, state and federal laws and the vendor, solicitor, temporary
merchant or landowner possesses a valid vending license issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.14) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2017-04, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 150.056 REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   The following requirements shall apply to all temporary structures, except
those specifically exempted above.
   (A)   The structural frame of all temporary structures shall be made of
steel, aluminum, PVC or wood. If constructed of wood, the smallest wood member
shall not be less than a dimensional two inches by four inches in width.
      (1)   Wood used for the interior and exterior skins of a temporary
structure may be as follows: one-half inch plywood, one-half inch chipboard or
particle board.
      (2)   Wood, as defined in division (A)(1) above, may also be used for
shelving temporary structure.
      (3)   Tarps, which are utilized on temporary structures, which are
occupied by temporary merchants, shall be flame-retardant or flame-resistant,
as defined in this chapter. All tarps not complying with this chapter shall be
removed.
   (B)   All temporary structures shall be removed upon expiration of the time
limit stated on the temporary structure permit.
   (C)   If the structure is not removed by the expiration date stated on the
permit, the city may remove the structure without further notice to the owner
and shall charge the cost of the removal to the owner. The applicant for the
temporary structure permit shall be emailed the permit, which will constitute
sufficient notice that the structure shall not be placed for more than 30 days.
   (D)   In the event that a structure erected pursuant to this section is not
removed by the expiration date, the Building Inspector shall not issue
subsequent permits under this section to the owner of the property for the
location unless the Building Inspector has reached an agreement with the owner
of the property to assure the owner’s future compliance with any temporary
structures erected at that location.
   (E)   Temporary structures or appendages thereof shall not be placed closer
than five feet to any public alley. (Exception: When the property owner
provides a permanent barrier which is a minimum height of five feet between the
temporary structure and the public right-of-way, the temporary structure may be
placed closer than five feet to the public right-of-way. No sales may be
permitted through the permanent barrier.)
   (F)   The permit hereinbefore described may be suspended or revoked if at
any time the structure or its occupants are in violation of the ordinances of
the city or the laws of the state.
   (G)   Temporary structures may not be used for housing permanent or seasonal
businesses unless within the exemption of §
150.057.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.15) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2017-04, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 150.057 EXEMPT TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   After a permit application has been received, the following temporary
structures shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in §
150.056:
      (1)   A temporary structure being used for the purpose of a temporary
office during a construction project;
      (2)   A temporary structure being used for the purpose of a realty office
in a new development;
      (3)   Temporary storage buildings used in conjunction with a permanent
retail or wholesale business or residence, provided that said structures meet
the setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are placed, and
shall not exceed 144 square feet; and/or
      (4)   Temporary storage buildings owned by a business that rents or sells
them at one location to the general public.
   (B)   In conjunction with a permanent business as defined herein, the
permanent business shall be allowed one temporary structure to be located on
the property. Furthermore, the business operating in or from the temporary
structure shall be selling or vending items of like nature to which the
permanent business sells or vends.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.16) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2017-04, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 150.058 TEMPORARY SECONDARY RETAIL STRUCTURE PERMIT.
   For a time period longer than allowed by §
150.055, for an area open for retail display and/or sale of goods and products
available through the primary business located on that same parcel, a temporary
secondary retail structure permit may be issued as provided for in this
section.
   (A)   A permit application fee as set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution shall be submitted with the application form and required documents.
   (B)   The area of retail sales and display described in the permit shall be
located on same property parcel as the primary retail business.
   (C)   Any permit for use of a temporary retail structure under this section,
to be used in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages on any premises
licensed under SDCL Chapter 35-4 or under
Chapter 110, whether off-sale or on-sale, shall not change or abate the other
applicable structure requirements contained in
Chapter 110.
   (D)   The size of a temporary secondary retail structure allowed by this
permit shall be limited so that the entire temporary structure and appurtenance
is placed in compliance with all setback requirements (front, side and rear) as
would apply to a new permanent structure on that parcel.
   (E)   The size of a temporary secondary retail structure shall also be
limited so not to exceed the “footprint” of the ground floor (first floor) of
the primary business retail area located on the parcel
   (F)   A permit shall be valid only within the calendar year it is issued,
for erection and use of a qualifying temporary structure between the dates of
May 1 and September 30 of each year.
   (G)   For an annual permit application which discloses in sufficient detail,
in a separate building permit application for the structure, that the snow load
rating of the structure is properly designed to accommodate the normal load
required by this chapter and the Building Code, a permit may be issued to allow
erection and operation from April 1 through October 31 of that year.
(Prior Code, § 2.03.17) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2017-04, passed
5-31-2017; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
CONTRACTORS; LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
§ 150.070 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   License required for construction.
      (1)   No person shall perform construction work within the city, on any
property other than the person’s current primary residence, or property for
which the person meets the requirements of a qualified owner, until he or she
has applied for and obtained a contractor license from the Building Inspector’s
Office.
      (2)   Construction work subject to this requirement shall include, but is
not limited to, framing, moving or replacing cabinets or millwork, replacement
of roofing, doors, windows; installation or repair of insulation, sound
systems, flooring, carpets, wall coverings, paint subfloor or floor coverings
of vinyl, tile or stone; retaining walls or fences with a height at or above
four feet above the original grade; placement or installation of paving or
walkway material (such as concrete, blacktop, paving stones and the like) or
other material for use as a non-natural walking or driving surface. To qualify
for an exemption from this license requirement, all construction work described
in the permit must be performed by the person claiming the exemption, or by a
legal employee working in the presence of and under the direct supervision of
either the residential owner or, for nonresidential property, in the presence
of and under the direct supervision of the qualified owner.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.01)
   (B)   Application of chapter. For purposes of this section, construction
work shall include electrical work, plumbing work or work completed by a person
on a residential structure owned and occupied by said person as their primary
residence.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.02)
   (C)   Application for contractor license. To obtain a license from the
Building Inspector, the applicant must make electronic application to the
Planning and Permitting Department through the city’s designated website/
portal. All requested information must be included and any incomplete
application will not be processed and the license shall not be issued. Said
application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address and phone number;
      (2)   The name, address, email and phone number of the company in whose
name the application is being made, if different than set forth above;
      (3)   Proof of any state licenses held by the applicant;
      (4)   The applicant’s state excise tax number and/or sales tax number;
      (5)   Proof of insurance as required by division (D) below;
      (6)   Payment of applicable fee;
      (7)   Description of what kind(s) of contract work contractor will
perform; and
      (8)   Verification of any state required bond on applicable projects.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.03)
   (D)   Insurance required for construction. Any applicant desiring to be
licensed as a contractor shall be required to produce a certificate of
insurance stating that the applicant has manufactures contractors liability
insurance, including products and completed operations and property damage
insurance, in the amount not less than an amount as shall be set forth in the
city’s annual fee resolution per occurrence with an aggregate of not less than
an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. The
insurance requirements set forth in this section shall be maintained during the
term of the license. Failure to maintain the required insurance may result in
suspension or revocation of any license issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.04)
   (E)   Contractor license fee. With the application for a contractor’s
license, said applicant shall pay a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.05)
   (F)   Contractor license term and renewal. Any contractor license issued
shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of issuance. Any license
may be renewed by the licensee prior to expiration by submitting a completed
application and the necessary fee using CitizenServe. Upon a determination by
the Building Inspector that the application is in compliance with all
applicable sections of this chapter, the license shall be issued. Any person
working within the city with an expired license shall be considered to be
unlicensed in violation of this chapter. Any project being completed by an
unlicensed contractor is subject to an immediate stop work order.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.06)
   (G)   Required inspections.
      (1)   Due to the fact that inspections vary depending on whether the
project is or includes a structure, street, sewer, water and the like,
contractors shall be required to contact the Building Inspector’s Office to
acquire a list of required inspections for each individual project. In the
event any contractor fails to call for an inspection, the project may be
stopped until an inspection can be made.
      (2)   The specific inspections required for each project shall be
determined by the Building Inspector’s Office. The Building Inspector’s Office
may include guidelines with the Manual of Construction Guidelines, addressing
the type of inspections needed for certain projects. However the Building
Inspector’s Office shall maintain the discretion and authority to require any
necessary testing and/or inspections depending on any individual project.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.07)
   (H)   Notice and cost of inspections.
      (1)   A minimum of 24 hours’ notice shall be given prior to any required
inspection. The cost for an inspection shall be as set forth in the following
schedule of inspection fees.
 
Additional
plan review
required by  The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution (minimum
changes,     charge: one-half hour)
additions or
revisions to
plans
For use of
outside
consultants
for plan     Actual cost
checking,
inspections
or both
Inspections
outside of   The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution (minimum
normal       charge: one hour)
business
hours
Inspections  The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution (minimum
made on a    charge: two hours)
holiday
Inspections
for which no The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution (minimum
fee is       charge: one hour)
specifically
indicated
Re-          The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution (minimum
inspection   charge: one-half hour)
fees
 
      (2)   All inspection fees shall be collected by the Building Inspection’s
Office and remitted to the City Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.08)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.071 ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   License required for electrical construction.
      (1)   Before any person, including an apprentice electrician, Class B
electrician, journeyman electrician and/or electrical contractor may engage in
the business of installing any electrical wiring or constructing or installing
electrical apparatus or machinery in any structure or upon any premises other
than the person’s primary residence, within the limits of the city, he or she
must be licensed under the laws of the state and shall obtain a license from
the Building Inspector as set forth in this section.
      (2)   Licenses shall be issued in the name of the individual or the firm.
A list of licenses shall be posted on the city’s designated website/portal.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.01)
   (B)   Application for electrical construction license. To obtain a license
from the Building Inspector, the applicant must make electronic application to
the Planning and Permitting Department through the city’s designated website/
portal. All requested information must be included, and any incomplete
application will not be processed and the license shall not be issued. Said
application shall include or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Proof that applicant is licensed under the laws of the state;
      (2)   The applicant’s state excise tax number;
      (3)   Proof of any insurance or undertaking required by the state;
      (4)   The applicant’s name, address, email and phone number;
      (5)   Payment of applicable fee; and
      (6)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant’s contact
person.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.02)
   (C)   Electrical construction license term and renewal. Any license issued
shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of issuance. Any license
may be renewed by the licensee prior to its expiration by submitting a
completed application and the necessary fee using CitizenServe. Upon a
determination by the Building Inspector that the application is in compliance
with all applicable sections of this chapter, the license shall be issued. Any
person completing work under an expired license shall be considered to be
unlicensed in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.03)
   (D)   Insurance required for electrical construction. Any applicant desiring
to be licensed as an electrical contractor shall be required to produce a
certificate of insurance naming the city as the holder stating that the
applicant has contractors liability insurance, including products and completed
operations and property damage insurance, in the amount not less than an amount
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per occurrence with
an aggregate of not less than an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution. The insurance requirements set forth in this section
shall be maintained during the term of the license. Failure to maintain the
insurance may result in suspension or revocation of any license issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.04)
   (E)   Electrical construction fees. Upon making application for an
electrical construction license, said applicant shall pay the applicable fee as
set forth below.
 
Electrical contractor The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                      resolution
 
(Prior Code, § 2.05.05)
   (F)   Public liability not created. Consistent with the provisions of SDCL §
36-16-36, this section shall not be construed to relieve from or reduce the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling,
installing, altering or repairing any electrical system or equipment for
damages or injuries to persons or property, nor shall the city be held as
assuming any liability by reason of any of the provisions in this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.05.06)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.072 PLUMBING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   License required for plumbing construction. No person shall perform
plumbing construction work within the limits of the city, on any property other
than the person’s primary residence until he or she is licensed by the state to
perform such work as described in the state’s plumbing laws and obtains a
plumbing construction license from the Building Inspector’s Office.
(Prior Code, § 2.06.01)
   (B)   Application for plumbing construction license. To obtain a license
from the Building Inspector, the applicant must make electronic application to
the Planning and Permitting Department through the city’s designated website/
portal. All requested information must be included, and any incomplete
application will not be processed and the license shall not be issued. Said
application shall include or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Proof that applicant is licensed under the laws of the state;
      (2)   The applicant’s state excise tax number;
      (3)   Proof of any insurance or undertaking required by the state;
      (4)   The applicant’s name, address, email and phone number;
      (5)   Payment of applicable fee; and
      (6)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant’s contact
person.
(Prior Code, § 2.06.02)
   (C)   Plumbing construction license term and renewal. Any license issued
shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of issuance. Any license
may be renewed by the licensee prior to its expiration by submitting a
completed application and the necessary fee using CitizenServe. Upon a
determination by the Building Inspector that the application is in compliance
with all applicable sections of this chapter, the license shall be issued. Any
person completing work under an expired license shall be considered to be
unlicensed in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.06.03)
   (D)   Insurance required for plumbing construction. Any applicant desiring
to be licensed as a plumbing contractor shall be required to produce a
certificate of insurance naming the city as the holder, stating that the
applicant has contractor liability insurance, including products and completed
operations and property damage insurance, in the amount not less than an amount
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per occurrence with
an aggregate of not less than an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution. The insurance requirements set forth in this section
shall be maintained during the term of the license. Failure to maintain the
insurance may result in suspension or revocation of any license issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.06.04)
   (E)   Plumbing construction license fees. Upon making application for a
plumbing construction license, said applicant shall pay the applicable fee as
set forth below.
 
Plumbing contractor/sewer The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
and water installer       resolution
contractor
 
(Prior Code, § 2.06.05)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.073 LANDSCAPE CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   License required for landscape construction. No person shall perform
landscape construction work, within the limits of the city, on any property
other than the person’s primary residence until he or she is licensed by the
city to perform such work. Landscape construction includes, but is not limited
to, designing and altering the grounds or yard of property, removing, planting
or trimming, trees, shrubs and other plants and patio construction. This
section does not apply to lawn mowing operations, nonprofit organizations or
volunteers and volunteer organizations.
(Prior Code, § 2.09.01)
   (B)   Application for landscape construction license. To obtain a license
from the Building Inspector, the applicant must make electronic application to
the Planning and Permitting Department through the city’s designated website/
portal. All requested information must be included, and any incomplete
application will not be processed and the license shall not be issued. Said
application shall include or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Proof that applicant is licensed under the laws of the state, if
applicable;
      (2)   The applicant’s state excise tax number;
      (3)   Proof of any insurance or undertaking required by the state;
      (4)   The applicant’s name, address, email and phone number;
      (5)   Payment of applicable fee; and
      (6)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant’s contact
person.
(Prior Code, § 2.09.02)
   (C)   Landscape construction license term and renewal. Any license issued
shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of issuance. Any license
may be renewed by the licensee prior to its expiration by submitting a
completed application and the necessary fee using CitizenServe. Upon a
determination by the Building Inspector that the application is in compliance
with all applicable sections of this chapter, the license shall be issued. Any
person completing work under an expired license shall be considered to be
unlicensed in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.09.03)
   (D)   Insurance required for landscape construction. Any applicant desiring
to be licensed as a landscape contractor shall be required to produce a
certificate of insurance naming the city as the holder, stating that the
applicant has contractor liability insurance, including products and completed
operations and property damage insurance, in the amount not less than an amount
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per occurrence with
an aggregate of not less than an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution. The insurance requirements set forth in this section
shall be maintained during the term of the license. Failure to maintain the
insurance may result in suspension or revocation of any license issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.09.04)
   (E)   Landscape construction license fees. Upon making application for a
landscape construction license, said applicant shall pay the applicable fee as
set forth below.
 
Landscape contractor The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
                     resolution
 
(Prior Code, § 2.09.05)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.074 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Authority to revoke license. The Building Inspector or designee shall
have the authority to revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter based
upon any one or a combination of the following:
      (1)   Incompetence in the contractor’s performance of the work for which
the person is licensed;
      (2)   Failure to comply with applicable city ordinances, including
adopted building codes;
      (3)   Failure to comply with applicable state laws;
      (4)   Failure to pay applicable fees;
      (5)   Failure to submit or renew insurance requirements;
      (6)   Significant number of complaints regarding the contractor’s failure
to meet Building Code or city ordinance requirements during the term of the
contractor’s license; and
      (7)   Building Inspector discovers that the principal or sole owner of an
LLC which had its contractor’s license revoked by the city is the principal or
sole owner of another licensed LLC with no material changes in ownership.
(Prior Code, § 2.10.01)
   (B)   Revocation process.
      (1)   Any decision of the Building Inspector or designee to revoke a
license issued under this section shall be provided in writing with an
explanation to the licensee. Said licensee may appeal the decision of the
Building Inspector as set forth in §
150.010.
      (2)   If a contractor’s license is revoked, the Building Inspector may
allow the contractor to complete existing projects and/or do warranty work. No
new permits will be issued to the contractor.
      (3)   If a contractor’ license is revoked by the Building Inspector, the
contractor may make application for a new contractor’s license one year after
the date of revocation.
(Prior Code, § 2.10.02)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
BUILDING AND STRUCTURE MOVING
§ 150.085 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except a licensed building and structure mover, shall move
a building or structure into or within the city, and every person shall
annually, before engaging in such occupation, obtain a license therefor
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   A building or structure for the purposes of this subchapter shall be
defined to be any structure for which a building permit is required to be
obtained before placement within the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.086 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person requesting to be licensed as a building and structure mover
shall make electronic application therefor to the Planning and Permitting
Department through the city’s designated website/portal. Said application shall
include or be accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, email and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Payment of applicable fee; and
      (3)   Verification of required insurance coverage.
   (B)   Any license issued under this subchapter shall be effective for a
period of one year from the date of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.087 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any applicant desiring to be licensed as a building moving contractor
shall be required to produce a certificate of insurance naming the city as the
holder, stating that the applicant has manufactures contractor’s liability
insurance, including products and completed operations and property damage
insurance, in the amount not less than an amount as shall be set forth in the
city’s annual fee resolution per occurrence with an aggregate of not less than
an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
   (B)   The insurance requirements set forth in this section shall be
maintained during the term of the license. Failure to maintain the insurance
may result in suspension or revocation of any license issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.088 FEE.
   Upon making application for or upon renewal of a license as a building and
structure mover, any applicant shall pay a fee as shall be set forth in the
city’s annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.04) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.089 PERMIT REQUIRED BEFORE MOVING.
   (A)   Before the owner of any building or structure shall be authorized to
have a building or structure moved within the city by a licensed building and
structure mover, he or she shall obtain a permit. Said owner shall make
electronic application to the Planning and Permitting Department, and said
application shall include or be accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the owner;
      (2)   Name, address email and phone number of the licensed building and
structure mover;
      (3)   A description of the route to be taken in so moving the building or
structure;
      (4)   The date and time of the proposed move;
      (5)   The length of time the move is expected to take; and
      (6)   Safety precautions the mover will use.
   (B)   In determining whether or not to issue the permit, the Building
Inspector shall take into consideration any applicable section of this chapter
and/or
Chapter 156 relating to planning and zoning and determine if the building or
structure proposed to be moved would have a final location is in compliance
with the standards set forth in this chapter and
Chapter 156. The Building Inspector shall also take into consideration the
proposed route and whether or not said route is the most reasonable route to be
taken for the proposed move.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.05) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.090 NEW BUILDING OR MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   Any owner of a new building or structure for which a building permit
has been issued by the Building Inspector, or a mobile home as defined in
Chapter 156, shall be required to obtain a permit pursuant to this subchapter
before said new building or structure may be moved into the city.
   (B)   Any manufactured or mobile home moved into the city must be compliant
with Federal Housing and Urban Development (HUD) construction standards and
must have the HUD compliance tag or label fixed to the mobile or manufactured
home.
   (C)   The Building Inspector may deny a moving permit if the condition of a
mobile or manufactured home is such that it may pose a significant risk of
fire, health or may adversely affect the general welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 2.07.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
PUBLIC EXCAVATIONS
§ 150.105 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATORS.
   No person shall perform any excavation upon publicly owned property within
the limits of the city, until he or she is licensed by the city to perform such
work through the Planning and Permitting Department.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.106 APPLICATION FOR EXCAVATION CONSTRUCTION LICENSE.
   (A)   To obtain a license from the Building Inspector, the applicant must
make application to the Planning and Permitting Department through the city’s
designated website/portal. All requested information must be included, and any
incomplete application will not be processed and the license shall not be
issued.
   (B)   Said application shall include or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s state excise tax number;
      (2)   Proof of required insurance;
      (3)   The applicant’s name, address, email and phone number;
      (4)   Payment of applicable fee as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution; and
      (5)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant’s contact
person.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.107 EXCAVATION LICENSE TERM AND RENEWAL.
   Any license issued shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date of
issuance. Any license may be renewed by the licensee prior to its expiration by
submitting a completed application and the necessary fee using CitizenServe.
Upon a determination by the Building Inspector that the application is in
compliance with all applicable sections of this chapter, the license shall be
issued. Any person completing work under an expired license shall be considered
to be unlicensed in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.108 INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION.
   Any applicant desiring to be licensed as an excavating contractor shall be
required to produce a certificate of insurance naming the city as the holder,
stating that the applicant has contractors liability insurance, including
products and completed operations and property damage insurance, in the amount
not less than an amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution per occurrence with an aggregate of not less than an amount as shall
be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. The insurance requirements
set forth in this section shall be maintained during the term of the license.
Failure to maintain the insurance may result in suspension or revocation of any
license issued.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.04) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.109 DIGGING PERMIT FEES.
   For each separate excavation project or job, the licensee shall submit a
permit form at the location and in the manner established by the Building
Inspector and shall submit a permit fee for each such application as shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.05) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.110 PERMIT REQUIRED BEFORE EACH EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Before any licensed excavator may perform any excavation upon public
property, said licensor shall make electronic application to the Planning and
Permitting Department for a digging permit through the city’s designated
website/portal, and said application shall include or be accompanied by the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address, email and phone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Name, address and phone number for the licensed excavator (if not
applicant);
      (3)   Name, address and phone number of the owner of the property upon
which the excavation is to be completed;
      (4)   The location of the desired excavation, including a list of the
lots located in front of the desired location;
      (5)   The purpose for which the excavation is being made;
      (6)   The date and time of the proposed excavation; and
      (7)   The length of time the excavation is expected to take.
   (B)   In determining whether or not to grant the permit, the Building
Inspector shall take into consideration any applicable section of this chapter
and whether the proposed excavation is in compliance with the standards set
forth in this chapter or the Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.111 EXCAVATION NEAR STREETS.
   No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation of any lot or parcel
of land without first assuring that the land is securely guarded so as to
prevent the injury of any persons or animals passing upon or along the
sidewalks, streets, alleys, public grounds, traveled path or roadway.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.07) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.112 OBSTRUCTION OF SEWER PIPES, MANHOLES, WATER MAINS OR APPURTENANCES.
   A contractor shall ensure that no sewer pipes, manholes, water mains or
appurtenances that are part of the sewer, stormwater or drinking water systems
shall be damaged in the process of making an excavation. If damage of any kind
occurs during excavation, the licensee person shall compensate the city for the
damage, including, but not limited to, compensation for the cost of any
necessary repairs.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.08) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.113 EXCAVATION MUST BE REFILLED.
   (A)   In refilling any excavation, the earth shall be thoroughly and
completely compacted using machine compacting equipment. When the licensee has
completely refilled it, the surface of the excavation shall not be any higher
or lower than the original surface when the excavations were commenced, and
settling will be at a minimum. The licensee shall be completely responsible for
any settling of any ditches that occur. In the event of any settling, the
excavator shall be required to refill the ditch and compact it in such manner
that the surface when refilled shall not be any higher or lower than the
original surface when the excavations were commenced. The licensee shall, as
soon as possible and in no case longer than 30 days after the start of such
excavation, completely restore the street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place to the same condition as it was prior to the making of such excavation.
   (B)   In the event that the surface is of concrete or asphalt, the licensee
shall be required to replace the concrete or asphalt which is disturbed because
of the excavation. In the event that the surface is a maintained lawn, the
licensee shall be required to replace the lawn with sod approved by the city.
The width of the patch shall be at least two feet wider than the width of the
actual excavation, if the excavation is two feet or less. The width of the
patch shall be at least four feet wider than the actual excavation, if the
excavation is more than two feet wide. In the event that the surface is of
concrete or asphalt, all openings in the concrete or asphalt shall be
mechanically cut with a saw.
   (C)   If any settling of the ditch occurs within two years after the
excavation is backfilled, the licensee shall, at his or her expense, be
required to remove the patch, if applicable, compact the ditch and replace the
surface. The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining the excavation from
the time the excavation is backfilled until the surface is restored. This
maintenance shall include periodic visual inspection of the excavation to
ensure that the excavation is not settling or the fill is not being pushed out
of the excavation due to, or from, traffic.
   (D)   All excavations shall, at all times, be at the same surface elevation
as the original surface when the excavation was commenced and no excavation
shall become a hazard for vehicular travel or pedestrian traffic.
   (E)   If at any time after the issuance of a digging permit, the Building
Inspector shall find that the work does not pass a satisfactory test, or has
not been timely or properly refilled, maintained and restored to its original
conditions, Building Inspector shall notify the licensee in writing of the
failure.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.09) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.114 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   In the event that it comes to the attention of the city that any
excavation is, or presents, a hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrian
traffic, the city shall use the contact information noted on the permit
application and advise the licensee of the hazard. The licensee shall have a
period of 24 hours from the time of the contact to repair the excavation so as
to eliminate the hazard. Notice under this provision shall be deemed to have
been given by the city at the time the first attempt is made to the contact
information of the licensee, regardless of whether personal contact is made
with the licensee. In the event that the licensee refuses or neglects to repair
the hazard within the 24-hour period, the city shall have the right to have its
crews repair the hazard, and the licensee shall be responsible for all costs of
labor, material and machinery in making the required repairs.
   (B)   If the deficiency does not constitute a hazard to vehicular traffic or
pedestrian traffic, the licensee shall have a period of 20 days from the date
of the written notification of the problem to correct or alleviate the problem.
If the licensee does not correct or alleviate the problem within said 20-day
time period, the city shall have the right to have to do the required repair
and charge the licensee for the labor, material and equipment time in making
the repairs. The city shall send a statement to the licensee notifying him or
her of the charges pursuant to this section, and the excavator shall have a
period of 30 days to pay the charges in full. In the event that payment is not
made within 30 days, no further permits shall be issued pursuant to §
150.109 until charges pursuant to this section are paid in full. If the charges
are not paid to the city within 60 days after the date of billing, the city
shall have the right to obtain full reimbursement or restitution from the
licensee.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.10) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.115 APPLICABILITY TO UTILITY COMPANIES.
   All sections of this subchapter relating to excavations in public rights-of-
way shall be binding upon utility companies.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.11) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.116 BARRICADES, GUARDS, LIGHTS AND THE LIKE REQUIRED.
   Any person making any excavation within the city on either public or private
ground shall, during the progress and continuance of the work, erect, keep and
maintain about and around the same by day and night, suitable guards and
fences, lanterns and signals as to prevent injury to any person, animal or
vehicle on account of such excavation. The requirements of this section shall
be performed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the “Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.”
(Prior Code, § 2.08.12) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
FENCES
§ 150.130 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Fences may be constructed only as provided in this subchapter of natural
material in its living state or of the following factory manufactured
materials:
   (A)   Wood; subject to the following conditions or limitations:
      (1)   Wood which has a natural resistance to decay, such as redwood or
cypress, or treated wood, may be used;
      (2)   Wood in its natural state shall not be used for posts;
      (3)   Plywood or other solid sheeting materials which are two feet or
wider shall not be permitted;
      (4)   Spacing of support posts on wood fences shall be no more than eight
feet on center. Such supports shall be embedded below grade not less than three
feet unless the post is embedded in concrete. If concrete is used, the post may
be embedded below grade no less than two feet and one cubic foot of concrete;
      (5)   All wood in contact with the ground shall be treated; and
      (6)   Chemical retention shall meet the American Wood Preservers
Association Standards.
   (B)   Hedges; subject to the following conditions or limitations:
      (1)   Hedges shall not be located in the first 25 feet of any required
front yard on an interior lot;
      (2)   Hedges located on a corner lot shall not be located within 25 feet
of the property corner abutting the right-of-way intersection;
      (3)   All hedges shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion and
must be kept clean of all trash and other materials. When the Chief of Police,
Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer finds a hedge is causing a
public safety hazard (visibility) the hazard shall be removed immediately upon
notification by the Code Enforcement to the property owner; and
      (4)   When the Chief of Police finds a hedge is causing a public safety
hazard (visibility), the hazard shall be removed.
   (C)   Metal; subject to the following conditions or limitations:
      (1)   (a)   Metal fences may be of any manufactured metal product except
barbed wire or razor wire; and
         (b)   An exception to the above shall exist for security fences when
approved by the City Planning Commission. Security fences may be constructed
with barbed wire or razor wire if the lowest strand of barbed wire is not less
than eight feet from the existing grade.
      (2)   Spacing of support posts for metal fences shall be no more than
eight feet on center; and
      (3)   All supports shall be embedded in not less than one cubic feet of
concrete and extend below grade a minimum of two feet.
   (D)   Concrete, masonry or rock; subject to the following conditions or
limitations;
      (1)   Concrete, masonry or rock fences may be constructed of cast in
place concrete or any manufactured concrete product;
      (2)   Fences or walls constructed of concrete products shall be designed
with reinforcement. Such design shall be in compliance with the Building Code
and approved by the Building Inspector; and
      (3)   A retaining wall is not a fence. A retaining wall over four feet
tall requires a building permit.
   (E)   Polyvinyl chloride; subject to the following conditions or
limitations;
      (1)   Fences constructed of PVC must meet or exceed ASTM requirement;
      (2)   Posts for PVC fencing shall not be spaced more than eight feet; and
      (3)   Posts shall be installed not less than two feet below grade and
imbedded in not less than one cubic foot of concrete.
   (F)   Prohibited materials: Wood in its natural state shall not be used for
posts; and
   (G)   Other materials as may be approved by the Building Inspector when the
Building Inspector has determined that the alternate material meets or exceeds
the requirements of the above materials.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.131 HEIGHT, SETBACK AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all fences located within the
city.
   (A)   No fence shall be permitted over the height of six feet unless a
variance is approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (B)   On any interior lot, a fence which is above the height of four feet
and is opaque in nature shall not be permitted within the first 25 feet of any
required front yard.
   (C)   On any corner lot, a fence which is above the height of three feet and
is opaque in nature shall not be permitted within a site triangle which
measures 25 feet back in both directions from the property corner abutting an
intersection.
   (D)   All fences must be constructed to manufacturer’s recommendations or to
industry standards.
   (E)   Fences cannot be constructed in the public right-of-way (including
alleys) nor on adjacent property not owned by the applicant.
   (F)   Where property lines are unclear, the owner of record must survey the
property or locate the property corners to ensure the fence meets setbacks.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.132 FENCE PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required for fences. In addition to the requirements of §§
150.130 and
150.131, before any person may erect or cause to be erected or constructed a
fence four feet or more above the natural grade of the site within the city, he
or she must first obtain a fence permit from the Building Inspector. The only
two exceptions to this requirement are:
      (1)   If a temporary structure permit has been issued for the fence; or
      (2)   If a plan for which a building permit has been issued includes the
full description, location and statement of value of the fence to be
constructed.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.03)
   (B)   Application for permit for fences. To obtain a building permit for a
fence from the Building Inspector, the applicant must make electronic
application to the Inspection Office through the city’s designated website. The
permit application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name of the owner of the property on which the fence is to be
erected;
      (2)   The legal description and address of the property on which the
fence is to be erected;
      (3)   The proposed height of the fence;
      (4)   The type of material to be used in constructing the fence;
      (5)   Name, address, email and phone number of the applicant;
      (6)   Name, address, email and phone number of the person or licensed
contractor who will be erecting the fence (if not the applicant); and
      (7)   Written proof from the property owner authorizing the installation
of the fence if the property where the fence is to be installed is not owned by
the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.04)
   (C)   Fee for fence permit. Upon making application for a permit to build a
fence, all applicants shall pay a fee as determined by the permit fee schedule
outlined in §
150.052 for each fence permit requested.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.05)
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 150.133 UNSAFE OR HAZARDOUS FENCES.
   (A)   If at any time, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, Building
Inspector or designees, a fence becomes unsafe to the public or person
occupying the property, the city may order the fence removed. A fence shall be
considered to be an unsafe or hazardous under the following circumstances,
however, the city may find a fence is unsafe or hazardous under other
circumstances not specifically listed herein:
      (1)   Whenever any portion of the fence or a portion thereof has been
damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before
such catastrophe;
      (2)   Whenever the fence or portion thereof is creating a traffic hazard
because of visibility as determined under the setback requirements of this
chapter, Chapter 156 or by the Building Inspector;
      (3)   Whenever any portion of the fence or a portion thereof or
ornamentation attached on the fence is not of sufficient strength or stability,
or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of
resisting wind pressure as is stated in the building code for new structures;
      (4)   Whenever any portion of the fence or a portion thereof has cracked,
warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that the fence or portions of the
fence are materially less resistant to winds;
      (5)   Whenever the fence, or any portion thereof, is likely to partially
or completely collapse, because of:
         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
         (b)   Faulty construction;
         (c)   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such fence;
         (d)   The deterioration, decay or instability of its foundation; or
         (e)   Any other cause.
      (6)   Whenever the fence or a portion thereof lists, leans or buckles to
such an extent that the plumb line passing through the center of gravity does
not fall inside the middle one-third of the base of the fence;
      (7)   Whenever the fence or a portion thereof has been constructed in
violation of any specific requirements of the Building Code, ordinances of the
city or laws of the state; and
      (8)   Whenever the fence or portion thereof is creating a traffic hazard
because of visibility as determined by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   If a fence is determined to be of an immediate public safety hazard
(i.e., visibility, encroachment in public right-of-way and the like), the fence
shall be brought into compliance or removed within 48 hours upon notification
by the Building Inspector to the property owner (either by email or attempted
telephone contact). If any owner of record fails to abate a hazardous fence
within 24 hours after notice from the Building Inspector, the city shall have
the right to obtain a warrant from the court to go upon the property and abate
the violation without further notice to the owner or occupant of record. The
city may recover its costs of abatement pursuant to Chapter 37 or in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   If any owner of record fails to abate a unsafe fence within 30 days
after receipt of written notice from the Building Inspector, USPS first-class
mail or electronic email, the city shall have the right to obtain a warrant
from the court to go upon the property and abate the violation without further
notice to the owner or occupant of record. The city may recover its costs of
abatement pursuant to Chapters 37 or 94 or in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 2.11.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
EROSION CONTROL
§ 150.145 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   During the construction process, soils are highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroding soil endangers water resources by reducing
the water quality and adversely affecting aquatic habitat for fish and other
aquatic species. Eroded soils also increase the maintenance and repairs needed
to maintain storm sewers, ditched and other water carrying channels within the
city. It decreases the life expectancy for holding ponds and other runoff
management facilities. In addition, clearing and grading during construction
causes the loss of topsoil and native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to safeguard persons, protect
property and to prevent unnecessary damage to the environment within the city.
This subchapter will promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and
controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or
activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of
earth in the city.
   (C)   Unless specifically exempted, these regulations shall apply to all
lands within the city on which the vegetation is removed, disturbed or fill
material has been brought onto a site.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.01) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.146 GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any person may engage in a land-disturbing activity effecting from
1,000 square feet up or more, he or she must first obtain a grading permit from
the Building Inspector. Land disturbance of more than one acre also requires a
stormwater pollution prevention plan permit issued by the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.02) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.147 APPLICATION FOR GRADING PERMIT.
   To obtain a grading permit from the Building Inspector, the applicant must
make application to the Inspection Office through the city’s designated
website. Said application must include or be accompanied by the following:
   (A)   The name, address, email and phone number of the owner of the real
property proposed to be disturbed;
   (B)   The name, address, email and phone number of the contractor, if any,
doing the work;
   (C)   The name, address, phone number and emergency contact information for
the person(s) responsible for the erosion control measures implementation and
maintenance;
   (D)   Documentation of the approval of the stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) by the city’s Engineering and Inspections Office; and
   (E)   Submittal of an erosion control plan (ECP).
(Prior Code, § 2.12.03) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.148 EXCEPTIONS.
   No grading permit shall be required for the following activities:
   (A)   Any emergency activities that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources;
   (B)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations as a permitted main or
accessory use; and
   (C)   Land-disturbing activity less than 1,000 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.04) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.149 FEES.
   Upon making application for a grading permit, any applicant shall pay a fee
as determined by the permit fee schedule outlined in §
150.052.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.05) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.150 GRADING PERMIT ISSUED.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, upon receiving said application and fee, shall
examine the same. If the application is completed, the proper fee is paid and
the proposed land disturbance conforms to the ordinances and laws of this city,
he or she shall issue a grading permit to the applicant, which shall entitle
the applicant to proceed with the land disturbance.
   (B)   If the Building Inspector, upon examination of the application, finds
that the application is not complete, or other information is necessary before
a decision can be rendered thereon, the Building Inspector may request the
additional information from the applicant without the necessity of obtaining a
new application or fee.
   (C)   If the Building Inspector finds that the land disturbance applied for
does not conform to the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, he or
she shall reject the application by noting that fact upon the application and
returning one copy of the application to the applicant. The other copy of the
application shall be retained in the files of the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.06) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.151 EXPIRATION OF GRADING PERMIT.
   All permits shall be issued for a period of one year.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.07) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.152 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES APPLICABLE TO ALL LAND DISTURBANCES.
   Any person not required to obtain a grading permit but who is engaging in a
land-disturbing activity is required to apply effective best management
practices (BMP).
(Prior Code, § 2.12.08) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.153 EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any acceptable erosion control plan (ECP) shall include the following
requirements:
   (A)   A legible map identifying the area to be disturbed, slopes and
resources to be protected, as well as the nearest downstream stormwater inlet,
drainage ways and neighboring property lines. The minimum size of the map for a
site up to one acre is eight and one-half inches by 11 inches; for sites
disturbing more than one acre and industrial sites, the minimum map size will
be 11 inches by 17 inches;
   (B)   The plan must be approved and BMPs must be in place before grading may
begin;
   (C)   Documentation verifying that the property owner has obtained a general
permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activities
through the SD DANR for land-disturbing activity of one acre or more;
   (D)   Documentation verifying that the property owner has obtained a general
permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activities through
SD DANR. The requirements for this permit are governed by the Standard
Industrial Code (SIC). There are no size (area) requirements for this permit;
   (E)   All BMPs necessary to achieve soil stabilization on the site of any
disturbed areas, including stockpiles of any soil, rock or any additional
landscaping materials on the site;
   (F)   A designated entry/exit point, an on-site concrete washout area,
measures to protect the nearest downstream stormwater inlets or drainage way
and detailed measures to be taken to prevent mud-tracking from vehicles and
equipment into the street; and
   (G)   Inclusion of the date for final stabilization, as defined below, by
the grading permit holder.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.09) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.154 FINAL STABILIZATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Final stabilization shall be considered attained for all soil
disturbing activities at a site when either of the following criteria has been
met:
      (1)   A uniform (e.g., evenly disturbed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetation cover with a minimum density of 70% of the native
background vegetation for the area, has been established on all unpaved areas
and areas not covered by a permanent structure; or
      (2)   Equivalent permanent stabilization measures, such as the use of
riprap, retaining walls, geotextiles or other approved methods, have been
employed.
   (B)   When background native vegetation naturally covers less than 100% of
the ground, the 70% coverage criteria is adjusted as follows: If native
vegetation covers 50% of the ground, 70% of 50% (0.70 x 0.50 = 0.35) would
require 35% total coverage for final stabilization. In an area where less
vegetation is naturally found, less stabilization would be required.
   (C)   Any final stabilization must be completed within one year of
certificate of occupancy, final inspection or project completion, whichever
occurs sooner.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.10) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.155 FINAL STABILIZATION FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   For individual residential construction lots final stabilization means that
either:
   (A)   The homebuilder has completed final stabilization as specified above;
or
   (B)   The homebuilder requests, in writing, an extension beyond the one year
requirement outlined above for extenuating circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.11) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.156 FINAL STABILIZATION FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES.
   For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g.,
pipelines across range or crop land, staging areas for road construction and
the like), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed
land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not
previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately
adjacent to a watercourse, and areas which are not being returned to their
preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization criteria set
forth in §
150.154.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.12) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
§ 150.157 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the grading permit holder to attain
the approval of all required agencies for the crossing of any waterway
associated with any grading project (i.e., SD DANR, Corp of Engineers, FEMA and
the like).
   (B)   ECPs and SWPPPs must be maintained on the site during the progress or
the work.
   (C)   If control measures implemented do not achieve stabilization, the
permit holder may be required to submit an updated SWPPP or may be required to
submit an ECP prepared by a qualified state licensed professional engineer. The
applicant must submit to the city any updated or amended copies of the SWPPP or
ECP within five days of final approval by the state.
   (D)   The city’s authorized representative may enter on to the site to make
inspections as needed.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.13) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
LOW WATER CROSSINGS
§ 150.170 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LOW WATER CROSSINGS WITHIN THE CITY.
   (A)   All non-bridge, hereinafter referred to as low water crossings of any
creeks, within the city, shall be constructed to the following minimum
standards, shall be designed by a state licensed professional engineer with
experience in this type of construction and shall be submitted to the City
Engineering and Inspections Department and City Street Committee for review and
approval before any construction may begin.
   (B)   A Type I low water crossing will be required if:
      (1)   The crossing represents the only access into an inhabited
residential area;
      (2)   There is year-round water flow in the creek at the crossing
location; and/or
      (3)   Grade constraints at the creek crossing location cannot be met when
trying to install a Type II crossing.
   (C)   Type II low water crossings will be required at all other creek
crossing locations.
   (D)   A Type I low water crossing will be designed in accordance with the
following minimum standards:
      (1)   Shall have a minimum 32-foot wide top driving surface;
      (2)   Shall be constructed with a minimum of four to 24 inches RCP or CMP
culverts;
      (3)   Shall have a minimum 20-foot long flat bottom driving section over
the culverts;
      (4)   All concrete slab portions of the crossing shall be constructed of
a minimum eight-inch thick, reinforced concrete slab;
      (5)   Shall be constructed to meet an H-20 Highway Loading;
      (6)   Shall have a maximum grade of the driving surface out of and in to
the crossing bottom of 10%;
      (7)   Shall have a minimum of six inches of crushed base course as cover
over the culverts;
      (8)   Shall have minimum eight-inch thick reinforced concrete side slopes
on the upstream and downstream side of the crossing which shall have a 3:
1 slope;
      (9)   Shall have a minimum of four feet of reinforced concrete footing
walls and wing walls or eight feet of buried sheet pilings for footing walls
and wing walls installed at the toe of the concrete side slopes;
      (10)   Shall be constructed of minimum M-6 concrete as specified within
the most recent edition of the State Department of Transportation’s “Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges”;
      (11)   Shall have a minimum four-inch thick Class “G” asphalt driving
surface on the roadway running out of and into the 20 feet long, flat,
reinforced concrete, bottom section over the culverts (Class “G” asphalt
surface shall be as specified within the most recent edition of the State
Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Roads and
Bridges”);
      (12)   Shall have a 12-inch by 16-inch concrete cap poured on top of the
sheet pilings, if used, to tie the pilings to the concrete slab (the method of
rebar connection to the sheet pilings shall be approved by the city); and
      (13)   Shall have a city approved flowable fill mixture or gabion baskets
placed one each side of the culverts for a height of 18 inches.
   (E)   A Type II low water crossing will be designed in accordance with the
following minimum standards:
      (1)   Shall have a minimum 25-foot-wide top driving surface which may be
expanded to 32 feet when, in the city’s opinion, the extra width is necessary
and justified for pedestrian traffic or any other public safety issue;
      (2)   Shall have minimum 20-foot long flat bottom driving section;
      (3)   Shall be constructed of a minimum eight-inch thick, reinforced
concrete slab which shall extend from the top of the creek back to top of creek
bank;
      (4)   Shall be constructed to meet an H-20 Highway Loading;
      (5)   Shall have a maximum grade of the driving surface out of and in to
the crossing bottom of 10%;
      (6)   Shall have a minimum of six inches of crushed base course placed
under the driving slab;
      (7)   Shall have a minimum of four feet of reinforced concrete footing
walls and wing walls or eight feet of buried sheet pilings for footing walls
and wing walls installed at the edge of the concrete driving surface;
      (8)   Shall be constructed of minimum M-6 concrete as specified within
the most recent edition of the State Department of Transportation’s “Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges”;
      (9)   Shall have a 12-foot by 16-foot concrete cap poured on top of the
sheet pilings, if used, to tie the pilings to the concrete slab (method of
rebar connection to the sheet pilings to be approved by the city); and
      (10)   Shall have a minimum of 20 feet of two feet thick gabion baskets
placed on the upstream and downstream sides of the crossing extending from top
of bank to top of bank of the creek channel.
   (F)   Example of some typical details shall be available for review at the
city’s Engineering and Inspections Office.
   (G)   The finding of the Common Council of the city that this chapter is
necessary for the public safety of the citizens of the city and shall take
effect immediately upon passage.
(Prior Code, § 27.01.01) (Ord. 2007-31, passed 9-21-2007)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is subject to the
provisions of Chapters 37, 94 and 156 and/or a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable
by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL §
22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any costs and/or
restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
   (B)   In addition to the general penalty as stated above, any cleanup
required by the city for the removal of mud tracked onto the street from the
site, extra cleaning of the storm sewers or drainage ways and the like will be
charged to the permit holder at a rate of one and one-half times the normal
equipment rates and labor rate for the city.
   (C)   Failure to pay any applicable fees within 30 days of said notice may
result in the revocation of any and all outstanding permits and licenses held
through the city.
   (D)   In addition, any violation of the provisions of this chapter may
result in the revocation, suspension or refusal to issue any license pursuant
to any section of this chapter.
   (E)   In addition, any person who commences any work toward erecting or
constructing a building or structure or causes any alterations to an existing
building or structure which requires a building permit under the terms of this
chapter before obtaining the necessary permit shall be subject to an
administrative penalty fee, equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee
required by this chapter.
   (F)   Finally, in addition to this chapter, unlicensed contractors are
subject to the regulations of Chapter 37 for penalty.
(Prior Code, § 2.01.04) (Ord. 2016-10, passed 12-28-2016; Ord. 2022-07, passed
5-17-2022)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Unlawful to obstruct streets and sidewalks
   
151.002   Hindering street improvement
   
151.003   No burning on streets
   
151.004   Obstruction of crossings by trains
   
151.005   Easements over vacated streets and alleys
   
151.006   Easements over platted property
   
151.007   Unlawful obstruction and use
Names and Numbering
   
151.020   Names of streets and avenues
   
151.021   System of numbering; base lines
   
151.022   Odd and even numbers; how arranged
   
151.023   Size and color of numbers
   
151.024   Certificates of numbers
   
151.025   Time limit for numbering
Snow and Ice Removal
   
151.040   Public nuisance
   
151.041   Removal by owner
   
151.042   Removal by city; cost
   
151.043   Notice; assessment
   
151.044   Filing of assessment
   
151.045   Certification
   
151.046   Recovery of cost of removing snow or ice in lieu of assessment
against property
   
151.047   Parking prohibited on designated snow removal routes; immediate
ticket and tow authority
   
151.048   Director of Public Works authority
Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks
   
151.060   Building permit required
   
151.061   Width and location of sidewalks
   
151.062   Material
   
151.063   Construction
   
151.064   Maintenance, repairs and reconstruction
   
151.065   Notice of necessary maintenance, repairs or reconstruction
   
151.066   Installation required
   
151.067   When work not done by owner
   
151.068   Defacing sidewalks
   
151.069   Discharge of rainwater
   
151.070   Variances
   
151.071   Appeal process
Right-of-Way (ROW) Maintenance
   
151.085   Duty to maintain rights-of-way
   
151.086   Easements and drainage obstructions and modifications
   
151.087   Parking in unimproved rights-of-way
   
151.088   Alternative compliance rules
   
151.089   Notice of violation and appeals
   
151.090   City action to correct violation
   
151.091   Emergency abatement
   
151.092   Relationship to other law
Brick Project
   
151.105   Findings
   
151.106   Use of brick
   
151.107   Snow and ice removal
   
151.108   Defacing and destroying brick pavers prohibited
   
151.109   Notice to city
   
151.110   Maintenance; finance
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall encumber or obstruct any sidewalk, street, public way,
public alley or public ground within the city.
   (B)   No person shall leave standing or store any vehicle, structure or
object in any public right-of-way, street, sidewalk or on public ground which
obstructs the use of the same.
   (C)   No person shall permit merchandise to be stored upon any public right-
of-way, street, sidewalk or public ground unless authorized by City Council.
   (D)   No person shall sell any goods or merchandise upon any public street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground unless authorized by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.01) (Ord. 2003-12, passed 11-28-2003; Ord. 2005-09, passed
4-29-2005; Ord. 2007-10, passed 3-31-2007) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.002 HINDERING STREET IMPROVEMENT.
   No person shall hinder or obstruct the employees of the city in lawfully
making any improvement in any public street, road, alley, sidewalk or on any
public ground of this city, nor shall any person without proper authority tear
up, break or injure any pavement, cross walk, sidewalk or other improvement in
any public street, road sidewalk, alley or public ground in the city.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.02) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.003 NO BURNING ON STREETS.
   No person shall burn any trash, lumber, leaves, grass, straw or other
material of any kind upon, or light or have a fire of any kind upon, or allow
any gasoline or petroleum products upon, or place any dirt, trash or any other
kind of material upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.03) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.004 OBSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS BY TRAINS.
   No person shall direct the operation, order the operation, permit the
operation or operate any railroad train in such manner as to prevent the use of
the street or roadway for the purposes of vehicular or foot travel by blocking
or otherwise preventing the movement of such traffic thereon for any period of
time longer than five consecutive minutes in duration, and if a street or
roadway is so blocked for a period of at least five minutes, it shall be left
clear for a period of at least five minutes before it is again blocked. This
section shall not apply to trains traveling continuously in the same direction
through such intersection or crossing.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.04) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.005 EASEMENTS OVER VACATED STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Any future resolution providing for the vacation of any street or alley
shall not become effective until the owners of the streets and alleys after the
same have become vacated shall execute to the city and to the public an
easement across such streets or alleys so vacated for the installation,
operation and a maintenance of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical
lines, telephone lines and all other public utilities.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.05) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.006 EASEMENTS OVER PLATTED PROPERTY.
   Any future plat providing for the relocation of any street or alley shall
not be approved unless proper provisions and arrangements have been made for
easements for the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any
and all public utilities then in existence or which may be erected in the
future.
(Prior Code, § 15.04.06) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.007 UNLAWFUL OBSTRUCTION AND USE.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         OBSTRUCT. To render impassable without reasonable inconvenience or
hazard. No person shall be deemed to have violated this section solely because
of a gathering of persons to hear him or her speak or otherwise communicate or
solely because of being a member of the gathering.
         PUBLIC. A place to which the public or a substantial group has access,
among such places are included public streets, alleys, places, public buildings
and any places of business or amusement in which the buildings, places of
business or amusement are open to the public, or publicly owned property.
      (2)   Prohibited.
         (a)   It is unlawful for any person, without legal privilege to do so,
to obstruct any public street, alley, sidewalk, way, place or building, whether
alone or with others and who, after warning by a Code Enforcement Officer,
persists in so obstructing the same.
         (b)   It is unlawful for a person in a gathering to refuse to obey a
reasonable request or order by a police officer to move.
         (c)   It is unlawful for any person to loiter, stand or sit in or upon
any public street, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder
or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing
or attempting to pass along the same. A request or order to move addressed to a
person whose speech or other lawful behavior attracts an obstructing audience
shall be deemed reasonable if the obstruction of the public area can be
eliminated by police control of the size or location of the gathering.
         (d)   It is unlawful for any person, except as provided herein, to
place any goods, wares or merchandise for exhibition or sale upon any public
street, alley, sidewalk or any public grounds in the city, or place or cause to
be placed thereon any goods, wares or merchandise, or bottles, cans, cases,
packages, barrels or other containers, at any time for exhibition, sale or any
other purpose, or place or cause to be placed thereon, any advertising sign,
bicycle rack, popcorn stand or rack, or any other moveable property, article or
material which in any manner obstructs or interferes with the free use of such
public street, road, alley, sidewalk or public ground.
(Prior Code, § 15.06.02)
   (B)   Tree planters. For the purpose of this division (B), the placement of
tree planters and attached benches upon sidewalks by the owner of the abutting
property, or his or her agent, shall not be construed as an obstruction;
provided, that the sidewalk is approximately 15 feet in width and that there
remains a minimum of five feet between the tree planter, attached benches and
the property line, and that there remains a minimum of five feet between the
tree planter, attached benches and the back of the curb.
      (1)   The placement and design of the tree planters, attached benches and
the types of trees used shall be approved by the Building Inspector or his or
her designee.
      (2)   The owner of the abutting property or his or her agent, who places
the planters and attached benches upon the sidewalk, shall keep the trees, the
tree planters and the attached benches in a neat and satisfactory manner.
      (3)   No advertising of any kind or nature shall be permitted to be
placed upon the tree planter or attached benches.
(Prior Code, § 15.06.03)
   (C)   Sidewalk café. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the
City Council may by annual permit authorize businesses to operate sidewalk
cafés upon public sidewalks as hereinafter described, subject to the conditions
hereinafter set forth. A sidewalk café is an outdoor area located in the public
right-of-way which is operated and maintained by an establishment, coffeehouse,
tea shop, restaurant or bar. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be subject
to all licensing requirements, including those set forth at SDCL § 35-4-77.1.
Sidewalk cafés may be permitted within the city for operation between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., only if all design criteria can be met.
      (1)   Application.
         (a)   An application for a sidewalk café permit shall be filed using
CitizenServe by the proposed operator with the City Planning and Permitting
Department.
         (b)   Permit fees shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution per year regardless of what month the operator acquired the permit,
and expires December 31 of the issuance year.
         (c)   The application shall include a site plan which identifies the
location and number of tables, chairs, awnings, umbrellas, trash receptacles,
heaters, barricades and landscape features as applicable, a copy of any license
required by SDCL § 35-4-77.1 and an affidavit of compliance with that
requirement, and any other documents needed to demonstrate compliance with this
chapter. The application shall include a valid copy of all necessary licenses
and permits required by state law and county ordinance.
      (2)   Design criteria.
         (a)   Sidewalk cafés are permitted only on sidewalks with a minimum
width of five feet from the property line to the curb face. The location of the
sidewalk café must be adjacent the business operating the café and may not
extend beyond the property lines. Sidewalk cafés must maintain a clear
pedestrian path of at least five feet at all times. This pathway must be free
of any obstructions such as trees, parking meters and utilities or other
facilities such as telephone poles, fire hydrants, fire protection
appurtenances, parking meters, mailboxes or signs located in the public right-
of-way. All applicable sight triangle requirements shall be met at all times by
sidewalks. No café elements may be located within two feet of the curb face.
         (b)   All elements associated with sidewalk cafés, including, but not
limited to, tables, chairs, umbrellas, temporary barricades, heaters and
awnings must be of quality design, workmanship and materials to ensure safety
and convenience to patrons. All such elements will be reviewed as part of the
permit process.
         (c)   Elements of the sidewalk café may not be attached permanently to
the sidewalk of public right-of-way. The property owner is responsible for the
restoration of the sidewalk or public right-of-way if any damage is caused by
the sidewalk café. Physical barriers may not exceed four feet in height.
Bolting a barrier to the sidewalk is not permitted.
         (d)   Umbrellas must be designed to be secure during windy conditions.
Umbrellas must be at least seven feet above the sidewalk when open.
         (e)   Lighting for sidewalk cafés is subject to approval during the
permitting process. Such lighting shall not cause a glare to passing motorists
or pedestrians. Tabletop lighting may include candles and battery-operated
fixtures.
         (f)   Sidewalk cafés are not to broadcast loud noise that results in a
nuisance to the surrounding properties.
         (g)   Physical barricades are required if alcoholic beverages are sold
at the sidewalk café.
         (h)   No signage is permitted except for what appears on the business
and a small foldable sign placed near the sidewalk café. Any such sign shall
not contain off-premises advertising and shall not display a logo or
advertising copy other than for the sidewalk café.
      (3)   Objects for sale. Vending machines, carts or other objects for sale
are prohibited from inclusion in a sidewalk café. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the City Council from authorizing vending carts or similar uses
outside of sidewalk cafés.
      (4)   Services. All services provided to sidewalk café patrons as well as
all patron activity must occur within the designated sidewalk café area. No
alcoholic beverages may be stored or mixed in the sidewalk café.
      (5)   Supervision. The permit holder is responsible for proper
supervision of the sidewalk café to ensure the requirements of the permit are
met.
      (6)   Liability insurance. Every sidewalk café permit holder must
maintain commercial general liability insurance. The city shall be named as an
additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any liability
arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a sidewalk café. A copy of
the certificate of coverage shall be provided to the city, and notice of the
termination of insurance coverage shall be provided to the City Planning and
Permitting Department. The failure to maintain or a lapse in commercial general
liability insurance while operating in the city will result in immediate
revocation of the permit issued under this section.
      (7)   Additional requirements. Permit holders must ensure that the
requirements for operation are met. These include the following.
         (a)   Patrons must wear shoes and shirts at all times.
         (b)   All sidewalk cafés must maintain at least one opening for
ingress and egress at all times. All sidewalk cafés shall abide by all
accessibility requirements of the currently adopted Building Code.
         (c)   Sidewalk cafés must adhere to size, design and other
requirements approved by the city.
      (8)   Sanitation. All areas within and surrounding a sidewalk café must
be maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary condition. All cleaning must be
performed in accordance with city regulations.
      (9)   Exceptions. An exception may be granted by the Planning and
Permitting Official to any of the provisions of the design criteria set forth
in divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(h) above.
      (10)   Appeals. Any person or party has the right to appeal a city
planning and permitting decision according to the appeal process set in
division (D) below.
      (11)   Other laws. All permit holders shall be required to abide by all
federal, state and local laws.
      (12)   Revocation of permit.
         (a)   A sidewalk café permit may be revoked for cause, including, but
not limited to, the failure to comply with all of the standards required for
the issuance of the permit.
         (b)   A notice of intent to revoke a sidewalk café permit shall be
given in writing ten days prior to actual revocation and shall specify the area
or areas of continued failure to meet requirements and maintain conditions the
city may have imposed.
         (c)   If, during that period, proof of compliance is made by the
holder of the permit, the permit may be authorized to continue in force. If a
hearing has been requested following receipt of notice to revoke, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the matter and shall make a
determination whether to revoke within 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 15.06.04)
   (D)   Appeal process.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision made under this section shall be
entitled to have said decision reviewed by the city. If, after review, said
person is unsatisfied, he or she may appeal the decision to the City Council,
acting as the Board of Adjustment. The process shall be as follows.
         (a)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for
review with the city setting forth the basis for which he or she believes the
decision to be in error. The writing shall also include the person’s name and
mailing address.
         (b)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall
review the challenged decision and mail a written response to the aggrieved
person within 20 days.
         (c)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of
the city following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the
Finance Officer. There shall be a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the
Finance Office at the time of filing the written request for review. The
Finance Officer, or appointed designee, may waive the assessed fee if the
appellant provides a reasonable basis showing hardship or lack of ability to
pay the fee.
         (d)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council and a public hearing on the appeal shall be held at a
regularly scheduled City Council within 30 days after the date said appeal was
filed. The Finance Office shall provide notice to the person specifying the
time, date and location of the hearing.
      (2)   The City Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days of the hearing. The Council may affirm or reverse the
decision.
(Prior Code, § 15.06.06)
(Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2010-09, passed 8-18-2010; Ord. 2022-04,
passed 3-7-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
NAMES AND NUMBERING
§ 151.020 NAMES OF STREETS AND AVENUES.
   The names of the streets and avenues of the city shall be known and
designated by those names shown upon the several plats of the divisions and
subdivisions of the city within its corporate limits and as may be changed by
ordinance or resolution by the City Council, as filed and of record in the
Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.01) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.021 SYSTEM OF NUMBERING; BASE LINES.
   The dwelling houses, business places and frontages on the streets and
avenues of the city shall be and are hereby numbered, and the respective places
of residence and of business therein shall be hereafter known and designated by
number within the limits hereinafter provided as follows.
   (A)   For the purpose of numbering said residences and places of business,
on streets and avenues, as provided herein, Main Street and Junction Avenue
shall be used as base lines.
   (B)   The residences and places of business on streets and avenues lying
north and east of said base lines shall be numbered from the base number of
1,000, and said numbers for business places and residences on said street and
avenues shall decrease at the rate of 100 for each block.
   (C)   Residences and places of business on streets and avenues lying south
and west of said base lines shall be numbered from the base number of 1,000,
and said numbers for business places and residences on said streets and avenues
shall increase at the rate of 100 for each block.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.02) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.022 ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS; HOW ARRANGED.
   (A)   Each 25-foot space measuring east, north, west and south from the base
lines shall have two numbers, one odd and one even on each street, the odd
numbers being on the right-hand sides of the streets and corresponding even
number (the next number greater) shall, where the streets run parallel to the
section lines, be directly opposite on the left-hand sides of the streets.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining the right and left-hand sides of the
streets, a person is supposed to be standing with his or her back to the base
line and facing in the direction in which the numbers increase or decrease.
   (C)   On diagonal streets, except as outlined above, the numbers shall be
directly north and south or east and west of their corresponding number.
Diagonal streets, other than those excepted above, shall take the set of
numbers corresponding to the direction most nearly assumed by the street. That
is, a street running more nearly north and south than east and west will take
the northerly set of numbers.
   (D)   On curbed streets, the set of numbers shall be used corresponding to
their average direction.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.03) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.023 SIZE AND COLOR OF NUMBERS.
   (A)   All houses or buildings fronting on any public street or avenue in the
city shall be numbered with numbers of sufficient size and of such color and
shall be located as to be easily read from the street.
   (B)   All houses shall bear the number corresponding to the space on the
street line where a line through the center of the door, at right angles to
street line intersects the centerline.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.04) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.024 CERTIFICATES OF NUMBERS.
   All certificates of correct numbers will be furnished by the Building
Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.05) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.025 TIME LIMIT FOR NUMBERING.
   All buildings which may at any time hereafter by built within the city shall
be so numbered within ten days after such buildings shall become occupied as a
dwelling or place of business.
(Prior Code, § 15.02.06) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 151.040 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Snow and ice permitted to gather and remain upon the sidewalks of this city
is dangerous to the safety of its citizens and other using said sidewalks and
is hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.01) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.041 REMOVAL BY OWNER.
   The owner or occupant of any building or any lot, parcel or plot of ground
fronting or abutting on any sidewalk shall clear said sidewalk of snow or ice
to the full width of the sidewalk within 15 hours after it has fallen or
formed. Snow removal, as required by this subchapter, prohibits any person from
placing or piling any snow within the public right-of-way of any street or
alley after the city has plowed the street or alley. In addition, it is a
violation of this subchapter for any person to place or pile snow onto the
property of another without the owner’s permission. Absentee owners are subject
to this requirement and shall make arrangements for the removal of snow and ice
accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.02) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2018-14, passed
12-28-2018) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.042 REMOVAL BY CITY; COST.
   The Finance Officer shall cause to be published in the legal section of the
official newspaper the requirements of this subchapter, which notice shall be
published for two weeks after the first meeting of the City Council in October
of each year, which publication shall constitute notification by the property
owner of the contents of this subchapter. In the event the property owner or
person so notified fails to remove the snow as required by the notice
prescribed by this section, the Building Inspector may cause the snow or ice to
be removed so that the property is in compliance with this subchapter. The
actual costs of the removal of the snow and ice, plus an administrative fee as
shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution, shall be assessed upon
the lots or parcels of ground fronting or abutting said sidewalk, as provided
for in §
151.043.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.03) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.043 NOTICE; ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall maintain an accurate account of the
amount to be assessed against each lot or parcel of ground subject to
assessment, pursuant to §
151.042. On or before May 1 of each year, the Building Inspector shall cause
this account to be delivered to the Finance Officer. The Finance Officer shall
prepare an estimate of an assessment against such lot for the removal of snow
and ice for the preceding fall and winter and shall submit the same to the City
Council for its approval on or before the second meeting in June of each year.
The Finance Officer shall prepare a notice of said meeting, which notice shall
contain the name of the property owner, the legal description of the property
to be assessed and the time and place for hearing. Notice of this meeting shall
be given by publishing a true and correct copy of this notice in the official
newspaper of the city at least one week prior to the date set for hearing, and
further, by mailing a true and correct copy of said notice to the property
owner, as shown by the records of the County Assessor, at least ten days prior
to the date set for hearing. Said mailing shall be by first-class mail, postage
prepaid.
   (B)   At the time specified in the notice, the City Council shall meet and,
if it finds the assessments correct, shall approve the same with or without
modification or amendment as it may deem proper.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.04) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.044 FILING OF ASSESSMENT.
   Within ten days after such assessment has been approved by the City Council,
the Finance Officer shall make and file a certified copy of the same in the
office of the County Treasurer and, thereupon, said assessments shall be due
and payable to the city, and shall in all respects be considered as special
assessments, as provided by statute, and the same shall draw interest at the
rate of 10% per annum from the time of said assessment until 30 days after the
approval thereof by the City Council, and thereafter at the rate of 12% per
annum.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.05) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.045 CERTIFICATION.
   If any of said assessments are not paid to the city, the Finance Officer
shall certify any such delinquent assessments to the County Auditor on or
before October 15, and the same proceeding shall be had for the collection of
said assessments as are or may hereafter be provided by statute for the
collection of special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.06) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.046 RECOVERY OF COST OF REMOVING SNOW OR ICE IN LIEU OF ASSESSMENT
AGAINST PROPERTY.
   In lieu of assessing the cost of removing snow or ice from the sidewalks
against the abutting property, the City Council may authorize the City Attorney
to recover such costs in a civil action against the owner or occupant of the
property abutting such sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.07) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005)
§ 151.047 PARKING PROHIBITED ON DESIGNATED SNOW REMOVAL ROUTES; IMMEDIATE
TICKET AND TOW AUTHORITY.
   (A)   To facilitate prompt snow removal, it shall be unlawful for any
vehicle to be parked on any designated snow removal route within the city at
any time within 24 hours of a forecast by the National Weather Service, as
reported on the city’s website Weather Link, of an expected snowfall of at
least four inches or more within the city. The designated snow removal routes
are shown on the official map of snow removal routes available at the Finance
Office and maintained by that office, and as also shown on the city website
(www.sturgisgov.com). All designated snow removal routes shall also be marked
with signage along the designated right-of-way to identify them. Any vehicle
parked on a snow removal route within that 24-hour period and before city
employees have cleared the street curb to curb shall be subject to an immediate
citation for a parking violation until the street has been cleared curb to
curb. In addition, any vehicle tagged in violation of this subchapter may be
towed immediately after being tagged. The penalty for such violation is as set
forth in §
151.999, and the owner, in addition such penalty, shall also be required to pay
the cost of towing and removal of the vehicle to an authorized location.
   (B)   This provision shall not limit the separate authority to issue a
citation as provided for in §
72.06.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.08) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2010-13, passed
12-15-2010; Ord. 2013-18, passed 11-20-2013) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.048 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   The Director of Public Works shall consult with the Chief of Police and,
consistent with the authority of SDCL § 9-30-2, the city is authorized and
empowered to determine and designate snow removal routes upon any street or
highway within the city, or any part thereof. The designation of any snow
removal route by the city shall be conspicuously posted on each block along
said route.
(Prior Code, § 15.03.09) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2010-13, passed
12-15-2010; Ord. 2013-18, passed 11-20-2013)
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
§ 151.060 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any person may construct any sidewalk in the city, he or she shall
first obtain a building permit from the Building Inspector. The application for
the building permit shall include the measurements and planned location of the
proposed sidewalk and the width of adjoining sidewalks in the same locality.
The applicant shall pay the city the sum as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution for each application to cover the cost of processing the
application.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.01) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
§ 151.061 WIDTH AND LOCATION OF SIDEWALKS.
   The Building Inspector shall consider said application and shall determine
in said application as to the exact location and width of said sidewalk. In
determining the exact location and width of the sidewalk, the Building
Inspector shall cause as much uniformity to result as possible in the
construction of sidewalks in any one block or area. The location and width of
the sidewalk shall be included on the permit which shall be issued by the
Building Inspector to the applicant. It shall be unlawful for any sidewalk to
be built without a permit and not in conformity with the permit granted for
said sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.02) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.062 MATERIAL.
   Any sidewalk constructed within the city shall be made of concrete unless
otherwise approved by a special request approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.03) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
§ 151.063 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Resolution of necessity.
      (1)   The City Council, by resolution of necessity, may deem necessary
for sidewalks to be constructed throughout the city. The resolution may require
any owner of real property who abuts or adjoins a public right-of-way, or
public property containing a highway, to construct a sidewalk in a location as
designated in the resolution. The resolution of necessity must contain the
following:
         (a)   The proposed location of the sidewalk to be constructed;
         (b)   The date by which the construction must be completed; and
         (c)   Any details, plans and specifications may be reviewed at the
Finance Office during regular business hours.
      (2)   The resolution of necessity may address multiple sidewalks within
the resolution if the above requirements along with any associated notice and
mailing requirements are satisfied for each sidewalk set forth in the
resolution.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   Prior to the hearing on the resolution of necessity, a notice of
hearing on the proposed resolution of necessity must be published once, not
less than ten nor more than 20 days before the hearing on the resolution of
necessity. The notice must contain the time and place of the hearing and must
state that the City Council will consider any objections to the proposed
resolution by owners of the property abutting or adjoining the sidewalk
proposed to be constructed.
      (2)   In addition to publishing the notice of hearing, the notice of
hearing must be mailed not less than nor more than 20 days before the hearing,
by first-class or certified mail, to each owner of real property abutting or
adjoining the sidewalk proposed to be constructed. The mailed notice must
contain the location of the sidewalk to be constructed, the date by which the
construction must be completed, and that the property owner is responsible for
the costs of constructing the sidewalk.
      (3)   The Finance Officer will include on said notice, upon the advice of
the Building Inspector, specifications concerning the locations of all
sidewalks to be constructed under the provisions of this section. In case said
owners are nonresidents and cannot be found, then such notice shall be given to
such nonresident owner by publication in the official paper of the municipality
once each week for two successive weeks.
      (4)   Along with the above requirements, said notice will include the
following:
         (a)   A description of the work to be done;
         (b)   The location for all sidewalks to be constructed;
         (c)   The character of all sidewalks to be constructed;
         (d)   The name of the owner of any abutting property; and
         (e)   A description of the lots or parcels of ground fronting or
abutting the sidewalk which is to be constructed.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.04) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
§ 151.064 MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS AND RECONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The owner of property abutting or adjoining a sidewalk has the duty
and responsibility to maintain and repair the sidewalk, including all
associated costs.
   (B)   Any owner of property who fails to keep the sidewalks abutting or
adjoining the property in repair or creates or maintains a public nuisance
associated with the sidewalk, is liable to the municipality for any damage or
injury caused by neglect from the unrepaired sidewalk or nuisance. The property
owner is also responsible for any nuisance abatement costs.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.05) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.065 NOTICE OF NECESSARY MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS OR RECONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Upon request, complaint or observation, the City Planning and
Permitting Department will inspect and make a determination whether a sidewalk
needs maintenance, repairs or reconstruction completed by the property owner.
      (2)   If the Planning and Permitting Department determines sidewalk
maintenance, repairs or reconstruction are necessary, then the Department will
send notice, by first-class or certified mail, to the property owner.
   (B)   The notice must contain the following:
      (1)   Property owner name and address (if address is different than
subject property address, then both addresses are necessary);
      (2)   The location of the sidewalk;
      (3)   A description of the current condition of the sidewalk;
      (4)   A description of the work to be done; and
      (5)   The reasonable time frame for repairs, maintenance or
reconstruction to be completed.
   (C)   The requirement for a resolution of necessity does not apply to
sidewalk maintenance, repairs or reconstruction.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.06) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
§ 151.066 INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   A sidewalk must be installed or constructed on any vacant lot where a
new building or dwelling be constructed upon such vacant lot. Such sidewalks
must be completed at or before the time the new building or dwelling is
completed and must be constructed according to city plans and specifications.
   (B)   Provisions for a sidewalk to be omitted by the City Building Inspector
can be determined based upon the city’s curb and gutter evaluation plan.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.07) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2013-18, passed
11-20-2013; Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 151.067 WHEN WORK NOT DONE BY OWNER.
   If such sidewalks are not constructed, maintained, reconstructed or repaired
in the manner or within the time prescribed, the City Council may, by
resolution, cause the same to be done and the cost thereof assessed against the
lots or parcels of land fronting or abutting upon the sidewalks so constructed,
maintained, reconstructed or repaired, and the cost of such work shall be
assessed and certified in the manner as provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.08) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
§ 151.068 DEFACING SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall willfully deface, paint upon or mark upon or cause the same
to be done upon any of the sidewalks of the city.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.09) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.069 DISCHARGE OF RAINWATER.
   No person shall willfully permit rainwater discharge from any building to
move on and over any sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.10) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.070 VARIANCES.
   The requirements under this subchapter may be modified by a variance as
described and applied for under §
156.497.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.11) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
§ 151.071 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning and Permitting
Department, or the Building Inspector made under this subchapter shall be
entitled to have said decision reviewed by the city. If, after review, said
person is unsatisfied, he or she may appeal the decision to the City Council.
   (B)   The process shall be as follows.
      (1)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review
with the city setting forth the basis for which he or she believes the decision
to be in error. The writing shall also include the person’s name and mailing
address.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall review
the challenged decision and mail a written response to the aggrieved person
within 20 days.
      (3)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the
city following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the Finance
Officer. There shall be a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the Finance
Office at the time of filing the written request for review.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council and a public hearing on the appeal shall be held at a
regularly scheduled City Council within 30 days after the date said appeal was
filed. The Finance Office shall provide notice to the person specifying the
time, date and location of the hearing.
      (5)   The Council may affirm or reverse the decision of the city.
   (C)   The City Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days.
(Prior Code, § 15.05.12) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-01, passed
2-14-2022)
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) MAINTENANCE
§ 151.085 DUTY TO MAINTAIN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   An owner, occupant or other person in control of real property must
maintain any and all rights-of-way which abut their property in a safe and
sanitary condition. Rights-of-way include any non-paved areas and private trees
located in the area between their property line to the adjacent curb line,
roadway/alley line if no curb and gutter are installed, and the areas on both
sides of a sidewalk or bike path. Public trees located in rights-of-way are
provided for in §§
90.080 through
90.086. All right-of-way maintenance must follow the following standards.
      (1)   Sidewalks and bike paths. All grass and weeds which sit within five
feet of either side of a sidewalk or bike path must be trimmed to a maximum
height of eight inches. All tree limbs which overhang a sidewalk or bike path
cannot fall below seven feet above the sidewalk or bike path.
      (2)   Streets and alleys. All grass and weeds must be trimmed to a
maximum height of eight inches, and all tree limbs must be trimmed at least 14
feet above any street and alley.
      (3)   Grass and weeds. All grass and weeds within the right-of-way area
described above must be maintained at a maximum height of eight inches
throughout their property and to the edge of the street or alley.
      (4)   Corners. Any bushes or shrubs within ten feet from the curb of any
corner or intersection must be kept at a maximum height of two feet.
      (5)   Fire hydrants. Property owners must remove all bushes, shrubs,
plants or trees within five feet of a fire hydrant. All grass and weeds within
five feet of a fire hydrant must be trimmed to a maximum height of eight
inches.
      (6)   Debris basin. Abutting property owners must keep debris basins
clear of any obstructions, such as fallen trees, fallen branches, construction
materials and other materials not natural to the basins, which may impede the
functionality of water running through the basin. Abutting property owners are
not required to mow or cut the grass and weeds in the debris basin, however,
they must not add any improvement or modify the debris basin in any way. This
restriction includes building any fence, structure, concrete pad or any
improvement which may affect the functionality of the debris basin. The city
currently has one debris basin located within the city limits, and extends
between Elk Road and Raccoon Road.
      (7)   General. Trim or remove all bushes, shrubs, grass, weeds, plants of
any kind or trees blocking signal lights or traffic or pedestrian signs.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to allow the following to accumulate on
the person’s property or in the right-of-way area described above:
      (1)   Any bush, shrub, grass, weed, plant or trees which do not meet the
above standards;
      (2)   Garbage, rubbish or brush; or
      (3)   Filth or any other unsightly, objectionable or unwholesome matter.
This provision does not include any animal carcasses in the right-of-way
because of vehicle strikes or natural reasons.
   (C)   It is a valid defense to an alleged violation of this subchapter, to
which the burden rests on the alleged violator to show with a sufficient basis,
that the weeds or grasses observed on the subject property did not reduce or
impair visibility or line of sight at, of or for right-of-way, vehicles,
cyclists or pedestrians, and that the over-height weeds or grasses observed
were located at or on one or more of the following:
      (1)   An area within or adjacent to a stream, waterway or water quality
facility;
      (2)   A landscaped area arranged and managed consistent with a plan
accepted by the city, which area includes native or adapted vegetation, where
weed control and other periodic maintenance occurs; or
      (3)   City parkland, a greenbelt, nature preserve or other publicly
maintained open space.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.01) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.086 EASEMENTS AND DRAINAGE OBSTRUCTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Property owners are responsible for maintaining any and all applicable
easements which are within their property boundaries under the specific terms
of the easements.
   (B)   Property owners must maintain and not materially obstruct, destroy,
modify or otherwise affect the function of any drainage systems which runs
across their property. If a property owner materially affects a drainage
system, the property owner is responsible for all costs to repair or
reconstruct the drainage system back to premodification condition. If more than
one property owner materially affects a drainage system which runs through all
of their properties, then all of the violating property owners are severally
and jointly liable for any and all repairs or reconstruction costs. Any
proposed drainage system modifications must be approved by the City Engineer
prior to the start of any work to ensure drainage is adequately maintained and
will not materially affect other property owners.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.02) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023)
§ 151.087 PARKING IN UNIMPROVED RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Parking in an unimproved right-of-way is prohibited unless the
abutting landowner, who has the responsibility of maintaining the unimproved
right-of-way, consents to parking in the abutting unimproved right-of-way.
   (B)   All parking violations occurring in unimproved rights-of-way under
this chapter are enforced by the City Police Department under the standard
parking violation procedures.
   (C)   The notice provisions under
Chapter 37 do not apply to parking violations under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.03) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.088 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE RULES.
   The city may authorize departments to develop alternative compliance rules
that permit maintenance of specified perimeters on properties defined as large
parcels, undeveloped or minimally developed, as an alternative to compliance of
the entire property under §
151.085.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.04) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023)
§ 151.089 NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND APPEALS.
   Unless excepted under this subchapter or an emergency exists, any
enforcement under this subchapter must follow the notice and hearing procedures
as outlined in
Chapter 37. Additionally, any person alleged to violate this subchapter may use
the appeal procedures as provided in
Chapter 37 to appeal the decision.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.06) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023)
§ 151.090 CITY ACTION TO CORRECT VIOLATION.
   If the responsible party fails or refuses to correct a violation of this
subchapter, the city may:
   (A)   Expend city funds to remedy the violation;
   (B)   Charge the responsible party for work performed by the city, including
all reasonable labor and abatement costs; and
   (C)   Assess the actual costs against the property.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.07) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023)
§ 151.091 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   In addition to the corrective action authorized under this subchapter,
the city may take emergency action to abate a condition or circumstance that
poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   The city may take immediate action to remove as an immediate danger to
a person’s health, life or safety any condition which meets the following
criteria:
      (1)   Grass or weeds which exceed 48 inches;
      (2)   Bushes, shrubs, grasses, weeds, plants or trees which obstruct the
view of a vehicle entering a public street;
      (3)   A hidden or obscured unsafe condition of land located less than 30
feet from a public street or sidewalk; or
      (4)   Is determined by the city to be an immediate danger.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.08) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023)
§ 151.092 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW.
   This subchapter is cumulative of other laws and ordinances that authorize
the city to pursue civil or criminal proceedings against an owner, occupant or
person in charge of real property, or to seek other remedies available at law.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.09) (Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12, passed
2-2-2023)
BRICK PROJECT
§ 151.105 FINDINGS.
   It is a finding of the Common Council of the city that it is in the best
interest of the citizens of the city to enter into an agreement to sell bricks
within the city for purposes of beautification; and, pursuant to SDCL § 9-46,
the city has jurisdiction to regulate its sidewalks and, therefore, this
subchapter is hereby entered to regulate the installation of engraved brick
pavers and granite blocks on the sidewalks within the city.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 1) (Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000)
§ 151.106 USE OF BRICK.
   Sidewalks within areas, designated by the Council, shall be constructed of
brick pavers or granite block. The Council, by resolution, shall designate
which areas shall have sidewalks which are to be constructed of said material,
giving regards to business needs and the amount of travel in the vicinity of
each.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 2) (Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000)
§ 151.107 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   (A)   In areas which have been designated to have sidewalks made up of
pavers or granite, the city will be responsible for the removal of snow and ice
from said sidewalks. Said property owners will be encouraged to keep the
sidewalks clean of snow and debris, however, the city will provide snow removal
for the same.
   (B)   Prior to any property owners using pressure equipment or chemicals to
remove snow and ice from their buildings, they will contact the city and advise
them of the type of equipment and chemical de-icer they plan on using. The city
must give approval of the same, before the landowner is allowed to use said
chemicals or equipment.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 3) (Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000)
§ 151.108 DEFACING AND DESTROYING BRICK PAVERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be illegal for any person to deface or destroy a brick paver from
the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 4) (Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.109 NOTICE TO CITY.
   In the event it is necessary to remove sidewalk for purposes of utility
repair or replacement, the adjacent owner shall give the city 24 hours’ notice
so that the city may remove and replace any pavers or granite. Expenses of
labor and materials for removing said pavers or granite shall be the
responsibility of the adjacent building owner, and the city may assess costs
against the adjacent building landowner.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 5) (Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000)
§ 151.110 MAINTENANCE; FINANCE.
   Maintenance monies to repair or maintain said sidewalks shall be financed
from the City Brick Beautification Project. The city shall grant all necessary
services as set forth in the agreement between the city and Mato Paha Fund
Raisers, L.L.C., a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this
subchapter and by reference made a part hereof.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 6) (Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the
state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of
any costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 15.01.03)
   (B)   Any violation of §
151.007 is a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth
by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also
include payment of any costs and restitution authorized by this chapter or
state law. Violations may also be subject to administrative citations pursuant
to Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 15.06.01)
   (C)   Any violation of §§
151.085 through
151.092 is subject to the provisions of Chapters 37, 94 and 156 and/or a Class
2 misdemeanor punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the
state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of
any costs and/or restitution authorized by city code or state law, including,
but not limited to, property assessments.
(Prior Code, § 15.07.05)
   (D)   Violation of §§
151.105 through
151.110 is a Class 2 misdemeanor. In addition, the city may recover from the
offending party the cost to replace and/repair the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, Title 28, § 4)
(Ord. 2000-04, passed 5-26-2000; Ord. 2005-09, passed 4-29-2005; Ord. 2022-12,
passed 2-2-2023)
CHAPTER 152: CITY BEAUTIFICATION AND REGULATION OF ADVERTISING
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Scope and purpose
   
152.002   Definitions
   
152.003   Administration of chapter
   
152.004   Enforcement
   
152.005   Filing a sign complaint
   
152.006   Appeals
Signs Generally
   
152.020   Permit exemption
   
152.021   Permit and fees required
   
152.022   Permit durations
   
152.023   Design and construction standards
   
152.024   Clearance, size, height and projection
   
152.025   Prohibited signs in general
   
152.026   Signs prohibited in certain districts
   
152.027   Nonconforming signs
   
152.028   Temporary signs
   
152.029   Rally period temporary signs
   
152.030   Banners over public rights-of-way
   
152.031   Community events
   
152.032   Video signs
   
152.033   LED signs
   
152.034   Standards for all illuminated and electronic message signs
   
152.035   Commercial advertising upon vehicles
On-Premises Signs
   
152.050   Application
   
152.051   Maintenance, removal and repair responsibility
   
152.052   On-premises signage requirements
   
152.053   Portable “daily specials” signs
   
152.054   Enforcement of on-premises sign regulations
Billboards and Off-Premises Signs
   
152.065   Application
   
152.066   Inventory list
   
152.067   Billboards permitted only in Billboard Overlay District
   
152.068   Digital off-premises billboards
   
152.069   Off-premises signs
   
152.070   Billboard and off-premises permits
   
152.071   Billboard and off-premises sign fee schedule
   
152.072   Billboard inventory and color restrictions
   
152.073   Size and distance restrictions
   
152.074   Maintenance
   
152.075   Alterations or relocations
   
152.076   Annual inventory fee
   
152.077   Enforcement
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Signs constitute a separate and distinct use of the land upon which
they are placed and affect the use of adjacent streets, sidewalks and other
public places and adjacent private places open to the public. The unregulated
construction, placement and display of signs constitute a public nuisance
detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of
the city.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and impartial
regulations for all exterior signs and: to protect the public from visual
pollution and hazardous conditions that can result from commercial signs which
are structurally unsafe, obscure the vision of motorists, create dangers to
pedestrian traffic or which compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals
and warning signs; afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to
advertise and promote its products and services; to maintain and enhance the
visual environment to preserve the right of the citizens to enjoy the city’s
scenic beauty; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the
possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to
enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions.
   (C)   The regulations contained in this chapter advance these significant
governmental interests and are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to
achieve them.
(Prior Code, § 30.01.01) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign or sign structure that is blank, obliterated or
displays obsolete advertising material for a period in excess of 120 continuous
days or for which no legal owner can be found.
   BILLBOARD. Any off-premises sign, not within the definition in §
152.069, including a digital billboard as defined hereafter, regardless of how
constructed or supported, which advertises, calls attention to, communicates
any message or directs a person to a business, association, profession,
commodity, product, institution, service, entertainment, person, place, thing
or activity.
   BILLBOARD FACE. The surface of an off-premises sign or billboard which
displays an individual advertisement or message.
   BLANK SIGN. A sign that is void of advertising material but does not meet
the time requirement of an abandoned sign.
   BUILDING FACE OR WALL. All window and wall surface areas of a building in
one plane or elevation.
   COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MESSAGE. Any printed word or visual artwork which
depicts products, services, prices or mottos/tag lines and the like which are
offered at any particular establishment. This shall not include a business or
institutions logo.
   COMMUNITY EVENT. An activity or occasion held for the benefit, enjoyment or
entertainment of the citizens of the city, and not connected with any specific
business or for-profit organization.
   DIGITAL BILLBOARD. A billboard that displays a message is created from
computer programs and software and which can be designed to display static
displays, running text, display several different displays at the same time or
allow messages to be displayed at a scheduled time.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign which serves solely to designate the location or
direction to a place or area.
   ELECTION SIGN. Any sign that is posted as part of a political campaign or a
municipal, county, state or national election.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. A type of on-premises sign located in an outside
environment designed as computerized programmable electronic visual
communication devices.
   EXEMPT SIGN. A sign for which a permit is not required.
   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN. A sign that is used for the identification of a
business located within a home that is occupied by the business owner.
   INFLATABLE SIGN. A portable sign which is supported by the flow of air or
another gas to its nominal height and size to convey a message, advertisement
or marketing theme.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign or sign structure which does not comply
with all provisions of this code, but which was legal at the time it was
constructed.
   LIGHT EMITTING DIODE (LED SIGN). A type of sign that is capable of
displaying words or characters that can be electronically changed by remote or
automatic means.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding ground sign supported wholly by a base
structure and containing one or more signs of individual businesses on the
property; not including signs defined as pole or pylon signs.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that does not conform to this chapter as adopted.
   OBLITERATED SIGN. A sign that is totally or partially illegible or otherwise
obscured so as to not identify a specific product or service.
   OBSOLETE ADVERTISING MATERIAL. Material advertising a product or service
that is no longer in use or available.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign, as further defined in §
152.069, which provides only directions to a business, commodity, product,
service or entertainment, sold or offered at a location other than the
location, premises or lot upon which the sign is located.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person,
activity, goods, products or services which are located on the premises where
the sign is installed and maintained, or adjoining or located on adjacent
property owned by the same party and within 100 feet of the premises.
   PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
product, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at any location
which is not a temporary sign, as defined in this chapter.
   POLE SIGN. A freestanding sign with the base of the actual sign area at
least five feet above the ground, supported by a vertical pole(s).
   POLITICAL SIGN. A sign that advertises a candidate or an issue which is to
be voted on in a local, state or federal election.
   PORTABLE READER BOARD. A sign consisting of a board designed to hold
interchangeable letters that is commonly not permanently affixed to the ground
or structure that may or may not be on wheels but is at least nine square feet
in size. This does not include portable sandwich boards or signs of similar
design that are of such a size and weight to be movable by a person.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire area between property boundaries which is:
owned by a government, dedicated to public use or impressed with an easement
for public use; primarily used for pedestrian or vehicular travel; and publicly
maintained, in whole or in part, for such use. RIGHT-OF-WAY includes, without
limitation, the public street, shoulder, gutter, curb, sidewalk, sidewalk area,
parking or parking strip and any other public way.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is
located as being for rent, sale or lease.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected or constructed wholly upon the roof of any
building on any area of the roof surfacing material, or area above the
uppermost parapet line, or any line so established by the roof plane. Signs
mounted on a mansard roof or on a canopy cover over a patio or sidewalk, are
not considered to be ROOF SIGNS; however, the uppermost part of the sign may
not be taller than any portion of the roof.
   SANDWICH BOARD. An A-frame shaped portable sign positioned on the ground and
supported only by its own sides.
   SIGN. Any banner, structure, display, painting, mural, device or
representation, temporary or permanent, portable or ground-mounted, which is
designed or used to advertise or call attention to any person, thing, business,
activity or place and is visible from any right-of-way.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports, has supported or is capable of
supporting a sign, including a decorative cover.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any device, display, structure or pennant that by word or
art work conveys a message on one face, with the full structure and any
supporting elements installed in compliance with the Building Code, to be on
display or in use for 30 days or less in a calendar year, with no support
elements or other material to remain after the sign is removed.
   UNLAWFUL SIGN. A sign or sign structure which is erected or installed in
violation of this chapter, or is otherwise in violation of any city ordinance
or state law, or is unlawful for reasons of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment as
declared by the Building Official or designee.
   VIDEO SIGN. A sign that projects images similar to a television set.
   WALL MURAL. Any mural which is purely decorative in nature and content, and
does not include advertising by picture or verbal/written message.
   WALL SIGN. A sign painted directly on the surface of a building, fence,
awning or marquee; or a sign attached to or erected against the wall of a
building, fence, awning or marquee, with the face in a parallel plane to the
plane of the building wall.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any decal, lettering, applique, sticker or painted message that
is attached directly to the interior or exterior glass surface on a building
window, or any form of communication that is not physically attached to the
interior glass surface, but is displayed in a window for public viewing.
(Prior Code, § 30.01.02) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.003 ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The Building Inspector or designee, under the statutory supervision of
the city, is authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this
chapter and shall have authority as set forth below.
      (1)   The Building Inspector or designee shall have the power to render
interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental
regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. The
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent
and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   Require other such data and information as may be needed to
evaluate a permit application.
      (3)   When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, or when the Building Inspector or designee has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists a sign or a condition which is
contrary to or in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector or designee
may enter the premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform duties
imposed by this chapter, provided credentials be presented to the occupant and
entry requested, if premises are occupied. If premises are unoccupied, the
Building Inspector or designee shall make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request
entry. If entry is refused, the Building Inspector shall have recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   Whenever the work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the
enforcement of this chapter, the Building Inspector or designee may order the
work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or
causing the work to be done. Work must then be stopped until otherwise
authorized by the Building Inspector.
   (C)   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility to any person owning, operating or controlling any sign or sign
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the city be held liable by reason of the inspections or inventories authorized
by this chapter or any permits issued under this chapter.
   (D)   All provisions of the laws and ordinances of the city and the state
shall be complied with, whether specified herein or not. In the event that
portions of this chapter conflict with other portions, or portions of this
chapter in conflict with state or federal law, the more restrictive requirement
shall apply. In addition, compliance with this chapter does not give authority
to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of the building code,
municipal code or other local law, or ordinance regulating construction or the
performance of construction in the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.01.03) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.004 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Building Inspector or designee may declare any sign in violation
of this chapter by reasons of inadequate maintenance, improper placement,
dilapidation, abandonment or if erected without a permit or is in violation of
any other provision of this chapter or any other state or federal law.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any violations are subject
to enforcement under Chapter 37.
   (C)   Upon determination that a sign or sign structure is in violation of
this chapter, the Building Inspector or designee, shall provide written notice
to the owner of the violating sign and the owner of the building, structure,
premises or property upon which it is located, which notice shall state the
reason(s) such sign is in violation and set forth a period of 15 days for
compliance or removal of the sign. In the event that compliance is not made
within the 15 days, the sign may be removed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter at cost to the owner of the building, structure, premises or
sign.
   (D)   The owner(s) of the property, building, structure or premises upon
which the sign sits and the owner(s) of the sign shall be jointly and severally
liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city in removing a violating
sign and the city may pursue any and all legal remedies authorized by state law
to collect against the owners.
   (E)   Service of the notice shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto
either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by priority mail with USPS
tracking to each person at their address as it appears on the last equalized
assessment role of the county or as contained in city records. If no address of
any such person so appears or is known, then a copy of the notice shall be
mailed, addressed to the person, at the address of the premises involved in the
enforcement proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive the notice
shall not affect the validity of the proceedings service by priority mail with
USPS tracking in the manner herein provided shall be effective upon receipt of
mailing.
(Prior Code, § 30.01.04) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.005 FILING A SIGN COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, in the event any city
employee or representative receives a complaint of a possible violation of this
chapter, either orally or in writing, said representative shall forward the
complaint to the Building Inspector or designee for investigation.
   (B)   After receiving a sign violation complaint, the Building Inspector or
designee shall conduct a proper investigation into the matter and make a
determination as to whether the sign violates any provision of this chapter,
the Building Code adopted by the city, or any other applicable ordinances or
laws.
   (C)   In the event the Building Inspector or designee determines that the
sign is in violation, the Building Inspector or designee shall follow the
enforcement procedure established in this chapter or Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 30.01.05) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.006 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person who has received a citation issued by a Code Enforcement
Officer or designee under this chapter may appeal said citation to the city and
City Council by following all of the procedural requirements set forth in
Chapter 37. Before filing an appeal with the Finance Office, the aggrieved
person shall meet with the city to discuss why the person believes the citation
was issued in error. If unresolved, the appeal may be commenced.
   (B)   Appeals shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal with the
Finance Officer. There shall be a fee as shall be set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the
Finance Office at the time of filing the notice of appeal. The notice of appeal
shall include a statement of the action complained of, why the same should be
modified or rescinded, address where the appellant can be mailed notice of
hearings, and a copy of the citation issued. The Finance Officer shall deliver
a copy of the appeal notice and all filed documents to the City Attorney. In
all other respects the appeal herein shall be conducted as provided for in
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 30.05.01) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
SIGNS GENERALLY
§ 152.020 PERMIT EXEMPTION.
   The following signs shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of this
chapter:
   (A)   Governmental regulatory, pedestrian or vehicle direction or
regulation, directional, traffic, information and warning signs; governmental
agency flags, emblems and insignia, all no larger than an area of two square
feet; and also, temporary signs placed for the purposes of public safety, or
temporary signs placed by the government for information regarding events
within the community;
   (B)   Commemorative plaques placed by recognized historical agencies and
commissions;
   (C)   Instructional or identification signs not larger than an area of two
square feet, such as parking information located on private property;
   (D)   Directional signs entirely on the private premises where the activity
described is located. Directional signs under this provision shall not exceed
five square feet in area;
   (E)   Temporary political signs, not exceeding 32 square feet, provided they
are removed within one week after the election or within 90 days of being
placed, whichever occurs first, and are not placed within the public right-of-
way. Political signs that are in excess of said size are in violation and
subject to enforcement. Political signs or that are placed within the public
right-of way are in violation of this chapter and may be removed by the
Building Inspector or designee without notice;
   (F)   One construction sign shall be allowed per legal building site lot.
The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall not be erected
until a building permit has been issued;
   (G)   Window signs covering up to 25% of the area per window, unless
otherwise required by state law or city ordinance;
   (H)   Flags of any nation or political subdivision flown with a total pole
height not to exceed 12 feet, with a maximum number of five poles and
unsupported flags per premises;
   (I)   Signs located within the interior of a building;
   (J)   Signs identifying public or private institutions, school, nonprofit
membership organizations and philanthropic institutions that are educational,
cultural, religious or recreational in nature and located in a zoning district
that does not otherwise provide for on-premises signage may display on-premises
signs. However, such sign or part thereof shall not contain a commercial
advertising message;
   (K)   Signs containing the words “donated by,” “sponsored by” or other
similar language depicting that a certain bench or other item beneficial to the
community was donated by a certain organization, business or person. The size
of such indication shall be proportionate based upon the location where it is
placed and shall not be unreasonably large, and in no event may exceed four
square feet;
   (L)   Any sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area, identifying a
construction site, a development or advertising the sale of property within a
subdivision that is located on some portion of the subdivision being advertised
for sale;
   (M)   Any non-illuminated “for sale” sign or “for rent” sign of a reasonable
size advertising the sale, rental or lease of the residential premises on which
the sign is located, but in no event may it exceed eight square feet;
   (N)   Nameplates located upon single-family, two-family and multi-family,
dwellings or on a commercial or industrial structure;
   (O)   Any non-illuminated sign not exceeding 48 square feet in area
advertising or identifying the construction or development of any lot more than
100 square feet in area; or
   (P)   Any sign not exceeding nine square feet in area identifying a public
park, playground or historical monument.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.01) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.021 PERMIT AND FEES REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No billboard, off-premises, on-premises sign or other non-exempt
sign as allowed under this chapter shall be erected, structurally altered,
replaced or enlarged within the city without first having been issued a sign
permit. The responsibility for securing the sign construction permit is joint
and several of the sign owner and contractor.
      (2)   A separate permit shall be required for each sign.
   (B)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall make application to the
Planning and Permitting Office. The permit application shall include and/or be
accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name and address; and that applicant is the owner
or owner’s authorized agent;
      (2)   The sign and real property owners’ names and addresses;
      (3)   The legal description and address of the property on which the sign
is to be placed;
      (4)   The estimated value of the sign;
      (5)   Any plans, specifications or legible drawings of the proposed sign/
structure structures or other information deemed necessary and requested by the
Building Inspector or designee; and
      (6)   The fees for sign building permits shall be based on the most
recent building code fee tables adopted by the City Council by resolution.
   (C)   It is not necessary to obtain a permit before completing general
maintenance to a sign such as painting, repainting, cleaning or minor repairs
provided no structural alteration is made.
   (D)   A sign construction permit will expire 180 days after its issuance.
The sign must be erected within this time. Erecting a sign after the expiration
date of the permit will result in the erection of a sign in violation of this
chapter. See also §
152.069.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.02) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.022 PERMIT DURATIONS.
   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall make application to the Building
Inspector or designee as required by §
152.021.
   (A)   It is not necessary to obtain a permit before completing general
maintenance to a sign such as painting, repainting, cleaning or minor repairs
provided no structural changes or alteration is made.
   (B)   Any sign construction permit shall expire 180 days after its issuance.
The sign must be erected within this time. Erecting a sign after the expiration
date of the permit shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Billboard and off-premises sign inventory permits expire on December
31 of the year in which the permit is issued.
   (D)   Any billboard or off-premises sign that does not have an off-premises
or billboard inventory permit by February 1 of any year is an unlawful sign as
defined under this code and is subject to removal under the provisions of this
chapter and subject to enforcement under
Chapter 37.
   (E)   No billboard or off-premises inventory permit shall be issued for a
new off-premises sign if the owner has unpaid fees, assessments, fines or other
charges owing to the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.03) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.023 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   Sign and sign structure design shall be reviewed and inspected by the
Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer or designee for compliance with
this chapter and the city’s adopted Building Code. The design and construction
requirements for all signs for which a permit is required are as follows.
   (A)   All exterior mounting hardware, brackets and related supporting
elements (except for freestanding support poles/posts) shall not be visible. If
concealment is not possible, supporting hardware shall be painted a color to
blend with the surrounding structure.
   (B)   A footing design shall be submitted for freestanding signs that are
taller than 15 feet measured from grade at the bottom of the support, to the
highest part of the sign. The footing design may require a professional
engineer’s design, at the discretion of the Building Official or his or her
designee.
   (C)   Flexible banner material installed as a permanent sign must be
installed to be legible and without any sagging, folds or wrinkles, and must be
attached to an exterior building wall so that the banner is flush with the
wall, or if not attached to a building, must be attached to a freestanding
structure designed specifically to hold the banner.
   (D)   Any person engaged in the activity or business of constructing or
placing signs shall be required to obtain the required contractor license(s)
issued by the Building Inspector or designee.
   (E)   Supports for signs and all sign structures shall be built to conform
to the requirements of the current building codes as adopted by the city for
wind loads, seismic loads and other combined loads.
   (F)   All signs using electrical power shall be constructed in accordance
with the provisions of ARSD 20:44:22, the National Electrical Code and this
code.
   (G)   All signs and sign structures shall be in good repair and shall be
maintained so as to protect from deterioration, damage, decay and/or
abandonment.
   (H)   All signs shall display a message. If any sign fails to display a full
face message for 30 consecutive days, the Building Official shall notify the
owner of the sign that the sign is in violation of this section, and penalties
for a violation may result.
   (I)   Any sign that is internally illuminated, or which displays electronic
variable messages through light emitting diodes, liquid crystal display, plasma
image display or any other light emitting mechanism must be equipped with
acceptable automatic dimming technology.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.04) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.024 CLEARANCE, SIZE, HEIGHT AND PROJECTION.
   The following provisions shall apply to all signs, whether exempt or non-
exempt, on-premises or off-premises, located within the city.
   (A)   No part of any wall or projection sign that is attached to a building
shall be erected to a height greater than such building, unless the building
and sign design and construction are approved in writing by an architect or
engineer qualified to make said approval. In no event shall any sign exceed the
maximum height allowed by
Chapter 156 within the zoning district.
   (B)   No sign shall be located closer than five feet to any public right-of-
way and shall be subject to the visual restrictions set forth herein.
   (C)   Signs attached to awnings, canopies or marquees shall maintain a
minimum vertical clearance of seven feet.
   (D)   No roof signs shall project above the roofline upon which they are
attached, unless the building and sign design and construction are approved in
writing by an architect or engineer. In no event, however, shall any sign
exceed the maximum height allowed by
Chapter 156 within the zoning district.
   (E)   Any sign located in the General Commercial District may extend over a
public sidewalk a distance equal to two-thirds the width of the sidewalk, but
in no case shall the sign extend more than ten feet over the public sidewalk.
All signs within said district must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of
seven feet above the sidewalk.
   (F)   Any sign located in the General Commercial District, Retail Commercial
District, Highway Service District and Office Commercial Single-Family
Residential District shall be placed at least five feet from any property line
and are subject to the visibility restrictions set forth herein.
   (G)   No sign shall obstruct visibility within the first six feet of
vertical height within a traffic site triangle. A 25-foot site triangle is
required on both sides of an access-way formed by the intersection of the
access-way and a public right-of-way. A 30-foot site triangle is required at a
corner formed by the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way.
   (H)   Inflatable signage cannot be erected within ten feet of the public
right-of-way and must be tethered securely with cables, tie downs or tether
lines, which shall not be located within, on or across any public right-of-way
or public property. Such signs shall be secured in such a manner if deflated
that no part of the sign will be within any public right-of-way or public
property, nor in any manner interfere with the use and operation of utility
lines, antennas or towers.
   (I)   Signs located within 25 feet of a public street intersection shall not
exceed two and one-half feet tall if the sign rests directly on the ground or
is attached to a foundation on the ground. If supported by a post(s) or pole(s)
it shall have a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet above the crown of the
roadway, per Figure 3 below.
   (J)   Signs and awnings that extend out from an exterior wall over a public
sidewalk shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet and shall
not materially impede adjacent parking or street traffic.
   (K)   The height of a sign that is not attached to a building shall not
exceed 35 feet above grade to the highest portion of the sign and shall not
include filled grade beneath the sign to increase sign height.
   (L)   Examples:
(Prior Code, § 30.02.05) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.025 PROHIBITED SIGNS IN GENERAL.
   The following signs, whether intended as permanent or temporary are
prohibited within the limits of the city, except as otherwise provided by this
chapter:
   (A)   Signs located within or encroaching on a public right-of-way,
including signs extending beyond a property line;
   (B)   Signs that constitute pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazard;
   (C)   Off-premises signs not located within the areas identified in §
152.068;
   (D)   Signs that could be confused with any governmental regulatory,
directional or warning sign;
   (E)   Abandoned signs;
   (F)   Signs not in compliance with this chapter;
   (G)   A home occupation sign not authorized a by the use on review for that
home occupation;
   (H)   Signs attached to any public property or utility infrastructure
without permission, including, but not limited to, the following: power poles,
street light poles, traffic signs, fire hydrants or any public building;
   (I)   Signs that interfere with traffic signs or signals;
   (J)   Permanent signs attached to or supported by a vehicle;
   (K)   Blank signs;
   (L)   Tethered, airborne devices that may be blown or moved or located
within the required setback;
   (M)   Signs incorporating noise, blasts, vibration or dust;
   (N)   A non-transit sign attached to, or painted on, a motor vehicle, the
principal purpose of which is to serve as a stationary advertising device
without permit from the city as authorized by city policy. A logo or business
name on a motor vehicle or on equipment shall not be prohibited unless the
motor vehicle or equipment is being used as a stationary advertising device;
   (O)   Projecting signs, except pedestrian-oriented signs that do not exceed
eight square feet;
   (P)   On-premises roof signs; and
   (Q)   Signs that emit sound, odor, visible matter or which are similar to
traffic control signs or signals and which advertise words such as “Stop,”
“Go,” “Danger,” “Warning”; or signs that obstruct the vision of traffic control
signs or signals or lights in the public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.06) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.026 SIGNS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS.
   (A)   In addition to the general prohibitions contained in §
152.025, electronic signs or digital billboards shall be prohibited in all
zoning districts except the following districts:
      (1)   General Commercial;
      (2)   Highway Service;
      (3)   Billboard Overlay Districts; and
      (4)   Single-Family Residential/Office.
   (B)   Any LED or video sign allowed within a district shall be subject to
the restrictions and regulations set forth within this chapter.
   (C)   No sign may contain any flashing, intermittent or moving lights,
unless otherwise unless otherwise permitted by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.07) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.027 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   The following regulations shall govern nonconforming signs in the city for
the purpose of eventual compliance of all signage and eliminating such
nonconforming use within the corporate limits of the city.
   (A)   No changes shall be allowed to modify the overall height, shape,
illumination, square footage, location or support structure of the signage.
   (B)   No changes shall be allowed for maintenance, repair or replacement of
any part of the sign structure, including labor and materials, which exceed 50%
of the sign value, as determined by the Building Inspector or by an appraisal.
   (C)   No changes shall be allowed to add additional support, fasteners,
parts, support structures or a new sign face to extend the useful life of the
sign.
   (D)   The sign shall be removed if it is determined to not be structurally
sound by the City Building Inspector or designee during periods of both active
use and non-use.
   (E)   No changes shall be allowed if the use of the property changes to a
different permitted use as described by the list of uses allowed by the zoning
district in which the sign is located.
   (F)   Prior to September 1, 2024, all signs not complying with the
regulations of the sign provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be modified to
comply with the terms of the sign regulations; thereafter, signs not in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to all
enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.08) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.028 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Any person wishing to erect a temporary sign, not within the
definition of an exempt sign as defined in §
152.020, shall submit a temporary sign permit application to the Building
Inspector or designee. The Building Inspector or designee shall be informed of
the time period for which said sign will be displayed. The time period,
location and design of the sign, including the size, weight and condition must
be approved by the Building Inspector or designee, and the Building Inspector
or designee shall have authority to deny approval of the erection of a
temporary sign based thereon. The time period for which a temporary sign may be
permitted must correspond with the purpose for the sign, such as a special sale
or event, but the period shall not exceed 30 days.
   (B)   If any temporary sign is erected without the authority of the Building
Inspector or designee, has expired or otherwise is in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be removed immediately upon written or
verbal notice from the Building Inspector or designee. In the event, the sign
is not removed by the owner within 24 hours of notice being received, the
Building Inspector or his or her designee may remove the sign at the cost of
the owner. The owner(s) of the property, building and/or structure shall be
jointly and severally liable to the city in removing a violating sign and the
city may pursue any and all legal remedies authorized by state law to collect
against the owners.
   (C)   Temporary video signs and LED signs shall only be allowed as
specifically authorized by this chapter. The location, placement or
installation of any temporary sign shall not be located on the following:
      (1)   A utility box/cabinet, transformer and similar utility
installation;
      (2)   A support pole for a traffic signal, street light, power, cables,
phone lines and the like; and
      (3)   A support pole for street signage.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.09) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.029 RALLY PERIOD TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   A temporary sign, put up during the period beginning on July 15 and
ending at 12:00 p.m. on the Friday following the last official day of the
annual Rally, does not require that the temporary sign permit application
described §
152.028 be submitted to the city. However, any such temporary sign shall still
be subject to all other requirements of
Chapter 152 applicable to temporary signs, including, but not limited to, the
Building Code requirements of Chapter 150, design and construction
requirements, clearance, size, height and projection requirements, on premises
and other location requirements, and provisions for prohibited signs, together
with all maintenance, repair and removal requirements of
Chapter 152. All such temporary signs shall also be installed and secured so as
to remain in place during windy conditions and must be set back a minimum of
five feet from any curb or any public street (or alley) right-of-way.
   (B)   Any temporary signs, as described in this section, shall be taken down
or removed no later than 12:00 p.m. on the Friday following the last official
day of the annual Rally. Any such temporary sign which has not been removed or
taken down by the end of that period shall then be removed or taken down by the
owner of the property on which it is located.
   (C)   If the property owner fails to remove the sign by that date, a
citation for a violation of this chapter may be issued or the sign may be
removed by the city. If removed by the city, the owner(s) of the property, the
building, the structure and/or the premises upon which the sign is located,
together with the owner(s) of the sign itself, shall be jointly and severally
liable to the city for all direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in
removing the sign.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.10) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.030 BANNERS OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Banners may not be suspended over any public right-of-way between July 1 and
August 31 without a marketing agreement or sponsorship agreement with the city.
An application for such use shall include the dates upon which it is desired
the banner be displayed, the location and the size and contents of the banner,
and all other information needed to the Rally and Events Department.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.11) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.031 COMMUNITY EVENTS.
   Signs advertising or displaying information regarding a community event may
be allowed within or over public city rights-of-way upon approval of the city
or a designated official. The written request for the proposed sign shall
include the dates upon which it is desired the sign(s) be displayed, the
location and the size and contents of the sign and all other information needed
to meet all Rally and Events Department requirements.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.12) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.032 VIDEO SIGNS.
   (A)   Permanent video signs shall be subject to applicable requirements of
this chapter and shall only be permitted in General Commercial and Highway
Service Districts. Permanent video signs shall only be used as on-premises
signs which would allow for advertising of products or services available at
that location.
   (B)   In determining whether to issue a permit pursuant to this section, the
city or a designated official shall consider traffic safety, the general safety
of the public and any other concerns expressed by the Building Inspector or
City Police Department. The city or a designated official shall have the
authority to demand removal of any approved temporary or permanent video sign
that is determined by the Chief of Police or Building Inspector to be a hazard
to the safety of traffic or the general public or a public nuisance.
   (C)   No application shall be considered pursuant to this section until the
applicant has paid a permit fee as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution. In the case of removal of the temporary video sign by the city,
said fee shall not be refunded.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.13) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.033 LED SIGNS.
   (A)   Permanent LED signs shall be subject to applicable requirements of
this chapter and shall only be permitted in General Commercial and Highway
Service Districts. Permanent LED signs shall only be used as on-premises signs
and are subject to the restrictions and regulations set forth within this
chapter.
   (B)   No LED sign shall exceed a maximum of 100 square feet for each face or
a total of 200 square feet for the entire sign and the sign shall contain a
maximum of two faces.
   (C)   Any person may apply for a permit to be issued by the Building
Inspector or designee for use of an LED sign as a temporary sign in connection
with a special event, including the Motorcycle Rally. Said permit shall be
requested in writing to the Planning and Permitting Office prior to the first
day of the Motorcycle Rally or other special event. Temporary LED signs may be
conditionally allowed during the Motorcycle Rally or other special event in
General Commercial, Retail Commercial and Highway Service Districts.
   (D)   In determining whether to issue a permit pursuant to this section for
a temporary LED sign, the Building Inspector or designee shall consider traffic
safety, general safety of the public and any other concerns expressed by the
Building Inspector or City Police Department. The city shall have the authority
to demand removal of any approved temporary LED sign that after the permit is
issued is determined by the Chief of Police or the Building Inspector to be a
hazard to the safety of traffic or the general public or a public nuisance.
   (E)   No permit application shall be considered for a temporary LED sign to
be used during the Motorcycle Rally until the applicant has paid a permit fee
as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution. In the case of
removal of a temporary LED sign by the city, due to violation of this chapter,
said fee shall not be refunded.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.14) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.034 STANDARDS FOR ALL ILLUMINATED AND ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGNS.
   The following are the standards for illuminated and electronic message
signs.
   (A)   No such illuminated sign shall interfere with the traveled way of
streets or obscure traffic signs or devices.
   (B)   All electronic message signs shall revert immediately to a black
screen if the sign malfunctions.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.15) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.035 COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING UPON VEHICLES.
   No chapter or section of this chapter shall be construed to disallow the use
of commercial advertisements upon vehicles as set forth in §
71.025. Advertisements relating to the business for which a vehicle is used may
be placed upon a motor vehicle when such vehicle is in use for normal delivery
or business purposes and not merely or mainly for the purpose of commercial
advertising; and buses and taxi cabs operated for the transportation of the
public for hire or buses operated for transportation of the elderly or disabled
whether for hire or at no charge and law enforcement and emergency vehicles may
display commercial advertisements on the exterior surface areas of said
vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 30.02.16) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
ON-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 152.050 APPLICATION.
   The following provisions shall apply in addition to the permit application
requirements of §
152.004 to all on-premises signs located in all zoned districts except those
signs specifically exempted, and only if such exemption specifically states
that it only applies to signs located in a specific zoned district.
(Prior Code, § 30.03.01) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.051 MAINTENANCE, REMOVAL AND REPAIR RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   All signs must be kept in good and safe repair. If a sign is not
maintained in good and safe repair, the Building Inspector may notify the owner
thereof and order him or her to repair the sign within a specified period of
time not less than 15 calendar days. If the sign is not repaired within the
time specified in the repair notice, the Building Inspector shall notify the
owner of the sign and the property owner on which the sign is located to remove
the sign within a specified period of time. The owner of the sign and the owner
of the property upon which it is located shall be jointly and severally liable
for keeping a sign in good and safe repair and properly maintained; or for the
removal of a sign if ordered by the Building Inspector or designee.
      (2)   The owners of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it
is located shall have joint and several, responsibility for keeping a sign in
safe repair and properly maintained, or for the removal of a sign if and when
it is abandoned, no longer functional, unsafe or not maintained.
   (B)   Projection, clearance and height.
      (1)   Subject to the requirements of §
152.024, signs located within 25 feet of a public street intersection shall not
exceed two and one-half feet tall if the sign rests directly on the ground or
is attached to a foundation on the ground. If supported by a post(s) or pole
(s), it shall have a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet above the crown of
the roadway.
      (2)   Signs and awnings that extend out from an exterior wall over a
public sidewalk shall maintain a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet and
shall not materially impede adjacent parking or street traffic.
      (3)   The height of a sign that is not attached to a building shall not
exceed the maximum building height allowed in that district under the authority
of Chapter 156, and which shall include filled grade beneath the sign intended
to raise the maximum sign height.
(Prior Code, § 30.03.02) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.052 ON-PREMISES SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   On-premises signs, where permitted, shall be regulated by the requirements
of this section and of the city ordinances.
   (A)   The owner of an on-premises sign shall not sell advertising on such
sign or otherwise enter into contracts which allow the sale of advertising of
products or services not available for purchase on the parcel in which the sign
is located.
   (B)   A property where an on-premises sign is permitted may have both on-
premises ground and on-premises wall signs.
   (C)   Electronic message centers are allowed which incorporate varying
message display technology through either manual means, or by use of a digital,
plasma or LCD display, or other similar technology
   (D)   The maximum area of an on-premises sign authorized by this section is
800 square feet unless otherwise indicated within this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.03.03) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.053 PORTABLE “DAILY SPECIALS” SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   Business shall be allowed portable signs in the form of a
sandwich board or other similar design to be used for advertisement of daily
specials, events or services of the business.
      (2)   Said sign may be set out each day upon the opening of the business
and shall be removed from the outside of the premises upon the end of business
hours each day.
   (B)   Any sign used pursuant to this section shall be approved by the
Building Inspector or designee and shall comply with all of the following.
      (1)   The sign shall be no more than 16 square feet in size, unless
located within the General Commercial District.
      (2)   The sign shall be of a sufficient weight and structure to assure it
will stay in place and not be moved by the wind or other natural element.
      (3)   In the General Commercial District only, where the setback makes it
impossible for a business to place the sign on the property of the business,
one portable sign may be placed in the public right-of-way subject to the
Building Inspector or designee’s authority to control the specific location
within the public right-of-way to assure pedestrian and vehicular safety. Said
sign shall be a maximum of nine square feet in size.
      (4)   Due to the increase in pedestrian traffic during the Motorcycle
Rally, any sign authorized by this section to be within the public right-of-way
shall not be used seven days prior to the official start of the Motorcycle
Rally or during the Motorcycle Rally each year.
(Prior Code, § 30.03.04) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.054 ENFORCEMENT OF ON-PREMISES SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, in the case of
noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, the Building Inspector or
designee shall provide written notice to the owner(s) of the violating sign and
to the owner(s) of the building, structure, premises or property upon which it
is located. This written notice shall state the reason(s) such sign is in
violation and set forth a period of time within which the sign must be made
compliant or be removed. In the event that compliance is not made within the
time period set forth, in addition to all other penalty and enforcement
provisions of this chapter, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter at cost to the owner of the building, structure,
premises or sign.
   (B)   The owner(s) of the property, building, structure or premises upon
which the sign sits and the owner(s) of the sign shall be jointly and severally
liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city in removing a violating
sign and the city may pursue any and all legal remedies authorized by state law
to collect against the owners.
   (C)   Service of the notice of violation upon the owners may/shall be by
mailing a copy of the notice by priority mail with USPS tracking to each person
at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment role of the
county or as known to the Building Inspections Office. If no address of any
such person so appears or is known, then a copy of the notice shall be mailed,
addressed to the person, at the address of the premises involved in the
proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive the notice shall not
affect the validity of the proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by
priority mail with USPS tracking in the manner herein provided shall be
effective upon receipt of mailing.
(Prior Code, § 30.03.05) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017) Penalty, see §
152.999
BILLBOARDS AND OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
§ 152.065 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all billboards (including
digital billboards) and off-premises signs.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.01) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.066 INVENTORY LIST.
   An authorized list or inventory of existing billboards and off-premises
signs shall be prepared and kept updated by the Building Inspector and shall be
placed on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.02) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.067 BILLBOARDS PERMITTED ONLY IN BILLBOARD OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   Billboards shall only be allowed by permit in the areas of the city shown as
Billboard Overlay District (BB-1) and as identified as BB-1 on the zoning map
on file at the City Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.03) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.068 DIGITAL OFF-PREMISES BILLBOARDS.
   (A)   New digital billboards may be permitted and conforming static
billboards may be converted to digital billboards for use in those Billboard
Overlay Districts where billboards are permitted, subject to all applicable
regulations pertaining to billboards. All digital billboards (new or converted)
shall also conform to the following additional regulations.
   (B)   Digital billboards shall display static images for a period of at
least six seconds before instantaneously transitioning to another static image.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.04) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.069 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   This type of sign is to meet a standard to preserve and protect
overall landscape quality as well as scenically sensitive areas and promote the
safety of those using the public rights-of-way. Off-premises signs must follow
the same rules as governmental and regulatory signs. An off-premises sign may
only include the name of the destination, logo and directions. No commercial
advertising message shall be allowed. Prohibited off-premises signage includes
roof tops, projecting and hanging signs, awnings and under canopies. Each sign
may have a maximum of three square feet per business included on the sign with
a sign maximum of 12 square feet in size and signs with more than one sign face
per direction may be allowed only with a use on review.
      (2)   No part of the off-premises sign face or structure will be allowed
to exist in or overlap into the required side or rear yard setbacks.
   (B)   A conditional use permit is required for each off-premises sign, in
addition to a sign permit and prior to a sign permit or any building permit
being issued, approval of the conditional use permit must be obtained.
      (1)   Approval of a conditional use permit is required any time a new
off-premises sign is erected or a structural alteration as defined by this code
is made to an existing off-premises sign prior to a sign permit being issued.
      (2)   Approval of a conditional use permit is required for the conversion
of an on-premises sign to an off-premises sign and prior to issuance of a sign
permit.
      (3)   Off-premises signs for for-profit entities shall only be allowed
within Highway Service and General Commercial Zones or within one block of an
interstate exit or other highway entrance into the city.
      (4)   Off-premises signs for nonprofit, educational or institutional
businesses or services shall be allowed within any zone at the discretion of
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
      (5)   A maximum of two off-premises signs per block are allowable.
   (C)   Size, height and spacing regulations for off-premises signage shall
meet the requirements of §
152.024 as well as the applicable provision of Building Code.
   (D)   The conditional use permit shall be approved by the Planning
Commission and is reviewed annually by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.05) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.070 BILLBOARD AND OFF-PREMISES PERMITS.
   (A)   The following provisions shall apply in addition to the permit
application requirements of §
152.021 to all billboard and legal off-premises signs located in all zoned
districts except those signs specifically exempted, and only if such exemption
applies specifically to the location identified in the permit application.
   (B)   Any sign construction permit shall expire 180 days after its issuance.
The sign must be erected within this time. Erecting a sign after the expiration
date of the permit shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Billboard and off-premises sign inventory permits expire on December
31 of the year in which the permit is issued.
   (D)   Any billboard or off-premises sign that does not have an off-premises
sign or billboard inventory permit by February 1 of any year is an unlawful
sign as defined under this code and is subject to removal under the provisions
of this chapter.
   (E)   No billboard or off-premises sign inventory permit may be issued for
any off-premises sign if the owner has unpaid fees, fines, assessments or other
charges of any kind owing to the city. No sign construction or inventory permit
for billboard or off-premises sign alterations will be issued if the owner has
unpaid fees, fines, assessments or other charges of any kind owing to the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.06) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.071 BILLBOARD AND OFF-PREMISES SIGN FEE SCHEDULE.
   The cost of a sign permit for construction or alteration of a billboard or
off-premises sign shall be based upon the value of the billboard and/or sign.
The cost shall be based on the most recent building code fee tables and shall
be paid at the time the permit application is submitted.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.07) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.072 BILLBOARD INVENTORY AND COLOR RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Planning and Permitting Office shall keep an inventory of all
billboards located within the city. The inventory shall include billboards
located within and outside of the BB zoned areas. Pursuant to this subchapter,
the owner of each billboard located within the city shall obtain a billboard
inventory permit for each billboard face capable of providing a separate
message. The permit shall refer to the location, size, height and degree of
conformity to this chapter. Only inventoried billboards may be subsequently
issued sign permits for billboard alterations.
   (B)   The base of any and all billboards shall be black or brown.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.08) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.073 SIZE AND DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Any billboard located within the BB-1 Billboard Overlay District shall
not exceed 14 feet by 48 feet with a maximum height of 45 feet, including all
supports and aprons. There shall be a maximum of four billboard faces allowed
for each structure, each face not to exceed the size and height restrictions in
this section. Said faces must be placed opposite of each other at the same
height facing opposite directions.
   (B)   A billboard shall not be erected within a minimum of 500-foot radius
of an existing billboard. Five hundred feet is the minimum distance that must
exist between signs. Said distance must exist between signs in all directions.
A longer distance may be required based upon safety factors related to the size
and/or density of the signs. An off-premises sign as permitted under this
chapter shall not be subject to these distance requirements.
   (C)   Whenever dimensions of a sign are specified, they shall include
panels, frames, supporting structures and all parts of the sign. In cases where
parts of the advertisement extend beyond the rectangular or other shaped face
of the sign, the method of measuring shall be to enclose the entire sign into
the closest geometric shape and the measurements of that shape shall constitute
the average square footage of the sign.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.09) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 2019-11, passed
11-19-2019)
§ 152.074 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All authorized existing billboards must be kept in good and safe
repair. If a billboard on the authorized list is not maintained in good and
safe repair, the Building Inspector or designee shall notify the owner thereof
and order him or her to repair the billboard within a specified period of time
not less than 30 calendar days. If the Building Inspector or designee finds
that the billboard is not repaired within the time specified in the repair
notice, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the billboard and the
owner of the real property on which the billboard is located to remove the
billboard from the property within a specified period of time. All billboards
ordered to be removed shall be stricken from the inventory when the time limit
set in the removal notice ends.
   (B)   No permit is needed for general maintenance, but no existing billboard
shall be structurally altered without first obtaining an alteration permit from
the Building Inspector or designee for that purpose. A separate permit shall be
required for each billboard.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.10) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.075 ALTERATIONS OR RELOCATIONS.
   A billboard shall not be altered with regard to size, shape or height
without the prior issuance of a sign construction permit for billboard
alterations. All such permits shall require full compliance with this chapter.
Relocation of an existing billboard shall be considered a new billboard
requiring a sign construction and billboard permit.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.11) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.076 ANNUAL INVENTORY FEE.
   (A)   An annual inventory fee shall be assessed against all existing
billboards and off-premises signs. Said fee shall be assessed each January
following the effective date of this chapter. The amount of said fee shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per billboard face or per off-
premises sign. Failure to pay said fee in a timely manner shall result in the
Building Inspector or designee notifying the owner of the billboard or off-
premises sign and the real property that the billboard or off-premises sign in
violation shall be removed within a specified period of time. After said time
period, the billboard in violation shall be removed from the authorized
inventory.
   (B)   Off-premises signs that are for a governmentally recognized nonprofit,
education or institutional businesses or services shall be exempt from this
fee.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.12) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.077 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, and in addition to the
provisions of §
152.999, in the case of noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter,
the Building Inspector shall provide written notice to the owner of the
violating billboard and the owner of the property upon which it is located,
which notice shall state the reason(s) such billboard is in violation and set
forth a period of 15 days for compliance or removal of the billboard. In the
event that compliance is not made within the 15 days, and in addition to all
other penalty and enforcement provisions of this chapter, the billboard may be
removed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at cost to the owner
of the building, structure, premises or billboard.
   (B)   The owner(s) of the property, building, structure or premises upon
which the billboard sits and the owner(s) of the billboard shall be jointly and
severally liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city in removing a
violating billboard and the city may pursue any and all legal remedies
authorized by state law to collect against the owners.
   (C)   Service of the notice of violation upon the owners shall either
personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by priority mail with USPS
tracking to each person at his or her address as it appears on the last
equalized assessment role of the county or as known to the Building Inspections
Office. If no address of any such person so appears or is known, then a copy of
the notice shall be mailed, addressed to the person, at the address of the
premises involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive
the notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings taken under this
chapter. Service by priority mail with USPS tracking in the manner herein
provided shall be effective upon receipt of mailing.
(Prior Code, § 30.04.13) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2
misdemeanor subject to punishment that may include any or all of the following,
for each day on which a violation occurs:
      (1)   Incarceration in the County Jail and/or payment of a fine in the
maximum amounts set forth by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2;
      (2)   Payment of any costs and/or restitution;
      (3)   Revocation, suspension or refusal to issue any license or permit
pursuant to any section of this chapter; and
      (4)   Removal of the violators’ sign and/or elimination of said
violators’ right to obtain future sign permits.
   (B)   In addition, the owner(s) of the property, building, structure or
premises upon which the sign sits and the owner(s) of the sign shall be jointly
and severally liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city in removing
a violating sign and the city may pursue any and all legal remedies authorized
by state law to collect against the owners.
(Prior Code, § 30.01.06) (Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-17-2017)
CHAPTER 153: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Scope and purpose
   
153.002   Definitions
   
153.003   Appeal process
Applicability
   
153.015   Application of chapter
   
153.016   Existing wireless telecommunications facilities
Application Procedures
   
153.030   Approval required
   
153.031   Preapplication conference
   
153.032   Application requirements
   
153.033   Application fee
   
153.034   Notice of complete application
   
153.035   Approval
   
153.036   Public hearing
   
153.037   City Council decision
Approval Standards
   
153.050   Standards and grounds for denial
   
153.051   Structural design
   
153.052   Location
   
153.053   Setbacks
   
153.054   Fencing
   
153.055   Access
   
153.056   Landscaping
   
153.057   Lighting
   
153.058   Color and materials
   
153.059   Visual impact
   
153.060   Liability insurance
   
153.061   Fees and costs
Third-Party Review
   
153.075   Necessity
   
153.076   Cost
   
153.077   Selection of third-party expert
   
153.078   Intent of third-party expert review
Inspection
   
153.090   Initial inspection
   
153.091   Future inspections
   
153.092   Reports to be submitted to city
   
153.093   Repair or demolition
   
153.094   Required repairs
   
153.095   Required demolition
   
153.096   Costs
Abandonment
   
153.110   Duty of owner or operator upon intent to abandon
   
153.111   Authority of the city to deem abandoned
   
153.112   Options of owner after abandonment
   
153.113   Authority of the city upon owner’s failure to act
Temporary Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
   
153.125   Approval required
   
153.126   Application requirements
   
153.127   Location
   
153.128   Fee
   
153.129   Authority to issue permit
   
153.130   Maximum duration of permit
   
153.131   Maximum height of tower
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and impartial
regulations for the construction and placement of all wireless communications
facilities. The regulations set forth herein are intended to encourage the
development of a competitive wireless communications marketplace while
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public and maintaining the
aesthetic integrity of the city. The regulations set forth herein apply to the
placement, construction and modification of telecommunications facilities and
are being adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To implement a municipal policy concerning the placement, construction
and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities within the city;
   (B)   To establish clear guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of municipal authority to regulation telecommunications facilities;
   (C)   To protect the scenic and visual character of the city through careful
design, landscaping, site placement and screening and camouflaging techniques
by minimizing the adverse impacts of such facilities, including:
      (1)   Scenic and visual impact;
      (2)   Environmental impacts;
      (3)   Impacts to historically significant areas;
      (4)   Health and safety impacts; and
      (5)   Property value impacts.
   (D)   To promote and encourage share use/collocation of existing and new
telecommunications facilities as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single use telecommunications facilities;
   (E)   To further the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan of the
city, while promoting orderly development of the city with minimal impact and
existing uses;
   (F)   To avoid potential damages to property caused by telecommunications
facilities by ensuring that such facilities are soundly and carefully designed,
constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or when
determined to be structurally unsound;
   (G)   To ensure that telecommunications facilities are compatible with
surrounding land uses to facilitate the provision of wireless communications
services to residences and businesses in an orderly fashion; and
   (H)   To promote the location of telecommunications towers in nonresidential
areas.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMATEUR (HAM) RADIO STATION. An antenna of an AMATEUR (HAM) RADIO STATION
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
   EMERGENCY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A temporary wireless
communication facility for emergency communications by public and private
official.
   TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A portable self-contained
cell site facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide
personal wireless services on a temporary basis. One normally includes tower,
antenna and accompanying equipment that is used on a seasonal or temporary
basis and can be completely removed from the property when not in use.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Any structure, antenna, tower or
device which provides radio or television transmission, commercial mobile
wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services,
common carrier wireless exchange phone services, specialized mobile radio
communications, personal communication service or pager service.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.003 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector, City Engineer,
Finance Office or other city department head made under this chapter shall be
entitled to have said decision reviewed by the City Council. The process shall
be as follows.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector, City
Engineer or other department head under this chapter may file a notice of
appeal with the Finance Officer. There shall be a fee set forth in the city’s
annual fee resolution assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the
Finance Office at the time of filing the notice of appeal.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall notify
the City Council, and a public meeting shall be held within 30 days after the
date said appeal was filed. The City Council shall provide notice to the person
specifying the time, date and location of the hearing.
   (C)   The City Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days of the hearing. The Council may affirm or reverse the
decision of the designated city official.
(Prior Code, Chapter 33.09) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
APPLICABILITY
§ 153.015 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall apply to all construction and expansion of wireless
telecommunications facilities with the exception that the following are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter unless specifically stated otherwise
herein:
   (A)   Emergency wireless telecommunications facilities;
   (B)   Amateur (Ham) radio station antennas that are not more than 35 feet in
height;
   (C)   Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities are exempt from all
sections unless specifically provided otherwise herein;
   (D)   An antenna used as an accessory to a residential dwelling unit
provided that it does not exceed 35 feet in height; and
   (E)   Nonconforming, previously existing wireless telecommunications
facilities which meet the requirements set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.016 EXISTING WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Any telecommunications facility legally existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter shall be considered a legal nonconforming wireless
telecommunications facility and shall be allowed to continue its current usage
as it exists at the time of adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Any legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facility shall be
allowed to remain in place for its existing use and be maintained; provided,
however, that any legally existing nonconforming telecommunications facility
may not be:
      (1)   Structurally altered, including adding to the size or height of the
facility;
      (2)   Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity or change its
existing use;
      (3)   Expanded;
      (4)   Reestablished after its disconnected use of 180 days; or
      (5)   Reestablished after damage or destruction is the estimated cost of
reconstruction exceeds 50% of the appraised replacement cost.
(Prior Code, § 33.02.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
§ 153.030 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, expand or structurally alter a wireless
telecommunications facility within the city without first having been issued an
appropriate permit. The responsibility for securing the permit is joint and
several of the entity constructing, expanding or structurally altering the
wireless telecommunications facility and the owner of the property upon which
said facility is being placed or altered.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.031 PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   Any person seeking approval of the City Council and the issuance of a permit
under this chapter for the placement of a wireless telecommunications facility
shall meet with the City Planning and Zoning Commission before filing an
application. At this meeting, the Commission shall explain to the applicant the
related provisions, as well as application forms and submissions that will be
required under this chapter. Any person may schedule such a conference by
contacting the Building Inspector and requesting that he or she be placed on
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.032 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The permit application shall include and/or be accompanied by the following
information:
   (A)   The full name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
   (B)   The full name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property upon which the wireless telecommunications facility is to be placed
and/or structurally altered;
   (C)   A copy of the lease or sale agreement for the property on which the
tower is proposed to be located and, if applicable, the portion of the
agreement that specifies, in case of abandonment, a method that the utility
will follow in dismantling and removing the proposed telecommunications
facility, including a time table for removal;
   (D)   A site plan or survey, signed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor in the state that shows the proposed location of the
wireless telecommunications facility and all easements and existing structures
within 750 feet of the proposed site on the property on which the facility will
be located, and all easements and existing structures within 250 feet of the
access drive, including intersection with the public street or right-of-way;
   (E)   A map drawn to scale or a colored aerial photograph to scale no less
than one inch equals 400 feet that identifies every structure and every owner
of real estate within a 1,500-foot radius of the proposed facility;
   (F)   A statement that every person who, according to the records confirmed
by County Equalization and Planning, owns property within 1,500 feet of the
proposed facility or property contiguous or adjacent landowners to the site
upon which the facility is proposed to be constructed unless the proposed
facility is to be placed within a communication center has been:
      (1)   Notified by certified mail at least 14 calendar days in advance of
any City Planning and Zoning Commission meeting and/or any City Council
meeting, along with a return receipt request, of the proposed construction,
which notice shall include a map of the location of the proposed construction;
      (2)   Given the telephone number and address of the developer, applicant
and landowner; and
      (3)   Informed of his or her rights to participate in the City Planning
and Zoning Commission meeting or City Council meeting on the application.
   (G)   A list of the property owners who received the notice, together with
copies of the certified receipts for the notice sent to the list of property
owners;
   (H)   Written verification that the property on which the wireless
telecommunications facility is proposed to be located is an approved lot for
such purpose and appropriately platted;
   (I)   A scenic assessment, consisting of the following:
      (1)   Elevation drawings of the proposed facility and any other proposed
structure showing height above ground level;
      (2)   A landscaping plan indicating: the proposed placement of the
facility on the site; location of existing structures, trees and other
significant site features; the type location of plans proposed to screen the
facility; the method of fencing, the color of the structure and the proposed
lighting method; and
      (3)   Photo simulations of the proposed facility taken from the
perspectives determined by the City Planning and Zoning Commission, or its
designee, during the preapplication conference. Each photo must be labeled with
the line of sight, elevation and with the date taken and printed on the
photograph. Photos must show the color of the facility and the method of
screening.
   (J)   A written description of how the proposed facility fits into the
applicant’s telecommunications network. This submission requirement is not
required disclosure of confidential business information;
   (K)   Evidence demonstrating that no existing facility, building, site or
structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed facility, the evidence of
which may consist of any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the
targeted market coverage area that are suitable to meet the applicant’s
engineering requirements;
      (2)   Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height or
cannot be increased in height at a reasonable cost to meet the applicant’s
engineering requirements;
      (3)   Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
Specifically, planned necessary equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing facilities, considering the existing and planned use of those
facilities and existing facilities cannot be reinforced to accommodate the new
equipment; and existing facilities do not have space on which planned equipment
can be placed so it can function effectively;
      (4)   The fees, costs or contractual provision required by the owner in
order to share or adopt an existing facility are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
the pro rata share of a new facility development are presumed to be
unreasonable;
      (5)   Evidence that the applicant has made diligent good faith efforts to
negotiate collocation on an existing facility, building or structure and has
been denied;
      (6)   The applicant’s proposed antenna or equipment would cause
electromagnetic interference with antenna on the existing powers or structures;
and
      (7)   Antennas or equipment on the existing facility would cause
electromagnetic interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.
   (L)   A sample of a form of surety approved by the City Planning and Zoning
Commission to pay for the costs of removing the facility if it is abandoned.
Actual surety is to be obtained after approval of the application by the City
Planning and Zoning Commission;
   (M)   A brief description of the character of the general area in which the
tower is proposed to be constructed along with a five-year future development
trend expected in the area, to be agreed upon by the City Engineering and
Inspection Office;
   (N)   A statement that the applicant has made a good faith effort to
identify and evaluate less intrusive alternatives and considered the likely
effects of the insulation on nearby land uses and has concluded that there is
no more suitable location reasonably available for a tower space for a wireless
telecommunications facility from which adequate service to the area can be
provided;
   (O)   Documentation from the Federal Communications Commission ensuring
public safety radio services will be free from harmful or destructive
interference;
   (P)   Documentation verifying that the Federal Aviation Administration has
been notified of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and the site
location; and
   (Q)   Documentation, including registration number received from the Federal
Communications Commission by the applicant verifying the Federal Communication
Commission’s approval of the facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007; Ord. 2007-23, passed
8-31-2007)
§ 153.033 APPLICATION FEE.
   An application shall include an application fee as shall be set forth in the
city’s annual fee resolution. The application shall not be considered complete
until this fee is paid.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.04) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.034 NOTICE OF COMPLETE APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application, the City Planning and Zoning
Commission shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt.
      (2)   Within 30 working days of a receipt of an application, the City
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application and determine if
the application meets the submission requirements.
   (B)   If the application is complete, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall notify the applicant in writing of this determination and require the
applicant to provide a sufficient number of copies of the application to the
Commission. The applicant shall then be added to the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (C)   If the application is deemed to be incomplete, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall notify the applicant in writing, specifying the additional
materials or information required to complete to application. The applicant
shall then be responsible for supplementing the application until it is deemed
to be complete.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.05) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.035 APPROVAL.
   (A)   Within 90 days after receiving a completed application for approval,
the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve with condition
or deny the application in writing, together with the findings on which that
decision is based.
   (B)   The Commission’s decisions shall then be submitted to the Finance
Officer along with a copy of the complete application, and the Finance Officer
shall provide a copy of the application and the Commission’s decision to each
member of the City Council and the Mayor.
   (C)   The Commission’s decision shall act as the Planning and Zoning
Commission’s recommendation on the application.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.06) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.036 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   A public hearing shall be held within 30 days of the City Council
receiving the completed application and the written recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Finance Officer shall notify the applicant
in writing of the location, time and date of the public hearing. The applicant
shall be responsible for notifying applicable landowners of the hearing as set
forth previously within this chapter.
   (B)   Detailed minutes of the public hearing shall be taken, and, if
necessary due to complexity, the hearing may be recorded for purposes of
preserving the record of the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.07) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.037 CITY COUNCIL DECISION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the City Council shall issue
a written decision to the applicant either approving, denying or approving with
conditions the application request and issuance of the permit.
   (B)   Any decision to deny a permit request shall be supported by
substantial evidence contained within a written record.
(Prior Code, § 33.03.08) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
APPROVAL STANDARDS
§ 153.050 STANDARDS AND GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   An application for approval of a permit issued under this chapter shall meet
all of the approval standards set forth in this subchapter, and failure to do
so shall be grounds for denial of any application.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.051 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
   Any new wireless telecommunication facilities or alternations to existing
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable city building
codes and shall meet or exceed any applicable state, federal or local
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.052 LOCATION.
   (A)   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be permitted in areas
zoned residential.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically provided within this chapter, any
wireless telecommunication facility shall be a minimum of 750 feet from any
existing structure.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.053 SETBACKS.
   (A)   Any wireless telecommunications facility shall comply with the setback
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
   (B)   Setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower/antenna of the
facility or from any protruding building structure at the base of the facility,
whichever is closest to the property line of the parcel on which it is located.
   (C)   In the event where there is a conflict between the minimum lot setback
and minimum street right-of-way setback, the greater setback shall apply. All
guy-wires, support anchors and any other appurtenances of the facility shall
meet all setback requirements.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.04) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.054 FENCING.
   A chain-link fence or wall, not less than six feet in height from finished
grade, equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, shall be placed
around any wireless telecommunications facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.05) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.055 ACCESS.
   Access to any wireless telecommunication facility shall be through a locked
structurally sound gate.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.06) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.056 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be used to mitigate the visual impacts of a wireless
telecommunications facility. In the event adequate vegetation is not present,
the facility location shall be landscaped with a landscape buffer that
effectively screens the view of the facility. Existing vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   Landscaping shall be used placed inside and outside the fenced area
and shall include planting trees to blend the facility in with the surrounding
development and natural scenery.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.07) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.057 LIGHTING.
   Any wireless telecommunication facility shall not be illuminated, except for
security lighting that is directed down in a manner to retain light within the
boundaries of the site or as required by the FCC or FAA.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.08) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.058 COLOR AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Any wireless telecommunication facility shall be constructed with
materials and colors that match with the surrounding natural or built
environment to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   Unless otherwise required, muted colors and earth tones shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.09) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.059 VISUAL IMPACT.
   (A)   Any wireless telecommunications facility shall not have any
unreasonable adverse impact upon designated scenic resources within the city as
identified either in the comprehensive plan, or by a state or federal agency.
   (B)   In determining the potential unreasonable adverse impact of the
proposed facility upon designated scenic resources, the following factors shall
be considered:
      (1)   The extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility is visible above the tree line as seen from one or more viewpoints of
the impacted designated scenic resource;
      (2)   The type, number, height and proximity of existing structures and
features and background features within the same line of sight as the proposed
facility;
      (3)   The extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility would be visible from viewpoints;
      (4)   The amount of vegetative screening;
      (5)   The distances of the proposed facility from viewpoints and the
location of the facility; and
      (6)   The presence of reasonable alternatives that would allow the
facility to function consistently with its purpose.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.10) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.060 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Liability insurance in an amount not less than an amount as shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution shall be maintained by the owner
and operator of any wireless telecommunication facility until such facility is
dismantled and removed from the location within the city.
   (B)   Proof of said insurance shall be provided to the Finance Officer upon
completion of the application process.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.11) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.061 FEES AND COSTS.
   Any wireless telecommunications facility’s owner or operator shall have paid
all fees and/or costs associated with the application process, including the
costs associated with any third-party expert review.
(Prior Code, § 33.04.12) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
THIRD-PARTY REVIEW
§ 153.075 NECESSITY.
   Wireless service providers use various methodologies and analyses, including
geographically-based computer software to demonstrate the specific technical
parameters of their services and rely upon said methodologies and analyses in
determining the need for expansion of certain services. Considerations such as
expected coverage areas, antenna configurations, topographical constraints that
affect signal paths and other factors of consideration are beyond the knowledge
of the city’s professionals. Due to the complexity of the wireless
telecommunication area, it may become necessary for the city to hire a third-
party expert to assist the city with its duties and authority under this
subchapter, including having the expert complete a review of technical data
submitted by an applicant.
(Prior Code, § 33.05.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.076 COST.
   Any costs associated with the hiring of a third-party expert under this
subchapter shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The city shall provide
the applicant with a copy of any bill received from the third-party expert, and
any applicant shall make payment for said bill to the City Finance Office prior
to the public hearing being held on the application. No application shall be
approved or permit issued until all costs have been paid by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 33.05.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.077 SELECTION OF THIRD-PARTY EXPERT.
   The selection of any third-party expert may be by mutual agreement of the
city and the applicant, or, at the discretion of the city, provided, however,
that the applicant is entitled to review any reports prepared by the expert and
comment on their content.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.08) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.078 INTENT OF THIRD-PARTY EXPERT REVIEW.
   The third-party expert review is intended to address interference and public
safety issues and be a site-specific review of technical aspects of the
facility and/or a review of the applicant/provider’s methodology and equipment
and/or a review of any other technical aspects of the proposal that may have
arisen during the application process that are beyond the knowledge of the city
professionals. Based upon the expert’s review, the city may require changes
and/or additions to the applicant/provider’s application.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.09) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
INSPECTION
§ 153.090 INITIAL INSPECTION.
   Any new wireless telecommunications facility shall be inspected for
structural integrity by a qualified registered professional engineer within 30
days after construction is complete.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.091 FUTURE INSPECTIONS.
   Following initial inspection, any wireless telecommunications facility shall
be inspected by a qualified registered professional engineer no less than once
every ten years.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.092 REPORTS TO BE SUBMITTED TO CITY.
   (A)   A copy of any inspection report obtained shall be provided to the City
Building Inspector within 30 days of its receipt by the owner or operator of
the facility.
   (B)   Failure to provide the required inspection reports within the time
required shall be deemed prima facie evidence of abandonment of the facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.093 REPAIR OR DEMOLITION.
   Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer after review of any inspection
reports, the city may require the facility be repaired or demolished based upon
the results of the inspection.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.04) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.094 REQUIRED REPAIRS.
   (A)   Any repairs that are required as a result of the inspection shall be
completed within 90 days from the receipt of notice by the owner or operator of
the needed repairs.
   (B)   Repairs may be required to be completed more quickly if the City
Engineer determines that a safety emergency exists.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.05) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.095 REQUIRED DEMOLITION.
   Within 90 days of receipt of notice, the owner shall complete the removal of
a facility that has been ordered demolished based upon an inspection report.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.06) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.096 COSTS.
   Any costs of inspection, reports, repairs or demolition required under this
subchapter shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the
facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.06.07) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
ABANDONMENT
§ 153.110 DUTY OF OWNER OR OPERATOR UPON INTENT TO ABANDON.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any wireless
telecommunications facility to notify the city in writing of any intent to
abandon use of any facility.
   (B)   Said written notice shall be provided to the City Engineering and
Inspections Office and include the owner or operator’s intent with regards to
the abandoned facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.07.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.111 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY TO DEEM ABANDONED.
   (A)   In the event the use of any wireless telecommunications facility has
been discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days, the facility shall be
deemed to have been abandoned.
   (B)   The City Engineering and Inspections Office shall provide written
notice to the owner or operator of the facility that the facility is deemed
abandoned and that the owner and/or operator shall be required to remove the
facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.07.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.112 OPTIONS OF OWNER AFTER ABANDONMENT.
   Within 45 days of receipt of a notice of abandonment or within 45 days of
notifying the city of intent to abandon, the owner or operator shall exercise
one of the following options:
   (A)   Demonstrate to the City Engineer that the facility has not been
abandoned, is in use or has been in use during the continuous period of the
preceding 180 days, is being properly maintained and is not a safety hazard;
   (B)   Reactivate the use of the facility or transfer the facility to another
owner/operator who will make actual use of the facility; or
   (C)   Submit a plan for completion of removal of the abandoned facility to
be accomplished within 90 days. Said plan shall include the site of the
facility being returned to its pre-construction natural condition.
(Prior Code, § 33.07.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.113 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY UPON OWNER’S FAILURE TO ACT.
   (A)   In the event the owner or operator of the wireless telecommunications
facility fails to exercise one of the three options in §
153.112 within the allowed time, including failure to follow through with
completion of removal, then the city may proceed at the owner or operator’s
expense to remove the abandoned facility and return the site to its pre-
construction natural condition.
   (B)   (1)   The owner or operator of the facility shall be responsible for
all costs associated with the dismantling and removal of any abandoned
facility.
      (2)   In the event the city removes any facility, the costs of
dismantling, removal and replacement of the site to its pre-construction
natural condition shall be assessed against the facility’s owner and/or
operator.
      (3)   The lien of such assessment shall bear interest, have priority and
be collectable as provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 33.07.04) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
§ 153.125 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall place a temporary wireless telecommunications facility
within the city without first having been issued an appropriate permit. The
responsibility for securing the permit is joint and several of the entity
placing wireless telecommunications facility and the owner of the property upon
which said facility is being placed.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.01) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.126 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   To obtain a permit for a temporary wireless telecommunications
facility, the applicant shall make application to the Engineering and
Inspections Office on a form to be provided by the city.
   (B)   The permit application shall include and/or be accompanied by the
following information:
      (1)   The full name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The full name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property upon which the temporary facility is to be placed;
      (3)   A detailed description of the proposed location of the temporary
facility;
      (4)   The proposed time frame, with specific dates during which the
temporary facility is to be located upon the property;
      (5)   A written explanation addressing type of supplemental, temporary
service will be provided by the temporary facility;
      (6)   A written explanation addressing why the additional service is
needed during the time frame requested;
      (7)   A statement of approval signed by the appropriate property owners,
if applicable; and
      (8)   Documentation, including registration number received from the
Federal Communications Commission by the applicant verifying the Federal
Communications Commission’s approval of the facility.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.02) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007; Ord. 2007-24, passed
8-31-2007)
§ 153.127 LOCATION.
   Temporary wireless communication facilities shall not be permitted in areas
zoned residential or within 175 feet of any property within a residential zoned
district, unless the applicant provides a statement of approval signed by the
owners of all property located within 750 feet of the proposed location.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.128 FEE.
   The cost of a temporary wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be
set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution and shall be paid at the time of
making application.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.04) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.129 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE PERMIT.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall review any completed application
submitted pursuant to this subchapter and may issue the permit if all
applicable requirements have been satisfied.
   (B)   The permit shall include the specific time frame for which the permit
was approved, and the permit shall expire at 12:00 a.m. on the last day allowed
by the permit.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.05) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.130 MAXIMUM DURATION OF PERMIT.
   The maximum duration of any temporary wireless telecommunications permit
shall be 45 days in any one-year period.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.06) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.131 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF TOWER.
   The maximum height of any temporary telecommunications facility shall be 120
feet.
(Prior Code, § 33.08.07) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state
pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any
costs and/or restitution authorized by this chapter and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 33.01.03) (Ord. 2007-17, passed 8-4-2007)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Scope and purpose
   
154.002   Definitions
Authority and Jurisdiction
   
154.015   Authority
   
154.016   Jurisdiction
   
154.017   Variances prohibited
Procedure
   
154.030   Procedure for approval of subdivision
   
154.031   Procedure for unofficial review by Planning Commission
   
154.032   Preliminary plan requirements
   
154.033   Procedure for review of preliminary plan
   
154.034   Final plat requirements
   
154.035   Procedure for review and approval of final plan and plat
   
154.036   Guarantee in lieu of completed improvement
   
154.037   Expiration of approval of preliminary plan
Design Standards
   
154.050   Conformity to comprehensive/development plan
   
154.051   Street plan
   
154.052   Alleys
   
154.053   Sidewalks
   
154.054   Names
   
154.055   Blocks
   
154.056   Lots
   
154.057   Easements
   
154.058   Drainage, inundation and stormwater runoff control
   
154.059   Building restrictions
   
154.060   Nonresidential subdivisions
   
154.061   Private streets and reserve strips
   
154.062   Street lights
Required Improvements
   
154.075   General provisions applicable to improvement
   
154.076   Streets and alleys
   
154.077   Curbs and gutters
   
154.078   Water distribution system
   
154.079   Sewers
   
154.080   Storm sewers and drainage
   
154.081   Property markers
   
154.082   Street signs
   
154.083   Oversize facilities
   
154.084   Inspection
   
154.085   Acceptance of improvements by the city
Variances to Development Standards
   
154.100   Hardship
   
154.101   Experimental subdivisions
   
154.102   Conditions
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious development of
the municipality and its environs; for the coordination of streets within
subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features of
the comprehensive plan; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light
and air, and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to
create conditions favorable to health, safety and convenience through the
provision for an adequate scale of street, sanitary, water, utility and other
improvements as land is subdivided.
(Prior Code, § 19.01.01) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor public way having a narrow right-of-way and affording a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The instrument issued by the Building Inspector
when a building has been inspected and found to meet adopted codes and
ordinances relating to construction. Such certificate authorizes occupancy of
said building.
   COMPREHENSIVE/DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Any legally adopted part or element of the
comprehensive/development plan of the city. This may include, but is not
limited to, the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, community facilities
plan, major street plan, capital improvements program and land use plan.
   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES. The State Department of
Water and Natural Resources; also referred to as SD DENR.
   DEVELOPER. Any person or group thereof proposing to transform a parcel of
land by dividing the parcel by platting and/or installing improvements for the
purpose of sale and transfer to others.
   EASEMENT. A right to land generally established in real estate deed or on a
recorded plat to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or
particular persons for specified uses.
   FINAL PLAT. A plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these
regulations and is in form for recording in the Office of the Register of
Deeds.
   FUEL BREAK. A strategically located strip or block of land varying in width,
on which some vegetation has been modified to reduce the rate of fire spread to
provide a safe place for firefighters to work and where fires may be more
readily controlled. A FUEL BREAK usually provides all-wheel drive access and an
advantageous area for quickly and safely constructing and manning a fire line.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Health.
   LOT. A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building
development.
   MAJOR STREET PLAN. The major street plan adopted as an element of the
comprehensive/ development plan.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. Any street constructed with street section less than
40 feet from back of curb to back of curb and right-of-way width of less than
60 feet.
   MASTER DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL PLAN. The flood boundary and floodway map
and the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) as approved by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   MOUNTAIN SUBDIVISION. All subdivisions located within the limits of the
Black Hills Fire District in South Dakota and also any subdivisions where
contours for any given cross-section of the subdivision indicate an average
cross slope greater than 15%.
   OWNER’S ENGINEER. The civil engineer registered and in good standing with
the State Board of Registration who is the agent of the owner of land which is
proposed to be subdivided or which is in the process of being subdivided.
   OWNER’S SURVEYOR. The land surveyor registered and in good standing with the
State Board of Registration who is the agent of the owner of land which is
proposed to be subdivided or which is in the process of being subdivided.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission for the city.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. The map or maps of a proposed subdivision and specified
supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed
engineering and design.
   SPECIFICATIONS. The specifications which have been adopted by the City
Council.
   STREET. A tract of land, dedicated to public use, which affords the primary
means of access to the abutting property, but excluding private driveways
serving only one parcel of land.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract or parcel of land by plat or other
instrument of conveyance into two or more lots, sites or other divisions
thereof, with all resulting parcels being less than three acres following the
division, for the purpose of immediate or intended future sale or ownership
transfer, which could be used as a building development. The term shall include
any division that includes a new street regardless of the size of the resulting
parcels following the division, re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   UTILITIES. Municipal and franchised utilities.
(Prior Code, § 19.01.02) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2008-05, passed
6-7-2008)
AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION
§ 154.015 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by SDCL § 11-06, as amended, the following
regulations are hereby adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 19.02.01) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.016 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction
of the city, including as provided for in SDCL § 11-6-26.
(Prior Code, § 19.02.02) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.017 VARIANCES PROHIBITED.
   Any subdivision of land within the city, or one mile thereof platted after
January 1, 1993, shall not be eligible for variances under provisions set forth
in this chapter, except so as to allow approval of an experimental subdivision,
as provided for in §§
154.100 through
154.102.
(Prior Code, § 19.02.03) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012) Penalty, see §
154.999
PROCEDURE
§ 154.030 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION.
   The procedure to be followed for approval of a subdivision within the
jurisdiction of the city shall be as follows.
   (A)   The developer shall submit to the Community Development Department a
minimum of five working days prior to the Planning Commission meeting a
preliminary plan and statements of intent permitting unofficial review.
   (B)   The Planning Commission will discuss these documents with the
developer and will establish applicable comprehensive/development plan
requirements, scale of improvements, design standards and will review it for
compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Following approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council, the
developer shall prepare the final plans and required plats for submission to
the Community Development Department a minimum of five working days prior to
the Planning Commission meeting.
   (D)   Upon finding that the final plans and plats are in substantial
compliance with the approved preliminary, the Planning Commission will
recommend its approval to the City Council.
   (E)   Upon approval of the final plans and plat, the Planning Commission
shall forward the plans and plat and its recommendation for approval to the
City Council.
   (F)   The final plat shall be filed with the Register of Deeds upon approval
by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.01) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.031 PROCEDURE FOR UNOFFICIAL REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall process proposed subdivisions in
accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   The procedure and/or requirements for unofficial review by the
Planning Commission shall be as follows.
      (1)   The developer shall prepare a written declaration of intent
concerning the tract of land to be subdivided in sufficient detail to clearly
indicate the nature and purpose of the subdivision. A written declaration of
intent shall be submitted to the Planning Commission before approval of the
preliminary plan.
      (2)   The developer shall prepare a plan which he or she shall submit to
and discuss with the Planning Commission in order to establish the requirements
of Chapter 156, drainage plans, major street plan and other features and
requirements of the comprehensive/development plan that will influence the
design of the subdivision.
      (3)   If the property proposed for development involves areas where, in
the view of the Planning Commission, the soil characteristics, terrain,
drainage, geology, ground cover or its location impose unusual requirements,
the Commission may request supplementary data to demonstrate the feasibility of
subdividing the land.
      (4)   The developer may request a written statement setting out the range
of requirements to be met in which instance the Planning Commission shall have
a period of 30 days to comply.
      (5)   At the request of the developer, the preliminary plan, together
with Planning Commission comments, may be submitted to the City Council for
their review and comment at a joint meeting with the developer.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.02) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.032 PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any preliminary plan shall include the following:
   (A)   A map showing the general location of the property proposed to be
subdivided which clearly shows the property boundary and its relation to
surrounding development, including property lines, roads, utilities, if any are
present in the vicinity, and water courses with tributary drainage areas;
   (B)   Contours from available data;
   (C)   Sewer and water systems proposed with points of connection to existing
service if public, and, if not, accompanied by reports by qualified engineers
indicating from available information, the suitability of soils to accommodate
private disposal systems, the probability of success of wells for water supply
and any significant problems of long-term supply, pollution or maintenance
problems of such wells or systems;
   (D)   A narrative describing the nature of the intended development, its
total area, its integrations into surrounding development and its impact on the
community;
   (E)   In the case of a mountain subdivision, a preliminary grading plan and
definition of the amount and location of forest cover may be required;
   (F)   Vicinity sketch;
   (G)   Names of the subdivision, developer, owner’s engineer and names and
addresses of all adjacent landowners;
   (H)   Date, northpoint and scale. The required scale shall be determined by
the City Development Director/Building Official;
   (I)   Location, width and purpose of all easements;
   (J)   Location and dimension of land to be dedicated or reserved for parks,
open space or other public use;
   (K)   Lot number and block number clearly identifying each parcel of land
and the dimensions of all lots;
   (L)   Building line location shall be shown along each street;
   (M)   Any portion of the land in or adjacent to the subdivision subject to
periodic inundation by storm drainage, overflow or ponding shall be clearly
shown and identified on the plan;
   (N)   A street plan containing the following information:
      (1)   Location of all proposed streets within the subdivision and
location of existing or proposed streets adjacent to the subdivision;
      (2)   Widths of existing and proposed rights-of-way;
      (3)   Clear identification of location and width of rights-of-way of any
street adopted as part of the major street plan;
      (4)   Street names which have been approved by the Planning Commission;
      (5)   Topography at five-foot contour intervals unless a closer contour
interval is required by the City Development Director/Building Official;
      (6)   Plan and profile of all streets;
      (7)   Location of all required sidewalks and crosswalks; and
      (8)   Curve data for the centerline of each street.
   (O)   A storm drainage plan containing the following information:
      (1)   Location of proposed drainage ways, streams and ponds in the
subdivision;
      (2)   Location, size and invert elevations of proposed drainage
structures, including culverts, bridges, pipes, drop inlets and top elevations
of headwalls and the like;
      (3)   Area of land contributing runoff to each drainage structure;
      (4)   Location of easements and rights-of-way for drainage ways and
maintenance of access thereof;
      (5)   Typical cross-sections of each drainage way; and
      (6)   Direction of water flow throughout subdivision.
   (P)   A sanitary sewer plan containing the following information:
      (1)   Location and size of all existing and proposed sewers in the
subdivision and location of all tie points and sewer laterals of the
subdivision;
      (2)   Direction of flow of each sewer line;
      (3)   Location of each manhole and other sewerage system appurtenances,
including lift stations, treatment plants; and
      (4)   Plan and profile of sewage system;
   (Q)   The water distribution plan shall contain the location and size of the
water distribution system, including pipes, valves, fittings, hydrants high-
pressure pumping equipment and other equipment; and
   (R)   A gas, electric and telephone distribution plan containing the
following information:
      (1)   Location of all poles or subsurface facilities as necessary to
serve each lot or parcel of land within the subdivision and where necessary to
abutting property; and
      (2)   Required easements, including anchor easements for guy-wires.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.03) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.033 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   The procedure followed after submission of a preliminary plan for review
shall be as follows.
   (A)   Fifteen copies of the preliminary plan and six copies of the required
supplemental material shall be submitted to Community Development Office which
shall issue a receipt for the same when it is ascertained that the submission
includes all requirements set forth in this chapter. If, because of the nature
of the subdivision more copies are required, the Development Director/Building
Official shall specify the required number of copies.
   (B)   The date of the Planning Commission meeting to review the plan shall
be specified on the receipt.
   (C)   When officially submitted and received, the Planning Commission shall
have a maximum of 45 days in which to review, prepare and submit its
recommendation and the plans to the City Council, provided, however, that the
developer’s engineer may agree to an extension not to exceed 30 days.
   (D)   When officially submitted and received, the Community Development
Office shall distribute copies of the plan as follows:
      (1)   To the appropriate school district;
      (2)   To any county and/or municipality within at least a three-mile
radius of any portion of the proposed subdivision;
      (3)   To any utility, local improvement and service district, when
applicable;
      (4)   To U.S. Forest Service and the State Department of Game, Fish and
Parks for review and recommendation regarding access roads, fuel breaks and
other measures designed to reduce fire hazards for mountain subdivisions;
      (5)   To the State Highway Department when applicable;
      (6)   Applicable soil or water conservation districts for explicit review
and recommendations regarding soil suitability and flooding problems;
      (7)   To the SD DENR; and
      (8)   To city departments.
   (E)   The above agencies, towns or cities shall have 24 days from the date
information is mailed to them to comment. Failure to respond within the
allotted time shall be considered an approval unless an extension has been
consented to by the developer and the City Council.
   (F)   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to determine
if is consistent with the standards set forth in this chapter, and it shall
only recommend approval for those preliminary plans which the Commission finds
to be developed in accordance with the intent, standards and criteria specified
in this chapter.
   (G)   If the Commission shall determine from a review of the preliminary
plan that the soil, slope, vegetation and/or drainage characteristics of the
site are such as to require substantial cutting, clearing, grading and other
earth-moving operations in the construction of the subdivision or otherwise
entail an erosion hazard, the Commission shall require the developer to provide
soil erosion and sedimentation control plans and specifications. Such control
plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer or the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.04) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.034 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following information is required for final plats of subdivisions.
   (A)   The original or reproducible final plat shall be drawn in black ink
upon Mylar or other approved reproducible medium not greater than 26 by 15
inches. The scale shall be one inch equals 100 feet for tracts under 40 acres,
and one inch equals 400 feet for tracts over 40 acres. Plat sizes may be
adjusted to meet filing requirements of the County Register of Deeds.
   (B)   The final plat shall show the following information:
      (1)   The boundary lines of the subdivision, including distances and
angles or bearings and all section lines. The names of all adjoining
subdivisions or a description of adjoining unplatted areas and their street
layout;
      (2)   Street lines, pedestrian ways, lots, reservations, easements and
areas to be dedicated to public use;
      (3)   The length of all straight lines, angles of intersection, length of
curves and radius. All dimensions of each lot shall also be shown thereon. All
dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of one foot to two decimal
places. The boundaries of the property, locations, scales and true north shall
be shown;
      (4)   Number to identify each lot and block or site; and
      (5)   Subdivision names, scale, northpoint and date.
   (C)   Each final plat submitted for review and approval of the City Council
shall contain the following certifications:
      (1)   Surveyor’s certificate;
      (2)   Owner’s certificate with notary statement;
      (3)   Acknowledgment of owner with notary statement;
      (4)   City Council approval block;
      (5)   City Planning and Zoning Commission approval block;
      (6)   Certificate of the County Treasurer;
      (7)   Certificate of the Street and Highway Authority;
      (8)   Certificate of the County Director of Equalization; and
      (9)   Certificate of the County Register of Deeds verifying that the
final plan meets the requirements of that office.
   (D)   (1)   The final plat shall not be accepted, reviewed or any action
taken thereon by the City Council if any of the requirements set forth above
are not included. At the time of the approval of the final plat by the City
Council, the required County Register of Deeds filing fee must be submitted to
the Finance Officer of the city by the developer.
      (2)   After approval of a final plat by the City Council, the Finance
Officer shall record this plat with the County Register of Deeds Office, and no
final plat shall be released to any other person by the Finance Officer between
the time of approval of the plat by the City Council and the recording of the
final plat by the Finance Officer with the County Register of Deeds Office.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.05) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.035 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAN AND PLAT.
   The procedure followed after submission of a final plan and plat for review
and approval shall be as follows.
   (A)   A final plan and required plat shall be prepared meeting the
requirements of this chapter and submitted to the Community Development
Department five working days prior to the Planning Commission meeting. The
final plat shall be approved and stamped by the County Treasurer prior to
submittal to the Community Development Department.
   (B)   The receipts issued by the Community Development Office for the 15
copies of the preliminary plan shall specify the date of the Planning
Commission meeting for review of the plans and plat. The Commission shall have
30 days in which to submit its recommendation to the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council shall have a maximum of 20 days to approve or
disapprove the final plans and plat after receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation.
   (D)   Not more than six days after approval of the final plans and plat by
the City Council, the final plat shall be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds. The recording fee shall be paid by the developer and shall
be submitted at the time final application is made.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.06) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.036 GUARANTEE IN LIEU OF COMPLETED IMPROVEMENT.
   No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission or
accepted for record by the Register of Deeds until any required improvements
listed shall be constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the City
Development Director/Building Official or in lieu of such prior construction,
the city may accept a security bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of
installation of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and
utilities installed without cost to the city in the event of default of the
developer.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.07) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.037 EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   Approval of a preliminary plan shall be effective for one year from the date
of approval by the City Council. Extensions beyond the one-year limitation for
a period of not to exceed three months may be provided upon agreement between
the City Council and the developer. If work has not been commenced within that
time set forth herein, then the above review and approval shall be void and the
process shall be followed in its entirety.
(Prior Code, § 19.03.08) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.050 CONFORMITY TO COMPREHENSIVE/DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive/
development plan.
   (B)   The densities established by
Chapter 156 and the proposed land use plan shall be observed by the developer.
   (C)   All thoroughfares in the major street plan shown as crossing or
bordering a proposed subdivision are required to be provided in the location
and at the right-of-way width designated thereon.
   (D)   A layout shall be made of the entire area proposed for development
before and after final grading is completed. Such a plan shall show the
proposed street and drainage pattern.
   (E)   The improvements the owner proposes to make off-premises, outside the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision, pursuant to the development of the
subdivision shall be clearly noted on the preliminary plan. These improvements
shall relate to drainage, utilities, extension of water mains, sewer mains and
other improvements necessary to permit development in the subdivision.
   (F)   The improvements the owner proposes to make, if any, relative to off-
premises improvements necessary to the development of the subdivision shall
also be clearly noted on the preliminary plan. These improvements shall relate
to drainage improvements necessary to carry runoff, extension of water mains,
sewers and other improvements.
   (G)   Minimum street construction standards shall be according to adopted
specifications.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.01) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.051 STREET PLAN.
   (A)   The arrangement, character, extent, location and grade of all streets
shall be in accordance with good land planning principles and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, orientation to vistas, to public convenience and safety and in
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such street.
   (B)   The street pattern shall lead traffic toward local shopping and
neighborhood centers and to main thoroughfares; however, the number of streets
which would tend to promote congestion converging upon any one point shall be
held to a minimum. Creation of a “Five-Points” shall not be permitted.
   (C)   The street pattern shall be in conformity with a plan for the most
advantageous development of the entire neighboring area. Sufficient proposed
streets shall be extended as far as the boundary lines of the tract to be
subdivided in order to ensure normal circulation of traffic within the
vicinity. Land abutting a proposed subdivision shall not be left landlocked by
such proposed subdivision.
   (D)   The street layout shall include residential collector and local
residential streets of considerable continuity approximately parallel to and on
both sides of any arterial street or railroad to reduce the number of
intersections of local residential streets with through streets and crossings
of railroad tracks.
   (E)   Local residential streets in the subdivision shall be so laid out that
their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.
   (F)   Subdivisions which abut, or include within the proposed area to be
subdivided, any highway or arterial street, shall provide the following:
      (1)   A marginal access street;
      (2)   Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access
reservation along the rear property line, or deep lots with rear service
drives; or
      (3)   Other treatment as may be necessary to adequately protect
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
   (G)   Intersections of local residential streets with arterial streets shall
be held to a minimum.
   (H)   Unusable reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited. Land shall not be subdivided in a manner which omits part of the
original tract to avoid drainage improvements.
   (I)   Where there exists a dedicated or platted half-street adjacent to the
tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be platted. No new half-streets
shall be permitted.
   (J)   Where there exists an unpaved dedicated or platted street adjacent to
the tract to be subdivided, the developer shall be required to provide concrete
curb and gutter, sidewalks and asphalt mat for the existing streets.
   (K)   Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall be provided
at the closed end with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of
100 feet and a minimum roadway diameter of 75 feet. Between the street and the
circle there shall be a 100-foot reverse radius unless otherwise approved.
   (L)   A cul-de-sac shall not exceed 500 feet in length.
   (M)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be
permitted. In no case shall a jog be permitted on an arterial street or
highway.
   (N)   The following conditions shall govern the designation and minimum
street right-of-way and roadway width.
      (1)   The minimum widths of highways, arterial streets, residential
collector streets, local residential streets and marginal access streets to be
dedicated to city or county shall be as indicated on the major street plan and
where not shown therein shall be not less than as follows.
 
Street Type           Right-of-Way
Arterials             80 feet
Highways              210 feet
Local residential     60 feet
Marginal access       55 feet
Residential collector 60 feet
 
      (2)   In undeveloped or vacant areas, the Planning Commission shall have
the discretion to identify or classify a street as a “collector street.”
      (3)   The amount of right-of-way deemed reasonable to be required by
dedication shall not exceed 100 feet in width.
      (4)   Minimum roadway widths are as follows.
 
Street Type           (measured from Curb Faces)
Arterials             60 feet (total)
Highways              64 feet (total)
Local residential     40 feet
Marginal access       35 feet
Residential collector 40 feet
 
      (5)   No on street parking shall be permitted on marginal access streets.
      (6)   Marginal access streets shall not be permitted in general
residential zoned areas. Street gradients shall be controlled by the following.
         (a)   Street grades shall not exceed the following unless otherwise
recommended and approved by the City Development Director/Building Official.
 
Street Type           Percent Grade
Arterials             7.0%
Highways              3.0%
Local residential     12.0%
Marginal access       12.0%
Residential collector 10.0%
 
         (b)   Minimum grades of any roadway shall not be less than 0.5% unless
otherwise approved by the City Development Director/Building Official.
         (c)   In a mountain subdivision the percentage of grade shall be
determined by the City Development Director/Building Official, but in no case
shall grades exceed 12%.
         (d)   Vertical curves shall be such as to prevent abrupt change and
shall be as approved by the City Development Director/Building Official.
      (7)   Alignment and visibility conditions are as follows.
         (a)   Minimum radius of horizontal curvature on the centerline shall
not be less than 100 feet.
         (b)   Tangents between reverse curves shall be as approved by the City
Development Director/Building Official.
         (c)   Angular breaks in right-of-way alignment of more than two
degrees are not permitted. Street pavement and curbs shall be curved in all
cases.
         (d)   Clear horizontal visibility, measured along the centerline,
shall equal or exceed at least 600 feet on arterial streets; 300 feet on
collector streets; and at least 200 feet on marginal access streets.
         (e)   Where there are roads in existence, engineering plans for
rights-of-way must be so designated as to contemplate elimination of bends,
crooks and other undesirable hazardous conditions.
      (8)   Intersections are regulated as follows.
         (a)   Submission of a grading plan showing existing conditions and a
detailed design for intersections which are either unusual, or are located on
difficult terrains, may be required by the City Development Director/Building
Official.
         (b)   Acute angles at street intersections are to be avoided insofar
as possible but in no case will an angle of less than 80 degrees be permitted.
      (9)   Minimum radii of intersections are as follows.
         (a)   Property lines at arterial street intersections shall be rounded
with a radius of 25 feet. An increased radius shall be required when the angle
of intersection is less than 90 degrees or when the intersection involves an
arterial street.
         (b)   Roadway and curb intersections shall be made concentric and
shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.02) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.052 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts, except
that the Planning Commission and the City Council may waive this requirement
where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as
off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with Zoning Ordinance
requirements. Such alleys shall have a minimum of 20 feet of right-of-way and
shall be dedicated to the public.
   (B)   Alleys are not permitted in residential districts except when the
Planning Commission and City Council determine special conditions warrant a
secondary means of access.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.03) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.053 SIDEWALKS.
   Portland cement concrete sidewalks, no less than four feet wide and full
four inches deep, shall be constructed on both sides of all streets within any
subdivision or any other place deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. If
the sidewalks are constructed no wider than four feet, there shall be a
boulevard constructed between the sidewalk and curb. If no boulevard is
constructed, the sidewalk must be a minimum of five feet in width. The sidewalk
location shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.04) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.054 NAMES.
   (A)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate by spelling or
sound or will otherwise be confused with the names of existing streets. Street
names are subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and the City
Council.
   (B)   Subdivision names and apartment project names shall not duplicate or
be confused with existing names. Subdivision and apartment project names are
subject to approval of the Planning Commission and the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.05) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.055 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
      (1)   Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning Ordinance and Health Department requirements as to lot sizes
and dimensions;
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet and shall normally be wide
enough to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten feet wide may be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation of access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, bus stops and other community facilities.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.06) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.056 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall conform to the
requirements of
Chapter 156.
   (B)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 156 and the requirements of the Health Department and the SD DENR. In
such cases where requirements may conflict, the larger requirement shall
govern.
   (C)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide off-street parking and loading
for the use contemplated and shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 156.
   (D)   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets. In no case shall width be less
than 60 feet.
   (E)   Each lot shall be provided with access to a street.
   (F)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
Along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or any other such
disadvantageous feature, the developer shall put in a planting screen easement
of not less than ten feet in width, across which no right of access shall be
provided.
   (G)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to street except
on curves where they shall be radial.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.07) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.057 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities and drainage where necessary and shall not be less than
15 feet wide total unless otherwise approved by the City Development Director/
Building Official.
   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way or
stream, there shall be provided a stormwater drainage easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such existing or planned drainage
way. The width of such drainage easement or right-of-way shall conform
substantially with the lines of such existing or planned drainage way and shall
be sufficient to contain the ultimate channel and maintenance way for the
tributary area upstream. Calculations necessary to establish the magnitude of
the drainage way shall be provided by the owner’s engineer.
   (C)   Lots and easements shall be arranged in such a manner as to eliminate
unnecessary jogs or offsets and to facilitate the use of easements for power
distribution, telephone service and drainage.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.08) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.058 DRAINAGE, INUNDATION AND STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL.
   (A)   A drainage plan shall be made for each subdivision by the owner’s
engineer. Adequate provisions shall be made within each subdivision to provide
drainage facilities needed within the subdivision taking into account the
ultimate development of the tributary area.
   (B)   Drainage and flood control facilities shall be provided in conformity
with the master drainage and flood control plan.
   (C)   The storm and sanitary sewer plan shall be made prior to other utility
plans. Engineering considerations in subdivisions and other development shall
give preferential treatment to gravity flow improvements as opposed to other
utilities and improvements.
   (D)   Off-premises drainage easements and improvements may be required to
handle the runoff of subdivisions into a natural drainage channel.
   (E)   Low areas subject to periodic inundation shall not be developed or
subdivided except in compliance with the floodplain district of Chapter 156 or
until the City Development Director/Building Official may establish the
following:
      (1)   The nature of the land use would not in itself impede surface water
runoff and would not be subject to appreciable damage by inundation;
      (2)   The area may be filled or improved in such a manner as to prevent
such periodic inundation, provided that such fill does not retard the flow of
surface waters or result in increasing the water level endangering life and
property of others; or
      (3)   Minimum floor elevations may be established to prevent damage to
buildings and structures.
   (F)   The City Development Director/Building Official may require whatever
additional engineering information he or she deems necessary to make a decision
on subdivisions and other development which are in areas of questionable
drainage.
   (G)   Ponds and similar areas shall be accepted for maintenance only if
sufficient land is dedicated as a public recreation area or park or if such
areas constitute a necessary part of the drainage control system. However, the
acceptance for maintenance of such park areas is subject to approval by the
City Council.
   (H)   Sewers shall be designed in accordance with good, accepted engineering
practice and are subject to approval by the City Development Director/Building
Official and the SD DENR.
   (I)   For any development in which more than one acre of land is to be
disturbed, a stormwater runoff control plan shall be prepared and submitted to
the SD DENR for approval. No construction improvements may begin until said
runoff control plan has been approved by the SD DENR and a copy of the approved
plan submitted to and approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.09) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.059 BUILDING RESTRICTIONS.
   If the subdivision does not lie within the city limits or within an area
subject to the jurisdiction of the city, the Planning Commission may require
provision for minimum front, side and rear yards, based upon the standards of
Chapter 156 and Health Department regulations.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.10) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.060 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   Nonresidential subdivisions shall be reviewed and processed by the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.11) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.061 PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS.
   There shall be no private streets platted within a subdivision, and there
shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is
vested in the city.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.12) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.062 STREET LIGHTS.
   (A)   Street lights shall be installed by the developer at any intersection,
the end of any cul-de-sac and at spacing’s a maximum of 400 feet on long street
segments without intersections.
   (B)   The developer shall submit his or her lighting plan and proposed poles
and fixtures to the Development Director and Public Works Director for approval
as part of the development process.
(Prior Code, § 19.04.13) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.075 GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO IMPROVEMENT.
   (A)   The developer is required to install or construct the improvements
hereinafter described prior to having released the bonds or other securities
which guarantee such required improvements.
   (B)   Any improvement required under these regulations shall be constructed
in accordance with specifications and under the inspection of the City
Development Director/Building Official.
   (C)   Any public and private water main, sanitary sewer, lateral, storm,
sewer and underground utilities shall be installed as necessary to prevent the
future cutting of pavement of any street, sidewalk or other required pavement.
   (D)   (1)   Any required improvement shall be guaranteed by the developer
for a period of two years from the date of formal acceptance by the City
Council.
      (2)   Formal acceptance shall be action taken by the City Council at a
regularly scheduled meeting of the Council and with the acceptance recorded in
the minutes of the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.01) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.076 STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   On any street and/or alley within the subdivision, and on any street and
alley providing access to the subdivision, as required by the City Council, a
suitable surface shall be constructed in accordance with adopted
specifications.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.02) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.077 CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   Standard 32-inch, Type B concrete curbs and gutters shall be placed on both
sides of any street in any subdivision or any place deemed necessary by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.03) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.078 WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Any subdivision within the city shall have a water distribution system
and shall be connected to the city’s water system owned and operated by the
Municipal Utility Board. The water system shall be provided at the expense of
the developer.
   (B)   The design and specifications of the water distribution system shall
meet any adopted specifications. The water distribution system shall meet the
requirements of the rules and regulations governing connections to and the use
of the city’s water system as adopted by the Municipal Utility Board. The
design and specifications of the water distribution systems shall be subject to
the approval of the City Development Director/Building Official and the
Municipal Utility Board and the SD DENR. All water distribution lines shall be
constructed in a publicly dedicated right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by
the Municipal Utility Board and the City Council.
   (C)   At such time as the water distribution system has been accepted by the
city, this system shall become the property of the Municipal Utility Board and
shall be maintained by the Municipal Utility Board. No private water system
shall be allowed in the city without the approval of the Municipal Utility
Board and the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.04) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.079 SEWERS.
   (A)   (1)   Any subdivision within the city shall have a wastewater
collection system and shall be connected to the city’s sewer system.
      (2)   The wastewater collection system and connection shall be provided
at the expense of the owner and, upon completion and acceptance of the system
by the city, shall become the property of the city. Once the system has become
the property of the city, the city shall be responsible for maintenance of the
system.
      (3)   Any wastewater collection system shall be designed to provide for
orderly expansion into surrounding areas. All wastewater collection lines shall
be constructed in a publicly dedicated right-of-way or within a recorded
perpetual utility easement, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
   (B)   The design and specifications of the sanitary sewer collection system
shall meet all adopted specifications. The design and specifications of the
sanitary sewer collection system shall be subject to the approval of the City
Development Director/Building Official Public Works Director, the City Council
and the SD DENR.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.05) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012; Ord. 2018-04, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 154.080 STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE.
   Storm sewers and drainage structures shall be designed and installed as
required by the City Development Director/Building Official in accordance with
accepted engineering practices. The storm sewer collection system shall be
designed to meet the flow requirements of a ten-year storm.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.06) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.081 PROPERTY MARKERS.
   The corner of any lot and the beginning and ending of any curve on property
lines shall be accurately marked on the ground with five-eighths-inch to one
and one-fourth-inch diameter iron rods or pipes at least 18 inches long with
aluminum caps.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.07) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.082 STREET SIGNS.
   The developer shall install durable street name signs at all intersections
which meet specifications of the city. One street sign is required for each
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.08) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.083 OVERSIZE FACILITIES.
   The City Council may participate in the cost of “oversize” improvements
within a subdivision if it is determined by the City Council that such oversize
improvements are necessary to serve large areas of land not in the subdivision
and if the cost of such oversize improvements is an unreasonable burden on the
developer.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.09) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.084 INSPECTION.
   Each facility constructed in any subdivision shall be installed under
inspection of the developer’s engineer. All work shall be performed in a
workmanlike manner, using good construction practices commonly accepted in the
western South Dakota area. In the event that any improvements are constructed
which are not done in a workmanlike manner or where materials are used that do
not meet the specification requirements of the city and state, then the City
Development Director/Building Official shall have the right to require the
developer to replace the improvements which are done improperly and the
development shall not be accepted by the City Council until such replacement
has taken place.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.10) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
§ 154.085 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS BY THE CITY.
   (A)   No building permits shall be issued by the Building Inspector, and no
structures or mobile homes shall be placed upon any lot within a subdivision
until the water distribution system and the wastewater disposal system have
been accepted by the city for maintenance and until the developer has provided
to the City Development Director/Building Official the back of curb elevations
on all lots. In order for the water distribution system and the wastewater
disposal system to be accepted by the city, they must be complete and in
working order and meet the specifications of the city and the City Development
Director/Building Official. In the event that a developer is platting lots in
sequence in a subdivision, all required improvements, including the water
distribution system, wastewater disposal system, sidewalks, curb and gutter and
hard surface streets must be completed and approved and accepted for
maintenance by the city on all pre-existing plats approved by the City Council,
before a new final plat will be approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Streets must be completed and approved and accepted for maintenance by
the city within one year of issuance of the first building permit, or no
further building permits within the subdivision shall be issued.
(Prior Code, § 19.05.11) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005; Ord. 2012-04, passed
5-2-2012)
VARIANCES TO DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 154.100 HARDSHIP.
   Where the City Council finds that extraordinary hardships, due to unusual
topographic or other conditions, beyond the control of the developer, may
result from strict compliance with this chapter, the City Council may vary the
regulations of this chapter so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured; provided, that such variation will not have the effect
of nullifying the intent or purpose of the Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning
Ordinance, major street plan or other elements of the comprehensive/development
plan.
(Prior Code, § 19.06.01) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.101 EXPERIMENTAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may waive, vary or modify the standards and
requirements of this chapter if, in its judgment, an unusual or experimental
subdivision might prove of considerable merit toward:
      (1)   The use of unusual materials in constructing required improvements;
or
      (2)   A new or untried design concept which appears promising.
   (B)   The City Council shall require the developer to provide a written
proposal stating the nature of the experiment and justifying reasons why this
chapter cannot be applied.
   (C)   The City Council may require additional guarantees, longer warranty
periods or additional bonding for experimental subdivisions.
(Prior Code, § 19.06.02) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.102 CONDITIONS.
   In granting variances, modifications and approvals for experimental
subdivisions, the City Council may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements
so varied, modified or approved. These conditions may include, without being
limited to: personal, surety, performance or maintenance bonds; affidavits,
covenants or other legal instruments.
(Prior Code, § 19.06.03) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter, including
any person who transfers or sells land without having the land platted or
replatted, as may be required, or otherwise transfers or sells land without
first obtaining any approval of the City Council required under this chapter
and registering as required with the Register of Deeds, shall forfeit and pay
and penalty as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution for each
portion of land so transferred or sold. The city may enjoin the transfer, sale
or agreement by an action for injunction or may recover the aforesaid penalty
by a civil action in any court or competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   In addition to the aforementioned civil penalty, any violation of the
provisions of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by the maximum
punishment set forth by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL § 22-6-2. Said
punishment may also include payment of any costs and/or restitution authorized
by this chapter and/or state law.
(Prior Code, § 19.01.03) (Ord. 2005-14, passed 12-16-2005)
CHAPTER 155: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Scope and purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Findings of fact
   
155.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
155.05   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
155.06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
155.07   Compliance
   
155.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
155.09   Interpretation
   
155.10   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
155.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
155.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
155.27   Permit procedures
   
155.28   Appeal process
   
155.29   Variances
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
155.40   General standards
   
155.41   Specific standards
   
155.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
155.43   Standards for areas of shallow flooding
   
155.44   Floodways
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
      (1)   To protect human life and health;
      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
      (7)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
      (8)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards
assume responsibility for their actions.
   (B)   The regulations are designed to minimize flood losses pursuant to and
consistent with the authority granted to the city by SDCL § 9-12-13 and SDCL
Chapter 11-4.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.01) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review by the Floodplain Administrator of the
application of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets) is
completed before the effective date of this chapter.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME. A structure transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after June 1, 1977.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et
seq.), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.02) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 2013-11, passed
9-4-2013)
§ 155.03 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.03) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, this chapter uses the
following methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.04) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.05 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.05) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.06 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study for City of Sturgis, Meade County, South Dakota,” dated
September 16, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps is hereby
adopted be reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood
insurance study is on file at the Office of the City of Sturgis, 1040 2nd
Street, Sturgis, South Dakota.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.06) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 2011-06, passed
8-24-2011)
§ 155.07 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.07) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.08) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.09 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.09) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.10 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city
or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 34.01.10) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.25 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The city shall designate a city official to perform the duties of Floodplain
Administrator and to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter
and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(Prior Code, § 34.02.01) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 2013-11, passed
9-4-2013)
§ 155.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344) from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Water and
Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
this chapter;
   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, and 44 C.F.R. § 65.12, of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve
certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which
increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot,
provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision
through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision).
(Prior Code, § 34.02.02) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.27 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. A
development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins
within any area of special flood hazard established in this chapter.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the applicable
floodproofing criteria of §
155.41;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
or erosion damage for the proposed use; and
      (6)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Prior Code, § 34.02.03) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.28 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The City Council is hereby designated as the Appeal Board. The Council
shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (B)   The process for filing an appeal shall be as follows.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Floodplain Administrator
under this chapter may file a notice of appeal with the Finance Officer. Any
appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the decision of the Floodplain
Administrator that is being appealed.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council and a public meeting shall be held within 30 days after
the date said appeal was filed. The City Council shall provide notice to the
person specifying the time, date and location of the hearing.
      (3)   The City Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days of the hearing. The Council may affirm or reverse the
decision of the Building Inspector.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal.
(Prior Code, § 34.02.04) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.29 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the authority to grant variances from the
strict application of this chapter subject to the conditions and procedures set
forth herein.
   (B)   The process for filing an appeal shall be as follows.
      (1)   Any variance request shall be filed with the Finance Officer.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a variance request, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council and a public meeting shall be held within 30 days after
the date said request was filed. The City Council shall provide notice to the
person specifying the time, date and location of the hearing.
      (3)   The City Council may notify the applicant of its decision following
the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to the person
within 20 days of the hearing.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (D)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in this chapter have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (E)   Upon consideration of the relevant factors set forth herein and the
intent of this chapter, the Common Council of the city may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose and objectives of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (G)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (H)   The following prerequisites apply to the granting of any variance.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon showing:
         (a)   A good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (I)   The Floodplain Administrator report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
(Prior Code, § 34.02.05) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 155.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 34.03.01) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A) as proposed in
§
155.27(B)(1) is satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division (B). A record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria.
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites:
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home
park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (3)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this section be elevated so that either:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
155.27(B)(1) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes, set forth above in this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(Prior Code, § 34.03.02) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with §§
155.01 through
155.04.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 34.03.03) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.43 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
155.06 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified);
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified),
or; together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of
buoyancy;
   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section are satisfied; and
   (D)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Prior Code, § 34.03.04) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 155.44 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established §
155.06 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply.
   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 34.03.05) (Ord. 2009-10, passed 4-6-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Short title
   
156.003   Purposes
   
156.004   Definitions
Zoning Districts and Map
   
156.015   Establishment of zoning districts
   
156.016   Zoning map
   
156.017   Scope of regulations
   
156.018   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
Agricultural and Conservation District (AG.1)
   
156.030   Description
   
156.031   Permitted uses
   
156.032   Uses permitted on review
   
156.033   Area regulations
   
156.034   Height regulations
   
156.035   Off-street parking
   
156.036   Floodplain requirements
   
156.037   Rural Service District
Park Land Zoning (Park)
   
156.050   Description
   
156.051   Permitted uses
   
156.052   Use on review
   
156.053   Area regulations
   
156.054   Temporary structures
   
156.055   Height regulations
   
156.056   Off-street parking
   
156.057   Floodplain requirement
Public Land Zoning District (Public)
   
156.070   Description
   
156.071   Permitted uses
   
156.072   Uses permitted on review
   
156.073   Area regulations
   
156.074   Height regulations
   
156.075   Off-street parking
   
156.076   Floodplain requirements
   
156.077   Landscaping
Medium Density Residential Housing
   
156.090   Description
   
156.091   Permitted uses
   
156.092   Uses permitted on review
   
156.093   Area regulations
   
156.094   Height regulations
   
156.095   Off-street parking
   
156.096   Floodplain requirements
   
156.097   Townhome regulations
Low Density Residential Housing
   
156.110   Description
   
156.111   Permitted uses
   
156.112   Uses permitted on review
   
156.113   Area regulations
   
156.114   Height regulations
   
156.115   Off-street parking
   
156.116   Floodplain requirements
   
156.117   Townhome regulations
Multi-Family Dwellings, High Density District (R-3)
   
156.130   Description
   
156.131   Permitted uses
   
156.132   Uses permitted on review
   
156.133   Area regulations
   
156.134   Height regulations
   
156.135   Off-street parking
   
156.136   Floodplain requirements
   
156.137   Landscaping
   
156.138   Townhome regulations
Manufactured Single-Family Homes, Moderate Density (MH-1)
   
156.150   Description
   
156.151   Permitted uses
   
156.152   Uses permitted on review
   
156.153   Area regulations
   
156.154   Height regulations
   
156.155   Off-street parking
   
156.156   Floodplain requirements
Manufactured Single-Family Homes, High Density (MH-2)
   
156.170   Description
   
156.171   Permitted uses
   
156.172   Uses permitted on review
   
156.173   Area regulations
   
156.174   Height regulations
   
156.175   Off-street parking
   
156.176   Floodplain requirements
General Commercial District (GC-1)
   
156.190   Description
   
156.191   Permitted uses
   
156.192   Uses permitted on review
   
156.193   Area regulations
   
156.194   Height regulations
   
156.195   Off-street parking
   
156.196   Floodplain requirements
   
156.197   Landscaping
Retail Commercial District (GC-2)
   
156.210   Description
   
156.211   Permitted uses
   
156.212   Uses permitted on review
   
156.213   Area regulations
   
156.214   Height regulations
   
156.215   Off-street parking
   
156.216   Landscaping
   
156.217   Floodplain requirements
Single-Family Residential/Office Commercial District (GC-3)
   
156.230   Description
   
156.231   Permitted uses
   
156.232   Uses permitted on review
   
156.233   Area regulations
   
156.234   Height regulations
   
156.235   Off-street parking
   
156.236   Floodplain requirements
   
156.237   Landscaping
Highway Service (HS-1)
   
156.250   Description, definitions and scope
   
156.251   Permitted uses
   
156.252   Uses permitted on review
   
156.253   Area regulations
   
156.254   Height regulations
   
156.255   Off-street parking
   
156.256   Floodplain requirements
   
156.257   Landscaping
General Industrial (GI-1)
   
156.270   Description
   
156.271   Permitted uses
   
156.272   Conditional use on review
   
156.273   Area regulations
   
156.274   Height regulations
   
156.275   Off-street parking
   
156.276   Floodplain requirements
Open Space or Floodplain District (OS-1)
   
156.290   Description
   
156.291   Permitted uses
   
156.292   Uses permitted on review
Transitional District (NU)
   
156.305   Description
Fairgrounds District (Fair)
   
156.320   Description
   
156.321   Permitted uses
   
156.322   Use on review
   
156.323   Area regulations
   
156.324   Temporary structures
   
156.325   Height regulations
   
156.326   Floodplain requirement
RV, Campground and Recreational Vehicle Park District (RV)
   
156.340   Description
   
156.341   Permitted uses
   
156.342   Uses permitted on review
   
156.343   Area regulations
   
156.344   Height regulations
   
156.345   Off-street parking
   
156.346   Utility requirements
   
156.347   Screening
   
156.348   Signage
   
156.349   Floodplain requirements
Mobile Food Vendors
   
156.360   Purpose
   
156.361   Applicability
   
156.362   Definitions
   
156.363   Operational requirements
   
156.364   Duration of activity and hours of operation
   
156.365   Signage
   
156.366   Health, safety and sanitation
   
156.367   Mobile food vending permit
   
156.368   Insurance
   
156.369   Revocation
   
156.370   Appeal process
Supplementary Regulations
   
156.385   Development standards for uses permitted on review
   
156.386   Accessory uses
   
156.387   Height
   
156.388   Yard, building setback and open space exceptions
   
156.389   Minimum off-street parking requirements
   
156.390   Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles
   
156.391   Off-street loading and unloading requirements
   
156.392   Gasoline service stations
   
156.393   Customary home occupation
   
156.394   Temporary uses
   
156.395   Tents
   
156.396   Swimming pools
   
156.397   Lighting
Downtown Overlay District
   
156.410   General description
   
156.411   Boundaries
   
156.412   Design guidelines
   
156.413   Permit process
   
156.414   Change of occupancy and temporary vending permits
   
156.415   Demolition permit
   
156.416   Permitted uses
Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses of Land
   
156.430   Purpose
   
156.431   Continuance of nonconforming uses
   
156.432   Extension of nonconforming uses in structures
   
156.433   Changes in nonconforming uses
   
156.434   Termination of nonconforming uses
   
156.435   Open land, nonconforming use of
   
156.436   Destruction, damage or obsolescence of structure
   
156.437   Continuance of nonconforming structures
   
156.438   Enlargement or extension of nonconforming structures
   
156.439   Restoration of damaged nonconforming structures
Landscape Regulations
   
156.450   Purpose and objective
   
156.451   Definitions
   
156.452   Applicability
   
156.453   Required amount of landscape material
   
156.454   General requirements; installation
   
156.455   Site distance for landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way
   
156.456   Security guarantee
   
156.457   Exceptions
   
156.458   Maintenance
   
156.459   Plan approval
   
156.460   Enforcement
   
156.461   Design criteria standards
Cannabis Establishments
   
156.475   Intent
   
156.476   Definitions
   
156.477   Regulations relating to cannabis cultivation facilities
   
156.478   Regulations relating to cannabis testing facilities
   
156.479   Regulations relating to cannabis product manufacturing facilities
   
156.480   Regulations relating to cannabis dispensaries
   
156.481   Prohibited districts for cannabis establishments
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.495   Organization
   
156.496   Notice procedure for application for uses on review, conditional uses
and variances
   
156.497   Variances
   
156.498   Certificate of occupancy
   
156.499   Procedure for authorizing uses permitted on review
   
156.500   Amendments upon application by property owner
   
156.501   Fees
   
156.502   Conflicts with other laws
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   An ordinance to provide for the establishment of zoning districts within
which the proper use of land and natural resources shall be encouraged and
regulated; to establish minimum standards for open space, building and
population density; to regulate the occupancy and use of dwellings, buildings
and structures, including tent and trailer coaches, that may hereafter be
erected, altered or moved; to provide for the administration thereof; to
provide for a method of amending; to provide for the conflicts with other acts,
ordinances or regulations; to provide for the collection of fees for the
furtherance of the purpose of this chapter to provide for petitions and public
hearings; to provide for appeals and for the organization and procedure of the
Board of Adjustment; and to provide for penalties for the violation of this
chapter and amending prior ordinances.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. I, § 1)
§ 156.002 SHORT TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Sturgis
Zoning Ordinance” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. I, § 2)
§ 156.003 PURPOSES.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the safety, health, morals,
convenience and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands and natural
resources in the city in accordance with their character, adaptability and
suitability for particular purposes; to conserve social and economic stability,
property values and the general character and trend of community development;
to prevent excessive concentration of population; to lessen congestion on the
public streets and highways; to facilitate adequate provision of streets and
highways, sewage and drainage, water supply and distribution, educational and
other public resources, by establishing herein standards for community
development in accordance with these objectives and by providing for the
enforcement of such standards.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. I, § 3)
§ 156.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular
number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular; the
word “lot” includes the partnership or corporation as well as an individual;
the word “structure,” the word “plot” or “parcel,” the word “building” includes
the word “structure,” the term “shall” is always mandatory and not directory;
and the word “may” is permissive. The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to
any land or building shall be construed to include the words “intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle that is left in one location on
public property or on private property without the consent of the owner thereof
for a continuous period of more than 72 hours.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental
to that of the main or primary structure located on the same lot or parcel of
land therewith.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to
the principal use or land or buildings and located upon the same lot or parcel
of land therewith.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. An enclosed building or a part of an enclosed
building, wherein an admission is charged for entrance into the facility, or
for food, alcoholic beverages or other beverages intended for consumption
within the facility, wherein may be observed or which contains one or more coin
operated mechanisms which when activated permit a customer to view one or more
live persons unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any portion of the areola of the female breast, or any portion of the male
or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals.
   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult entertainment center, adults-only
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store or adults-only motion picture
theater; where 30% or more of the sales floor, merchandise value or total
inventory, merchandise or performances are characterized by a preponderance of
nudity, sexual conduct, sadomasochistic abuse and/or sexual excitement.
   ADULT OVERLAY DISTRICT. The ADULT OVERLAY DISTRICT shall be composed of any
parcel immediately adjacent and having vehicle access from Mayer Avenue,
Sturgis Street, Hansen Drive or Industry Road.
   ADULTS-ONLY BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin-operated
means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity,
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined below,
or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material, for sale to patrons therein.
   ADULTS-ONLY MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building used regularly and
routinely for presenting programs, material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined below, for
observation by patrons therein.
   AGENCY. The City Council and any officer, employee, department, division or
other agency of the city, including boards and commissions, but excludes the
municipal court.
   ALLEY. A permanent minor right-of-way within a block set apart for public
use, vehicular travel and local convenience to provide access to the rear or
side of the abutting lots or buildings.
   ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL. As applied to a building or structure, any change
in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams
or girders.
   AMEND or AMENDMENT. Any repeal, modification or addition to a regulation;
any new regulation; any change in the number, shape, boundary or area of a
district or any repeal, abolition, change or addition to the zoning map.
   AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION BUSINESS. Any business whose primary function is
entertainment, such as theaters, billiard halls, amusement rides, shows,
sightseeing tours or any other entertainment or amusement, which may be
authorized by the Common Council.
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A vehicle registered with and licensed by the State
Division of Motor Vehicles of the Department of Revenue or the Department of
Motor Vehicles of any other state as an ANTIQUE VEHICLE.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
   APPROVED. Refers to the approval of the City Council or its authorized
agent.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection that is not intended for occupancy
and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, including,
without limitation, a roof overhang, mansard, unenclosed exterior balcony,
marquee, canopy, awning, pilaster and fascia, but not including a sign.
   AREA, BUILDING. The total areas taken on horizontal plane at the a main
grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of
uncovered porches, terraces, decks and the like.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility, which has individual dwelling or
living units where care may or may not be provided by on duty medical
personnel, this facility can also be capable of serving one or more meals a day
to the occupants of the structure at one and the same time.
   AT-HOME BUSINESS. Any retail or commercial type business offering any goods
or services in a residentially zoned district.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Every vehicle equipped with audible or visual
signals meeting the requirements of state law and the city, as amended, and
operated by a law enforcement personnel, City Fire Department personnel,
ambulance personnel and every other vehicle defined as an authorized emergency
vehicle by state law.
   AUTHORIZED SERVICE VEHICLE. Such highway or traffic maintenance vehicles as
are publicly owned and operated on a highway by or for a governmental agency,
the function of which requires the use of service vehicle warning lights as
prescribed by state law, and such other vehicles having a public service
function, including, without limitation, public utility vehicles and tow
trucks, as determined by the State Department of Highways. Some vehicles may be
designated as both an authorized emergency vehicle and an AUTHORIZED SERVICE
VEHICLE.
   AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOT, PUBLIC. A parcel of land, lot or portion thereof
owned and/or operated by a governmental or official public agency for off-
street motor vehicle parking, but excluding the storage of dismantled or
wrecked vehicles, parts thereof or junk.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Building or lot having pumps and storage tanks
where fuels, oils or accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed, sold or
offered for sale at retail and repair service is conducted, and excluding the
commercial storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or junk.
   AUTOMOBILE STORAGE GARAGE, PRIVATE. Accessory building, including a barn
used for automobile storage, or a portion of a main building or building
attached thereto, designed, arranged or used for housing private motor
vehicles, including farm machinery and vehicles. A PRIVATE AUTOMOBILE GARAGE
shall not be used for the commercial storage of dismantled or wrecked vehicles
or junk.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT. Lot arranged, designed or used for storage and display
for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of mobile home or farm implement,
trailer, excluding the storage of dismantled or wrecked vehicles, parts thereof
or junk.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING. The dismantling, storage, sale, crushing or dumping or
use motor vehicles, trailers or parts thereof.
   AWNING. An architectural projection roofed with flexible material,
including, without limitation, fabric, supported entirely from an exterior wall
of a building, and that may be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face
of the supporting building.
   BASEMENT. A story where the floor is more than three feet below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
   BATHROOM. A room with a tight-fitting door containing a water closet and a
lavatory, said room may also contain a shower or bathtub.
   BAY WINDOW. A window projecting from the wall of a building containing
windows on all walls of the projection. The projecting bay is floor to ceiling
in height, is not more than one-half the width of the room from which it
projects and is not less than 50% glass.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. A private home which is used for temporary, less than 30
days, accommodations for a charge to the public with not more than four units
or not more than a daily average of eight persons per night and which no more
than two family-style meals are served per 24-hour period.
   BICYCLE. A vehicle propelled solely by human power through a chain, belt or
gears and that has at least one wheel more than 14 inches in diameter.
   BICYCLE OR WALKING PATH. A separate path that has been designated for use by
non-motorized bicycles or pedestrians by traffic control device or other sign
and that is separated from the roadway for other vehicular traffic by open
space or a barrier.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS. The City Council for the City of Sturgis.
   BOARDING, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. Dwelling or part thereof where, for
compensation, lodging, meals or both are provided.
   BRUSH. Woody shrubs not part of a planned and maintained landscape of either
a highly structured manicured type or a natural appearance.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
shelter, support or enclosure for persons, animals or chattels. A BUILDING may
be pre-cut or prefabricated, or it may be made up of mobile modules or
sections, factory fabricated and transportable by rail or truck to a building
site, and designed to be incorporated into a structure upon a permanent
foundation on said site.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A structure having a roof supported by columns, posts,
poles or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of animals or chattels,
subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal use of a lot, designed
and intended or used as an accessory use.
   BUILDING CODE. The code in effect adopted by the state and the City of
Sturgis.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area on any lot on which a structure can be erected
consistent with existing setback requirements and is defined by the setback
lines applicable to that lot. But no such line shall run closer than five feet
from any property boundary, and to the extent required to avoid running closer
than five feet to any property boundary, this line may run less than eight feet
from the exterior wall of any protected structure.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade along the front building line to the
highest point of the roof surfaces of a flat roof, to the deck line of a
Mansard roof, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a gable,
hip or gambrel roof, not including chimneys or other similar structures.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The individual authorized by the Building Official and
the city to conduct inspections and issue permits.
   BUILDING AND/OR SETBACK LINE. The setback line beyond which the foundation
wall and/or any enclosed porch, vestibule or other enclosed portion of a
building shall not project, except as provided in this chapter.
   BUILDING, MAIN AND/OR PRINCIPAL. A building which is considered the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district,
a dwelling shall be deemed a MAIN BUILDING on which it is located.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The administrator of the building codes adopted by the
city.
   BUILDING SITE. A single parcel of land under one ownership occupied or
intended to be occupied by a building or structure.
   BUSINESS. Any profession, trade or occupation and all and every kind of
calling, whether or not carried on for profit, except those organizations
exempt from the federal income tax pursuant to I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), as amended
or renumbered.
   BUSINESS, PLACE OF. Any location, building or portion thereof or premises in
which or from which a business is carried on. The term includes, but is not
limited to, an office, warehouse, yard, location where books and records are
kept, the location from which business is solicited.
   BUSINESS, PROPER LOCATION. No registration or license shall be issued unless
and until the applicant for such license provides the City Clerk with the
address of the proposed location from which business will be conducted. The
Clerk shall cause inspection of the facilities, and buildings at the location
listed shall meet all applicable building and fire codes and zoning
restrictions currently in force within the city.
   BUSINESS, SERVICE. Any activities conducted for gain which render service
primarily to other commercial and industrial enterprises, or which service and
repair appliances and machines used in the home or business.
   BUSINESS, SERVICE TYPE, HEAVY. A business, which may sell goods at retail,
having a substantial portion of its volume devoted to the repair of automotive
or other motor driven equipment, machinery or parts, including the fabrication
thereof, but not for wholesale trade; and businesses dealing in building
materials, woodworking, dry cleaning and the like.
   CARE HOME. A rest and/or nursing home, convalescent home or boarding home
for the 24-hour care of children or the aged, but excluding the facilities for
the care of the “feeble-minded” or mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics or
drug addicts.
   CHARITABLE AND PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTIONS. A private, nonprofit body,
association or society not organized for the business of conducting a business,
no part of its’ net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any individual,
and which provides volunteer aid or relief or religious, social, physical,
recreational and/or benevolent services.
   CHATTEL. Any tangible, movable, personal property whatsoever, including, but
not limited to, building materials, household furniture, appliances or motor
vehicle parts, but not including duly licensed operable vehicles or
recreational vehicles, boats, camper shells or off-the-road vehicles mounted
thereon.
   CITY. The City of Sturgis or the area within the territorial city limits of
the City of Sturgis and such territory outside of this city over which the city
has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or charter
provision or any law.
   CITY CLERK OR CITY TREASURER. The Director of Finance and Record.
   CITY COUNCIL. The elected officials of the City of Sturgis, South Dakota.
   CLEANABLE. Having a smooth, hard surface that is free from unsealed breaks
and impervious to the amount of water that would be used in cleaning.
   CLINIC. A facility providing daily medical examinations and outpatient care
only.
   CONDUCT. To engage in, carry on, own, maintain, manage or operate any
business, trade, art, profession, calling, employment, occupation or any
commercial, industrial or professional pursuit, vocation or enterprise in this
city.
   CONSTRUCTION PROJECT. The erection, installation, alteration, repair or
remodeling of a building or structure upon real estate or any other activity
for which a building permit is required under this code or an ordinance of the
city.
   COVERAGE, LOT. The lot area covered by all structures located therein,
including the area covered by roofs.
   DAY CARE. A place, home or institute for the daily (not more than 12 hours)
care of children or the aged and is licensed by the state to provide said care.
   DECK. An open platform, which is either freestanding or attached to a
building or upon the roof of a building.
   DESIGN CAPACITY. The maximum number of persons permitted by the codes, which
can be accommodated at any one time with a reasonable degree of comfort, safety
and convenience.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   DISTRICT. Area within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted
and certain others are prohibited; yards and open spaces may be required; lot
areas, building height limits and other requirements are established; all of
the foregoing being identical for the district in which they apply.
   DORMITORY. A building or portion thereof used for sleeping purpose, in
connection with a school; college or other institution.
   DUMP. A lot, parcel or tract of land, the premises of which are used
primarily for disposal; by abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial,
incineration or any other means and for whatever purpose; of garbage, sewage,
trash, refuse, waste material of any kind, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles
or parts thereof, offal or dead animals.
   DWELLING. Building or portion thereof arranged or designed to provide living
facilities for one or more families.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A building or portion thereof having two or more single-
family dwellings attached to each other.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. Building arranged or designed as a dwelling and entirely
separated from any other building or structure by space on all sides.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling
units, which is owned by an individual or corporation and can be rented for a
period of not less than 30 days or otherwise known as an apartment house.
   DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED. One of two buildings, arranged or designed as
dwellings, located on abutting lots, separated from each other by a one hour
separation wall extending from the basement floor and separated from any other
building or structure by space on all sides.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof, containing only one
dwelling unit and occupied by only one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing only two dwelling units,
arranged one above the other or side by side on a single lot.
   DWELLING UNIT.
      (1)   Any building or portion thereof that contains living facilities,
including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required
by the building code, for not more than one family, or congregate residence for
ten or less persons.
      (2)   A building or portion thereof arranged or designed to provide
living facilities for not more than one family.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or
a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who need not be
related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
   FEASIBLE. The ability to construct an improvement on a site from the
standpoint of physical capabilities. It does not include economic desirability.
   FILLING STATION. A building or lot or part thereof supplying, and selling
gasoline or other equivalent fuel for motor vehicles at retail direct from
pumps and storage tanks.
   FIREARM. Any handgun, revolver, pistol, rifle, shotgun or other instrument
or device capable or intended to be capable of discharging bullets, cartridges
or other explosive charges.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor
area of a building or buildings located on a lot or parcel of land by the total
area of the lot or parcel of land.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
   FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE. A building housing the members of a fraternity
or sorority group living together under a cooperative arrangement as distinct
from boarding or lodging house.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two intersection
streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if
the street dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
   FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a
building that abuts a street, a parking area, a mall or other circulation area
open to the general public and that has either the primary window display of
the enterprise or the primary public entrance to the building; in industrial
districts, the building side with the primary entrance open to employees is the
BUILDING FRONTAGE; where more than one use occupies a building, each such use
having a primary window display or a primary public entrance for its exclusive
use is considered to have its own BUILDING FRONTAGE, which is the front width
of the portion of the building frontage occupied by that use.
   FRONTAGE, STREET. The linear frontage of a lot or parcel abutting a private
or public street that provides principal access to or visibility of the
premises.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. Any garage building or part of a main building used for the
storage of vehicles of those persons owning the property or for the storage of
those persons occupying the property as their residence. Said building shall
not be utilized for the purpose of leasing or renting space for storage of
vehicles of those other than the owners or the occupants of the primary use of
the property.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any garage not described as a private garage, which is
available to the public, and which is used for the storage motor vehicles.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building which contains facilities for the care, servicing
and/or repair of motor vehicles.
   GARBAGE. Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the preparation, cooking
and serving of food or the storage or sale of produce.
   GARBAGE CONTAINER. A metal or other non-absorbent container equipped with a
tightly fitting metal or non-absorbent lid or sealed plastic garbage bags, but
does not include incinerators or ash pits.
   GENERAL CIRCULATION. Delivered to a substantial number of residences in the
city and also otherwise made available for purchase or distribution.
   GRADE, ESTABLISHED. The elevation of the centerline of highways, streets and
roads as officially established by the City Council, its authorized agent or
any public agency having jurisdiction over such highway, street or road.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads brought to
grades as shown in official plans or designs thereto. When walls are parallel
to and within five feet of a sidewalk, GRADE means the sidewalk level.
   GUEST ROOM. A room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy
by one or more guests.
   HEREAFTER. Any time after the effective date of this code.
   HERETOFORE. Any time previous to the effective date of this code.
   HISTORICAL MONUMENTS AND/OR STRUCTURES. Any antique structure or building
existing contemporaneously with and commonly associated with an outstanding
event or period of history and any structure or building which the relics and/
or mementos of such event or period are housed and preserved.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A gainful profession or occupation conducted entirely
within a dwelling or accessory building by a member or members of the family
residing on the premises and secondary to the principal use of the premises for
dwelling purposes and in connection with, no display is used to advertise the
business.
   HOSPITAL. An institution receiving in-patients and rendering medical,
surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term HOSPITAL shall also include
sanitariums and sanatoriums, including those wherein feebleminded and mental
patients, epileptics, alcoholics and drug addicts are cared for or treated.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is offered to the public and in which
room assignments are made for compensation and in which entrance to and exit
from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person
in charge at all times.
   HOTEL ROOM, MOTEL ROOM or OTHER ACCOMMODATION. Any room or other
accommodation in any hotel, apartment-hotel, motel, guest house, trailer court
or any such similar place to any person who for a consideration uses, possesses
or has the right to use or possess such room or other accommodation for a total
continuous duration of less than one month.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines of two streets that join one another at, or approximately
at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict, whether or not one
such street crosses the other, but the term does not include the junction of
any alley with a street. If a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting
street is a separate INTERSECTION. If such intersecting street also includes
two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of such streets is a
separate INTERSECTION. The farthest applicable points shall be used when
measuring.
   JUNK. Accumulation of or storage of material outside of an enclosed
building; or used or discarded materials, house furnishings, appliances,
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof with or without dismantling, processing,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition of same.
   JUNKYARD/SALVAGE YARD. Any land or building commercially used for the
abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting or baling of paper, rags, scrap
metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition,
dismantling, storage or salvaging motor or other vehicles not in running
condition, machinery or parts thereof.
   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot
therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of a truck.
   LAW. Any regulation, ordinance, provision of this code or charter provision
of the city; any rule, statute or constitutional provision of the state which
is binding; any regulation, statute or constitutional provision of the United
States which is binding on the state or its cities.
   LICENSE. The written authority of the city issued by its duly authorized
agent, employee or officer, conferring permission on some person to pursue and
exercise a trade, occupation or business for a definite period of time within
the city, under the conditions prescribed by the ordinances of the city.
   LIFE CARE RETIREMENT CENTER. A residential facility containing dwellings
designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens or the disabled in a
planned retirement community which includes a residential complex, an activity
or community center, and a medical or nursing facility which is licensed by the
state as an intermediate care facility or a skilled nursing center.
   LOT. A parcel of land held under unified ownership in fee or co-tenancy or
under legal control tantamount to such ownership, considered as a unit, used or
proposed to be used, for a certain use or uses or occupied or to be occupied by
a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are
required under the provisions of this chapter, having at least the minimum
areas required by this chapter for a lot in the district in which the same is
situated and having its principal frontage on a public highway, road, street or
private road or right-of-way deemed adequate by the public agency having
jurisdiction.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot of which at least two adjoining sides abut for their full
lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of
two such sides is less than 135 degrees.
   LOT, COVERAGE, PERCENTAGE OF. The permissible percentage of “lot area” which
may be covered by buildings, including covered porches and accessory buildings.
   LOT, DEPTH. The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear
line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two non-intersecting sides abutting on two or more streets.
   LOT, FRONT OF. The line or lines of an interior or through lot, which abuts
a street; in a corner lot, the shortest line that abuts a street. When the
lines are of equal length, the lot shall be considered to front on that street
having the longest block frontage.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot, including a through lot.
   LOT, NET AREA OF. The total horizontal area included in the rear, side and
front lot or proposed street lines. No alley, street, public way, private
right-of-way, public land or any area proposed for the foregoing purposes shall
be included in determining the NET AREA OF THE LOT.
   LOT, RECORD. Land designated as separate and distinct parcel of land on a
legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed filed among the
land records in the office of the County Registrar of Deeds.
   LOT, THROUGH. An interior lot, fronting on two streets, roads or private
ways on street, road or private way and an alley.
   LOT, WIDTH OF (MINIMUM AT BUILDING LINE). The least permissible width of a
lot, measured horizontally along the front building line.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot, as hereinafter described.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line running along the front of the lot and separating
it from the street. In a through lot, both lines abutting the street shall be
deemed FRONT LOT LINES.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The line generally opposite or parallel to the front lot
line, except in a through lot. If the REAR LOT LINE is less than ten feet long
or the lot is pointed at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE is assumed to be a line at
least ten feet long lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line
or if the front lot line is curved, parallel to the chord of the arc of said
front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line.
   MINIMUM FLOOR ELEVATION. The lowest elevation permissible for the
construction or other placement of any floor, including a basement floor.
   MIXED USE. A building, structure or premises occupied by or used by two or
more principal types of use, any of which is permitted in a district
independent of other uses.
   MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The
chassis consists of the undercarriage, wheel assembly and towing hitch
assembly. The floor joists are structural members of the chassis. Two or more
longitudinal I-beams complete the chassis/floor system.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any or tract of land designed, used or intended to provide
a location or accommodation for one or more mobile homes and upon which any
mobile home or homes are parked or located, whether or not the lot or tract or
any part thereof is held or operated for profit, but the term excludes
automobile or mobile homes sales lots on which mobile homes are parked only for
inspection and sale.
   MOBILE HOME SKIRTING. A solid boarder constructed around the perimeter of a
mobile home from the bottom of the mobile home to the finished grade.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for
the accommodation of one mobile home and its accessory structures.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. Any area, tract or site or plot of land subdivided
for the purposes of individual ownership of separate lots, on which any number
of lots or mobile homes may be provided for, including accessory uses.
   MODULAR HOME. Any conventionally manufactured dwelling unit that is
constructed in two or more main sections and transported to and permanently
assembled on a foundation at the site. The chassis or frame for which the
sections are transported, shall not be in part or whole required for the
structural integrity of the building. Said frame, trailer or chassis shall be
removed prior to placement of the structure on a permanent foundation.
   MOTEL, MOTOR COURT, MOTOR HOTEL, MOTOR LODGE. A building in which lodging
and boarding are offered to the public for compensation, and which has separate
entrance to the exterior from each unit with at least one parking space for
each unit.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. All land vehicles propelled or drawn by other than muscular
power.
   NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER. A building containing three or more tenant
spaces of retail, personal service or restaurant use sharing off-street parking
in the open between the building and the street. NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTERS
do not exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area. Multi-tenant retail,
personal service or restaurant use buildings or building complexes without
parking, with enclosed parking or with parking screened from the street by the
building, shall not be a NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER.
   NEWSPAPER. A publication, having been in existence for at least six months,
regularly printed and distributed no less than once a week, that contains news,
opinions, advertisements and other items of general interest.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building, structure or use of land existing at time of
enactment of this chapter and which does not conform to regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
   NOTICE or LEGAL NOTICE. Any requirement for informing a person or persons, a
segment of the public or the public generally. A NOTICE required to be
published may be published in any newspaper of general circulation unless
otherwise required by the charter, this code or an ordinance.
   NOXIOUS MATTER/HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid,
particulate or any other form) which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
upon the social, economic or psychological well-being of individuals.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks, or areola or nipple of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   NURSING HOME. A residential health care facility which provides
institutional lodging, nursing care, personal care and supervision to aged,
chronically ill, physically infirm or convalescent patients who are not related
to the owner or administrator of the facility.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit, culvert,
building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in,
along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood
hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water, or that is placed where the flow or water might carry the same
downstream to the damage of life or property.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living in, sleeping, possessing or otherwise using any
land, building or part thereof.
   OPEN SPACE. The area of a lot, tract or parcel not devoted to any building,
structure, accessory use, roadway or parking facility.
   OPEN SPACE, USABLE. Open space within a lot, tract, parcel or development
site, excluding areas devoted to roadways and parking. At least one-half of all
areas designated as usable OPEN SPACE must have a slope of less than 10%.
   OWNER. A person as defined by this code, who, alone, jointly or severally
with others, or in a representative capacity (including, without limitation, an
authorized agent, executor or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any
property in question.
   PARKING LOT. An off-street facility, including parking spaces along with
adequate provisions for drives and aisles for maneuvering and giving access,
and for entrance and exit, all laid out in a way to be usable for the parking
of more than six motor vehicles or trailers.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street space available for the parking of one motor
vehicle and having not less than a ten-foot width and 20-foot depth (200 square
feet) exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving
access thereto, and having access to a street or alley.
   PASSIVE PARK. A plot of land that is landscaped, maintained as open space,
serves a neighborhood and is used as an informal gathering place for relaxation
and play. Permitted improvements include walking paths and sitting areas with
bench and chairs only.
   PERSON. A natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals. It
also includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word PERSON is used in
any provision of this code prescribing a penalty or fine as to partnership or
associations, the word includes the partners or members thereof, and as to
corporations, includes the officers, agents or members thereof who are
responsible for any violation of such section.
   PLAT. A map, generally of a subdivision, showing the location, boundaries
and ownership changes of lot divisions. To PLAT means to subdivide.
   PLOT PLAN. A diagram of a lot, as seen from above, showing the outline of
all structures on the lot and indicating the distance of the structures from
the borders of the lot.
   PRIMARY, PRIMARILY, PRINCIPAL or PRINCIPALLY. More than half, if used in a
quantifiable context, and first in rank, importance or value, if used in a
context where ranking is possible but quantification is not.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The specific primary purpose for which land or a building is
utilized.
   PROPERTY. Real, tangible and intangible personal property.
   PROXIMATE CAUSE. That which, in natural and continuous sequence, unbroken by
an efficient, intervening cause, produced the result complained of and without
which the result would not have occurred.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The City of Sturgis, State of South Dakota or the United
States, any of their agencies or instrumentality, and any body or official
thereof possessing power or authority delegated by the public authority.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire area between property boundaries which is:
owned by a government, dedicated to public use or impressed with an easement
for public use; primarily used for pedestrian or vehicular travel; and publicly
maintained, in whole or in part, for such use. RIGHT-OF-WAY includes, without
limitation, the public street, shoulder, gutter, curb, sidewalk, sidewalk area,
parking or parking strip and any other public way.
   PUBLIC USES. Public parks, schools and administrative, cultural and service
buildings, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage
and maintenance of equipment and material.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board
duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under state or municipal
regulations, to the public electricity, gas, steam, communication, telegraph,
transportation or water.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or
other public thoroughfare.
   QUARRY. A lot or parcel or portion thereof used for the purpose of
extracting stone, sand, minerals, gravel or top soil for sale as an industrial
operation and exclusive of the process of grading a lot preparatory to the
construction of a building for which application for a building permit has been
made.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Country clubs, riding stables, golf courses,
amusement rides and any other recreational facilities or centers public or
private.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle or structure capable of being mounted on,
attached to or towed with a hitch by a conventional motor vehicle and for which
no special road travel permit is required and having a body width not exceeding
eight feet exclusive of appendages (door knobs, handles, window or door sills,
vents and the like, and including travel trailers, camping trailers, fifth-
wheel trailers, pickup campers, motor-homes and intended for temporary or
transient living and/or sleeping quarters.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the area and reasonably characteristic of what can
be expected to occur in a particular stream. The REGULATORY FLOOD generally has
a frequency of approximately 100 years determined from an analysis of floods on
a particular stream and other streams in the same general region.
   RETAIL CLUSTER SHOPPING CENTER. A shopping center containing less than
60,000 square feet of gross floor area, but without common open parking between
the building and the street.
   RUBBISH. Includes paper, boxes and cartons, all household wastes other than
garbage, grass clippings, tree leaves, waste building materials or similar
materials not regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency.
   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
   SANITARY SEWER. A municipal or community sewage disposal system or a type
approved by the State Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   SCHOOL, PRIVATE. An institution of learning that is not tax supported,
including colleges and universities.
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC. A tax-supported institution of learning, including colleges
and universities.
   SETBACK. The distance required in these regulations between the property
line of the frontage road and the front building line.
   SEWERAGE, PRIVATE. An on-site method of sewage treatment, designed,
installed operated and maintained by the owner of the premises in accordance
with the requirements and standards of the Department of Environment and
Natural Resources
   SEWERAGE, PUBLIC. A sanitary system owned, operated and maintained by a
public agency, whereby waterborne wastes from sanitary facilities in dwellings,
accessory buildings, business or industrial establishments or any combination
thereof are conducted through pipes to a sewage treatment plant and disposal
system approved by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources as to
design and construction and operated and maintained in accordance with the
standards and requirements of said Department.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or
physical contact with a person’s unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, her breast.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SIDEWALK. A slab of concrete utilized for pedestrian foot traffic, which is
located within the public right-of-way and is a minimum of four feet in width.
   SIDEWALK AREA. The area between the curb of a street and the adjacent
property lines.
   SITE PLAN. A plan drawn to scale showing uses and structures proposed for a
parcel of land as required by the applicable regulations. It includes lot
lines, streets, building sites, reserved open space and other specific
development proposals, similar to a plot plan.
   SPOT ZONING. The singling out of a lot or a small area for a zoning change
which is out of harmony with the comprehensive plan and surrounding land to
secure special benefits for a particular property owner without regard for the
rights of adjacent landowners.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above. Except that the topmost STORY shall be
that portion of a building included between the uppers surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above
a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above grade, as
defined herein, for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more than 12
feet above the grade, as defined herein, at any point, such usable or unused
under-floor space shall be considered as a STORY.
   STORY, FIRST. The lowest story in a building that qualifies as a story, as
defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor
level shall be classified as a FIRST STORY, provided such floor level is not
more than four feet below grade, as defined herein, for more than 50% of the
total perimeter or not more than eight feet below grade, as defined herein, at
any point.
   STORY, HALF. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above
the floor of such story.
   STREET, CENTERLINE OF. A line established as a centerline of a street by the
City Council, or any state, county or other official or public agency having
jurisdiction thereof and shown as such on an officially adopted or legally
recorded map, or if there be no centerline established or if there exists
conflict among several maps, the CENTERLINE OF A STREET shall be line lying
midway between the street right-of-way lines thereof. When the street lines are
indeterminate and pavement or a well-defined traveled way exists, the
centerline is assumed to be a line midway between the edges of such pavement or
traveled way.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access
to abutting property.
   STREET, PROPOSED. Any proposed right-of-way or proposed widening or
extension of any street or public right-of-way, including a private street.
   STREET, PUBLIC. Any existing public or dedicated right-of-way 30 feet or
more in width, approved and accepted by the City Council, or a private street
deemed adequate for access purposes but not accepted by the city for public
maintenance.
   STREET GRADE. The officially established grade of the street upon which a
lot fronts or in its absence the established grade of other street upon lots
abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If there is no
official established grade, the existing grade of the street at such midpoint
shall be taken as the STREET GRADE.
   STREET INTERSECTION. Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other.
   STREET LINE. A line defining the edge of an existing street right-of-way and
separating it from abutting property, or the edge of a new street right-of-way
or proposed widening or extension of an existing street on a plan adopted by
the City Council or any other official or public agency having jurisdiction.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected between the ground and sky, the
use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to
something having permanent location on the ground.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development for residential,
industrial, commercial or other use.
   SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT. A zoning district to be mapped as an overlay to a use
district and which modifies or supplements the regulations of the general
district in recognition of distinguishing circumstances such as historic
preservation or unit development while maintaining the character and purposes
of the general use district area over which it is superimposed.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any mobile home, tent, camper or other structure used for
human shelter that is designed to be transportable and is not connected to
another structure, or to any utilities system.
   TEMPORARY OUTSIDE DISPLAYS AND SALES. The display or sale of goods or
merchandise not in or from an enclosed permanent building to be conducted for
no more than 24 days at a single location one time in a calendar year.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Any structure, building or edifice which is not placed
on a foundation and is utilized for a period of less than 30 days.
   TENT and TENT ACTIVITIES. Any canopy, temporary structure, enclosure or
shelter constructed of fabric or pliable material. TENTS, canopies and
temporary membrane structures shall not be used for a period of more than 30
days at a single location.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person whether as owner, agent, consignee or
employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary
business of selling, or delivering goods, services, wares and merchandise, and
who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, shops or any streets, alleys or other
places for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise,
privately; provided, that such definition shall not be construed to include any
person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock,
but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future
delivery. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall include the terms ITINERANT
MERCHANT and ITINERANT VENDOR.
   TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR). The removal of the right to develop or
build on land in one area and the transfer of that right to another area or
district where such transfer is permitted.
   USE. The principal purpose, by right for which a lot and/or the main
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended and for which it may be
used, occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use which is incidental to and customarily
found in connection with the principal use, and located on the same lot with
the principal building or use. An ACCESSORY USE shall not exceed one-fourth of
the use or area of the main business or building.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. The use of land not the principal use and not in
conformity with the regulations for the district in which the use in proposed,
due to the specific nature and unique characteristics of the use, requires
special standards and discretionary review to ensure conformance with the
purpose of the zoning regulations.
   USE, NONCONFORMING. A use, a building, structure, parking lot use, sign or
portion thereof which was lawfully established but which, due to the
application of this chapter, no longer conforms to the regulations of the zone
in which it is located, as defined in this chapter.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use which is listed as permitted by right in a zoning
district. Non-specified uses which are similar to those specified are also
permitted, by right, except as otherwise restricted within this chapter.
   UTILITIES. Municipal, franchised and contracted utilities.
   UTILITY LOT. Any platted lot used exclusively for the placement of
utilities, public works, wells, water storage, sewer systems,
telecommunications stations, electrical substations, high-pressured gas
stations and any other utility services approved by the City Council. Such lots
are only intended to be improved with the utility and any structures needed in
conjunction with the utility.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of a restriction of the code, granted by the Board of
Adjustment, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape,
topography or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or
circumstance of a particular property, the literal enforcement of the code
restriction, would result in unnecessary hardship, or when the relaxation of a
restriction of the code, granted by the Board of Adjustment shall provide a
quantifiable benefit to the city and the surrounding neighborhood of the
parcel.
   VESTED RIGHT. A right which has been legally established and cannot be
revoked by subsequent conditions or changes in law without due process of law.
There is no vested right to an existing zoning designation.
   WAY. A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently
established for passage of persons or vehicles.
   WAYSIDE STAND. A structure designed, arranged or used for the display or
sale of agricultural products grown or produced only on the premises upon which
such stand is located.
   YARD. Open space, located on the same lot with a building or group of
buildings, lying between the building or outer building of a group and the
nearest lot or street line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
   YARD, FRONT. Yard, extending across the full width of a lot, between the
front lot line (or the proposed front street line if such line falls within the
lot) and the nearest line of the building or the enclosed portion thereof. The
depth of the yard is the shortest horizontal distance between the existing
front lot line or proposed front street line and the nearest point of the
building or enclosed portion thereof.
   YARD, REAR. Yard, extending across the full width of the lot between the
rear lot line and the nearest line of the building, porch or projection
thereof. The depth of the REAR YARD is the shortest horizontal distance between
the rear lot line or proposed front street line and the nearest point of the
building, porch or enclosed portion thereof. When the rear lot line is less
than ten feet long or when the lot is pointed at the rear, the depth of the
REAR YARD is measured to an assumed rear lot line, as defined under LOT LINE,
REAR.
   YARD, SIDE. Yard, between the side lot line (or proposed side street line,
if such line falls within the lot) and the nearest line of the building, porch
or projection thereof, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or if in
the absence of either such yards, to the front lot line and the rear lot line.
The width of the SIDE YARD is the shortest distance between the side lot line
and the nearest point of the building, porch or projection.
   ZERO LOT LINE. A development form in which a building is sited on one or
more lot lines with no yard, or zero setback. The intent is to allow more
flexibility in site design and to increase the amount of usable open space on
the lot.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE. A written statement issued by the Building Official
authorizing buildings, structures and uses thereof and the use of land or the
changes in use in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and for the
purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
   ZONING MAP. The zoning map for the City of Sturgis, Meade County, South
Dakota as on file at the City Finance Office, initially dated January 2001,
including sections or portions thereof, adopted as part of this chapter,
together with all amendments, modifications and changes thereto subsequently
adopted.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. II) (Ord. 2013-13, passed 10-16-2013; Ord. 2013-20,
passed 12-4-2013; Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
§ 156.015 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals,
convenience and the general welfare of the community, the city is hereby
divided into districts of 16 different types, each being of such number, shape
kind and area and common unity of purpose and adaptability of use that are
deemed most suitable to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   The area of property lying within each district is shown on the
official zoning map on file in the City Finance Office:
      (1)   Agricultural Zoning District (AG);
      (2)   Park Land;
      (3)   Public Land;
      (4)   Medium Density Residential Housing;
      (5)   Low Density Residential Housing;
      (6)   Multi-Family Residential (R-3);
      (7)   Mobile Home 1 (MH-1);
      (8)   Mobile Home 2 (MH-2);
      (9)   General Commercial (GC-1);
      (10)   Retail Commercial (GC-2);
      (11)   Single-Family Residential/Office Commercial;
      (12)   Highway Service (HS);
      (13)   General Industrial (GI);
      (14)   Open Space (OS);
      (15)   Transitional Zoning District (NU); and
      (16)   RV, Campground and Recreational Vehicle Park (RV): See the
following description:
         (a)   Lot 4E, Parks Subdivision City of Sturgis, Meade County, South
Dakota, as shown on the plat filed in Plat Book 20 on Page 326;
         (b)   Lots 14, 15, 16, Block 2 of Lot F of the South Half of the
Southeast Quarter of Section 4, Township 5 North, Range 5 East of the Black
Hills Meridian, City of Sturgis, Meade County, South Dakota, as shown by the
Plat recorded in Plat Book 3 on Page 36; and
         (c)   Lot F of the Northwest Addition to the City of Sturgis, in the
Southwest Quarter of Section 4, Township 5 North, Range 5 East of the Black
Hills Meridian, City of Sturgis, Meade County, South Dakota.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. III, § 1) (Ord. 2006-14, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.016 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by the
ordinance codified in this chapter are denoted and defined as shown in the map
entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Sturgis, Meade County, South Dakota,”
adopted February 12, 2001, and as subsequently amended, and certified by the
City Finance Officer. Said map, together with everything shown thereon is
hereby incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth and described
herein.
   (B)   The zoning map shall be kept and maintained by the Finance Office and
shall be available for inspection and examination by members of the public at
all reasonable times as any other public record.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. III, § 2) (Ord. 2013-20, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 156.017 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations applying to each district include specific limitations on
the use of land and structures, height and bulk of structures, density of
population, lot area, yard dimension and area of lot that can be covered by
structures.
   (A)   Manufactured home and residential zoned areas. Outside activities and
uses are prohibited in the above districts unless specifically provided
otherwise, all activities, storage and displays shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed structure.
   (B)   Exceptions. Garage and yard sales/holiday decorations: No commercial
activities shall be permitted within these districts unless the business has
been reviewed by the City Planning Commission and City Council and a
conditional use permit is granted.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. III, § 3) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.018 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of any of the
aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets,
highways or alleys shall be construed to be following the centerlines of such
streets, highways or alleys.
   (B)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following platted lot
lines or other property lines, such lines shall be construed to be said
boundary lines.
   (C)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad
lines shall be construed to lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad
lines.
   (D)   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the
centerline of streams, rivers or other continuously flowing or non-flowing
water courses shall be construed as following the channel centerline of such
water courses and said boundaries shall be deemed to be at the limit of the
jurisdiction of the city unless otherwise indicated.
   (E)   Boundaries shown as following or closely following the limits of
political jurisdictions shall be construed as following such limits.
   (F)   Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable doubt
as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of the more
restrictive district shall govern the entire parcel in question, unless
otherwise determined by the governing body.
   (G)   Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the
district classification of the property to which the vacated portions of land
accrue shall become the classification of the vacated land.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. III, § 4)
AGRICULTURAL AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT (AG.1)
§ 156.030 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is intended to: protect agricultural lands and to
preserve the natural beauty and open character of forested and other natural
growth areas from incompatible land uses; or a transition area where future
development within the municipal limits will likely occur; or an area of
transition from heavily developed land to forested lands.
   (B)   No temporary merchants.
   (C)   No temporary structures in association with temporary merchants are
permitted in this district.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.031 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop
harvesting, including roadside stands exclusively for the sale of products
raised on the premises, but excluding commercial feed lots. All of the above
uses shall be conducted on land without more than one residential structure.
   (B)   Transportation and utility easements, utility substations, alleys and
public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Accessory structures which are utilized for short-term storage of
products or livestock.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.032 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Uses on review which are agricultural in nature and do not involve the
construction of more than one residential structure or are not harmful in
nature to the area may be permitted in accordance with provisions of §
156.498.
   (B)   Uses on review which are campgrounds temporary in nature, the running
of which are not harmful in nature to the area, may be permitted in accordance
with provisions of §
156.498.
   (C)   Any structure or use permitted shall be agricultural in nature.
      (1)   Front yard. All lots in this district shall have a minimum building
set back of 50 feet from any public right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yard. All lots in this district shall have a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from any adjoining property line.
      (3)   Rear yard. All lots in this district shall have a minimum building
setback of not less than 50 feet.
      (4)   Lot width. All lots used for this zoning designation shall consist
of not less than five acres.
      (5)   Lot area. All lots used for this zoning designation shall consist
of not less than five acres.
      (6)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots in this district shall not have more
than 5% of its total area covered by permanent structures.
      (7)   Lawns. Lawn and various vegetation shall be maintained at a height
of not more than eight inches for at least five feet from any public right-of-
way. The remaining property may be maintained in a natural state where the
height is higher than other zones in the community. All site triangles must be
maintained in a safe manner as described in city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.033 AREA REGULATIONS.
   Any structure or use permitted shall be agricultural in nature.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots in this district shall have a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from any public right-of-way.
   (B)   Side yard. All lots in this district shall have a minimum building
setback of 50 feet from any adjoining property line.
   (C)   Rear yard. All lots in this district shall have a minimum building
setback of not less than 50 feet.
   (D)   Lot width. All lots used for this zoning designation shall consist of
not less than ten acres.
   (E)   Lot area. All lots used for this zoning designation shall consist of
not less than ten acres.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots in this district shall not have more
than 5% of its total area covered by permanent structures.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.034 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 50 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.035 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   No off-street parking is required for this district.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01)
§ 156.036 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any structure constructed within this district must have its first floor
elevation constructed above the base flood elevation stated on the city’s FIRM.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01)
§ 156.037 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
   All property located within the Agricultural and Conservation District shall
be and is hereby classified as “rural property” as that term is defined in SDCL
Chapter 9-21A-2 and shall be construed to be a “rural service district”
pursuant to SDCL § 9-21A. Consistent with SDCL § 9-21A-6, the city hereby
determines that the tax levy and assessment value on the agricultural land
annexed shall not exceed the average tax levy average assessed value on
unannexed agricultural land in adjoining townships in the county as long as the
annexed agricultural land remains rural property as defined by SDCL Chapter 9-
21A.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.01) (Ord. 2009-13, passed 8-26-2009)
PARK LAND ZONING (PARK)
§ 156.050 DESCRIPTION.
   This district is intended to be used for public recreation on publicly owned
land. This district may be found intermixed with other zoning districts.
Intermixing of this zoning district shall not be construed as spot zoning.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
§ 156.051 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Public recreation areas (to include, but not be limited to,
playgrounds, picnic areas, bike paths or similar uses);
   (B)   Public areas which are used for baseball, softball, football, soccer
or similar recreational uses;
   (C)   Uses, which are entertaining or recreational in nature and are
approved by the Parks Board and City Council;
   (D)   Permanent structures may be permitted in this zoning district if they
are incidental to the primary use:
      (1)   Said structures may be restrooms, equipment storage facilities,
shelters, picnic areas, concession stands and the like; and
      (2)   No facilities may be constructed for sleeping within this zoning
district unless they are associated with an organized (licensed) campground.
   (E)   Campgrounds (public);
   (F)   Temporary structures in association with an event authorized by the
City Park Board and City Council. Said structures must be removed within 24
hours of the close of said event unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council; and
   (G)   When in the best interest of the public, parking areas may be
designated on park land to facilitate an event.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
§ 156.052 USE ON REVIEW.
   When in the best interest of the public, uses which are not listed above but
are recreational or entertaining in nature may be permitted under a conditional
use permit and approval of the Park Board and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
§ 156.053 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The following requirement shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district, except as provided in §
156.388.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots utilized for parks and recreation shall not have
structures located closer than ten feet to any public right-of-way.
   (B)   Side yard. There is a ten-foot minimum side yard requirement for this
district. Water from these lots may not drain onto any adjacent property.
   (C)   Rear yard. Each lot or area shall have not less than ten feet setbacks
for all structures.
   (D)   Lot width. All lots used for parks shall not be less than 75 feet in
width.
   (E)   Lot area. All lots used for parks shall not be less than 10,000 square
feet in area.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. The maximum area that can be covered by
permanent structures on parkland shall not exceed more than 10% of the overall
parcel of land.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
§ 156.054 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Temporary canopies, tents, awnings and the like may be set up on
parklands.
   (B)   All temporary structures may not be erected for a period of more than
two days unless otherwise approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.055 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principal or accessory building or structure shall exceed one story or 18
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
§ 156.056 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   When park land exceeds 10,000 square feet in area, a minimum of one hard
surface parking space shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of park
area.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
§ 156.057 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any building constructed within the designated 100-year flood zone as
stated on the city’s FIRM, shall have its first floor elevation at not less
than one foot above the flood elevation designated on the FIRM.
   (B)   In addition, any improvements with the flood area must comply with the
city’s Floodplain Ordinance included here in Chapter 155.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.02)
PUBLIC LAND ZONING DISTRICT (PUBLIC)
§ 156.070 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district will consist of land, which owned by a government entity
and is not classified in another zoning district.
   (B)   This land may be intermixed among the other zoning districts. In this
case if intermixing takes place it shall not be construed as spot zoning.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
§ 156.071 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Federal, state, county or city owned buildings. Structures that house
the following shall be permitted: police, fire, public works, court houses,
City Hall, community centers and the like or any similar in use which is in the
best interest of the public;
   (B)   Federal, state, county or city owned storage yards or maintenance
facilities;
   (C)   Public land designated as no use areas;
   (D)   Public parking lots or areas;
   (E)   Public water ways, drainages or spillways;
   (F)   Public landfills, sewer lagoons, water treatment facilities or similar
uses; and
   (G)   Temporary structures are permitted on lots zoned for government use,
but may be erected for a period not to exceed 12 calendar days at a time.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
§ 156.072 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   Uses on review may be granted for items, which are similar in nature to the
primary uses listed, but must be an accessory use to the primary use.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
§ 156.073 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district, except as provided in §
156.388.
   (A)   Front yard. None required.
   (B)   Side yard. None required.
   (C)   Rear yard. None required.
   (D)   Lot width. The minimum lot width required shall be not less than 100
feet.
   (E)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be not less than 10,000 square
feet.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. Permanent main and accessory buildings shall
cover not more than 65% of the lot area.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
§ 156.074 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure shall exceed four and one-half stories or 50 feet
in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.075 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Hard surface off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of not less
than one parking space for each 200 square feet of building area and not less
than one space for each employee.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
§ 156.076 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lots located within the
100-year floodplain as shown on the city’s FIRM shall have the first floor
constructed at least one foot above the floodplain elevation stated on the
FIRM.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
§ 156.077 LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping shall be provided in quantities as described in §§
156.450 through
156.461.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.03)
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL HOUSING
§ 156.090 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This is a residential district to provide for medium population
density the principal uses of land is for one and two-family residential uses.
Certain uses which are more compatible with intensive residential uses than
with commercial uses permitted.
   (B)   The City Planning Commission and City Council may permit recreation,
religious, education and other related uses in keeping with the residential
character of the district on review.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015; Ord. 2016-13, passed
1-25-2017)
§ 156.091 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Detached single-family homes which are of conventional construction
and are constructed as per the adopted building code on-site;
   (B)   Attached single-family dwellings, which are intended for sale or lease
to more than one but less than eight individual families. Said structures shall
not be more than two stories in height. For the purpose of this section, these
homes shall have a separation wall of not less than one-hour construction which
goes from foundation to the underside of the roof line which clearly divides
the dwellings into individual single-family dwelling units;
   (C)   Detached single-family manufactured homes, which shall be placed on a
foundation (excluding manufactured homes which are mobile in nature) and are
built in compliance with the codes adopted by the city and the state;
   (D)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work;
   (E)   Transportation and utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way;
   (F)   A maximum of two structures for storage which is a single story and
less than 144 square feet in area may be permitted without a building permit
and/or being placed on a foundation;
   (G)   All accessory storage structures must have a minimum of three-foot set
back from side and/or rear property lines. No structures are allowed within the
front setback of any property in this district;
   (H)   Small agricultural gardens; and
   (I)   Signs, as regulated in
Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.092 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The governing body in accordance with provisions contained in §
156.498 may permit the following uses on review:
   (A)   Churches or similar places of worship, with accessory structures, but
not including missions, revivals, tents or similar structures. (For the purpose
of this section, missions, revivals or similar uses shall be known as any
activity which takes place outside the permanent structure which causes more
traffic, noise and the like than the primary use.) This section is not intended
to prohibit activities such as preschool, Sunday school or similar activities
which may take place outside the structure;
   (B)   Schools public or private;
   (C)   Public parks, playgrounds and play fields, and neighborhood and
municipal buildings and uses in keeping with the character and requirements of
the district;
   (D)   Libraries, museums and historical monuments or structures;
   (E)   Utility substations;
   (F)   Golf courses or country clubs, with adjoining grounds of not less than
60 acres;
   (G)   Cemeteries;
   (H)   A planned residential development as regulated in this chapter;
   (I)   Home occupations which are clearly incidental in nature and which no
display except for regulated signage will be permitted on the exterior of the
building being utilized in part for any purpose other described above or as
described in §
156.393;
   (J)   Day care homes or group homes either for children or adults;
   (K)   Townhomes, subject to the regulations set forth in §
156.097; and
   (L)   At-home businesses, subject to the use on review process outlined in §
156.496.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015; Ord. 2016-13, passed
1-25-2017)
§ 156.093 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than ten feet
from property lines.
   (B)   Side yard. All interior lots with single story structures shall have a
minimum side yard of not less than five feet from property line to the wall of
the structure. In addition, any structure with two or more stories or having an
eave height of more than 18 feet above finished grade shall have one foot of
side yard for each two feet of eave height above finished grade.
   (C)   Corner lot side yard. All lots which have side yard abutting a street
shall have a minimum setback of not less than 18 feet from the property line.
   (D)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than
ten feet from property lines.
   (E)   Lot width. All lots used in this zoning designation shall have a
minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet
   (F)   Lot area. Shall have a minimum area of not less than 6,000 square
feet.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 45% of its
total area covered by permanent structures.
   (H)   Alley garage setback. Minimum of a ten-foot setback when accessed from
public alley, with no parking allowed within said setback.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.094 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.095 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   A minimum of one 400 square feet of hard surface parking with an
eight-foot minimum width, which must be configured in a manner to hold at least
two automobiles, must be provided for each single-family home.
   (B)   All drives and parking pads must be hard surfaced, including those
drives that connect a driveway or parking pad to a right-of-way. Hard surfaces
include asphalt or concrete; other materials, such as brick or pavers, may be
used subject to review by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.096 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any structure constructed within this district must have its first floor
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation stated on the FEMA FIRM. All
property improvements and uses are subject to current FEMA requirements.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.097 TOWNHOME REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to any lot containing townhomes.
   (A)   Area regulations.
      (1)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than ten feet
from the front property line to the front of the structure.
      (2)   Side yards. All interior lots shall have a minimum of not less five
feet from the side property line to the structure wall. Structures which are
two or more stories in height or have an eave height of more than 18 feet above
finished grade shall have an additional one foot of side yard for each two feet
of eave height above finished grade.
      (3)   Side yards on corner lots. All lots which have a side yard abutting
a street shall have a minimum side yard setback of not less than 18 feet from
the property line to the structure.
      (4)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than
ten feet from the property line to the primary residential structure.
      (5)   Lot width. All lots shall have a minimum lot width of not less than
35 feet.
      (6)   Lot area. All lots shall have a minimum lot area of not less than
3500 square feet.
      (7)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 50% of its
total lot area covered by permanent structures.
   (B)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories
in height.
   (C)   Off-street parking. A minimum of one 400 square feet of hard surface
parking (eight-foot minimum width, which must be configured in a manner to hold
at least two automobiles) must be provided for each single-family home. All
drives and parking pads must be hard surfaced, including those drives that
connect a driveway or parking pad to a right-of-way. Hard surfaces include
asphalt or concrete; other materials, such as brick or pavers, may be used
subject to review by the Building Inspector.
   (D)   Floodplain requirements. Any structure constructed within this
district must have its first floor elevation one foot above the base flood
elevation stated on the FEMA FIRM. All property improvements and uses are
subject to current FEMA requirements.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.04) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL HOUSING
§ 156.110 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is intended to be used for single-family residential
development with low population densities. Additional permitted uses will be
reviewed by the City Planning Commission and City Council. Recreational,
religious and educational facilities may be permitted under a use on review
because they are normally required to provide the basic elements of balanced
and attractive residential area.
   (B)   No temporary merchants are permitted.
   (C)   No temporary structures in association with temporary merchants shall
be permitted in this district.
   (D)   Exception: Temporary structures which are in conjunction with an event
of three days or less may be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.111 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Detached single-family homes which are of conventional construction
and are constructed as per the adopted building code on-site;
   (B)   Attached single-family dwellings, which are intended for sale or lease
to more than one but less than eight individual families. Said structures shall
not be more than two stories in height (for the purpose of this section, these
homes shall have a separation wall of not less than one-hour construction which
goes from foundation to the underside of the roof line which clearly divides
the dwellings into individual single-family dwelling units;
   (C)   Detached single-family manufactured homes which shall be placed on a
foundation (excluding manufactured homes which are mobile in nature) and are
built in compliance with the codes adopted by the city and the state;
   (D)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work;
   (E)   Transportation and utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way;
   (F)   A maximum of two structures for storage which is a single story and
less than 144 square feet in area may be permitted without a building permit
and/or being placed on a foundation;
   (G)   All accessory storage structures must have a minimum of three-foot
setback from side and/or rear property lines. No structures are allowed within
the front setback of any property in this district;
   (H)   Small agricultural gardens; and
   (I)   Signs, as regulated in
Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.112 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The governing body, in accordance with provisions contained in §
156.498, may permit the following uses on review:
   (A)   Churches or similar or places of worship, with accessory structures,
but not including missions, revivals, tents or similar structures. (For the
purpose of this section, missions, revivals or similar uses shall be known as
any activity which takes place outside the permanent structure which causes
more traffic, noise and the like than the primary use.) This section is not
intended to prohibit activities such as preschool, Sunday school or similar
activities which may take place outside the structure;
   (B)   Schools public or private;
   (C)   Public parks, playgrounds, play fields and neighborhood buildings and
uses in keeping with the character and requirements of the district;
   (D)   Libraries, museums and historical monuments or structures;
   (E)   Utility substations;
   (F)   Golf courses or country clubs, with adjoining grounds of not less than
60 acres, but not including miniature courses;
   (G)   Cemeteries;
   (H)   A planned residential development as regulated in this chapter;
   (I)   Home occupations which are clearly incidental in nature and for which
no display except for regulated sign will be permitted on the exterior of the
building being utilized in part for any purpose other described above or as
described in §
156.393;
   (J)   Day care homes or group homes either for children or adults;
   (K)   At-home businesses, subject to the use on review process outlined in §
156.496; and
   (L)   Townhomes, subject to the regulations set forth in §
156.117.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015; Ord. 2016-13, passed
1-25-2017)
§ 156.113 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than 25 feet
from property lines.
   (B)   Side yard. All interior lots shall have a minimum side yard of not
less than eight feet from property line to the wall of the structure. In
addition, the distance from the edge of the eave to the property line shall be
at least six feet. Structures which are two or more stories in height or have
an eave height of more than 18 feet above finished grade shall have an
additional one foot of side yard for each two feet in eave height above
finished grade.
   (C)   Side yard on corner lots. All lots which have side yard abutting a
street shall have a minimum yard setback of not less than 18 feet from the
property line.
   (D)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than
ten feet from property lines.
   (E)   Lot width. All lots used in this zoning designation shall have a
minimum lot width of not less than 100 feet.
   (F)   Lot area. Shall have a minimum area of not less than 7,000 square
feet.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 40% of its
total area covered by permanent structures.
   (H)   Alley garage set back. Minimum of a ten-foot setback when accessed
from public alley, with no parking allowed within said setback.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.114 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.115 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   A minimum of one 400 square feet of hard surface parking with an eight-foot
minimum width, which must be configured in a manner to hold at least two
automobiles, must be provided for each single-family home. All drives and
parking pads must be hard surfaced, including those drives that connect a
driveway or parking pad to a right-of-way. Hard surfaces include asphalt or
concrete; other materials, such as brick or pavers, may be used subject to
review by the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.116 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any structure constructed within this district must have its first floor
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation stated on the FEMA FIRM. All
property improvements and uses are subject to current FEMA requirements.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
§ 156.117 TOWNHOME REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to any lot containing townhomes.
   (A)   Area regulations.
      (1)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than 25 feet
from the front property line to the front of the structure.
      (2)   Side yards. All interior lots shall have a minimum of not less than
eight feet from the side property line to the structure wall.
      (3)   Side yards on corner lots. All lots which have a side yard abutting
a street shall have a minimum side yard setback of not less than 18 feet from
the property line to the structure.
      (4)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than
25 feet from the property line to the primary residential structure.
      (5)   Lot width. All lots shall have a minimum lot width of not less than
75 feet.
      (6)   Lot area. All lots shall have a minimum lot area of not less than
7,000 square feet.
      (7)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 45% of its
total lot area covered by permanent structures.
   (B)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories
in height.
   (C)   Off-street parking.
      (1)   A minimum of one 400 square feet of hard surface parking with an
eight-foot minimum width, which must be configured in a manner to hold at least
two automobiles, must be provided for each single-family home.
      (2)   All drives and parking pads must be hard surfaced, including those
drives that connect a driveway or parking pad to a right-of-way. Hard surfaces
include asphalt or concrete; other materials, such as brick or pavers, may be
used subject to review by the Building Inspector.
   (D)   Floodplain requirements. Any structure constructed within this
district must have its first floor elevation one foot above the base flood
elevation stated on the FEMA FIRM. All property improvements and uses are
subject to current FEMA requirements.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.05) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-4-2015)
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS, HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT (R-3)
§ 156.130 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   (1)   This residential district is intended to promote and encourage
the establishment and maintenance of suitable environment for urban residence
in areas appropriate by location and character for the occupancy of high-
density, multi-family dwellings.
      (2)   One of the important purposes of this district is to create
adequate standards for residential development in order to prevent overcrowding
and unhealthy housing conditions. In no case shall there be more than 20
dwelling units (apartments) per acre.
   (B)   No temporary merchants are permitted.
   (C)   No temporary structures associated with temporary merchants may be
permitted in this district.
   (D)   Exception: Temporary structures which are in conjunction with an event
of three days or less may be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
§ 156.131 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Any use permitted in R-1 and R-2 Districts;
   (B)   High density apartment buildings and/or complexes; and
   (C)   Group homes, congregate housing complexes.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
§ 156.132 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Accessory buildings such as laundry buildings, recreational buildings
and the like; and
   (B)   At-home businesses, subject to the use on review process outlined in §
156.496.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.133 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than 25 feet
from property lines.
   (B)   Side yard. All interior lots with single story structures shall have a
minimum side yard of not less than ten feet from property lines. Any structure
two or more stories or having an eave height of 18 feet or more shall have one
foot of side yard for each two feet of eave height above finished grade.
   (C)   Corner lot side yard. All lots which have side yards abutting a street
shall have a minimum yard setback of not less than 18 feet from the property
line.
   (D)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than 25
feet from property lines.
   (E)   Lot width. All lots used in this zoning designation shall have a
minimum lot width of not less than 75 feet.
   (F)   Lot area. All lots shall have a minimum area of not less than 7,000
square feet or not less than 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is
greater.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 45% of its
total area covered by permanent structures.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
§ 156.134 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed three stories or 45 feet in height. No accessory
structures shall exceed one story or 18 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
§ 156.135 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   A minimum of one 20-foot by 20-foot hard surface parking must be provided
for each single-family dwelling. All drives used for parking or movement of
motor vehicles shall be hard surfaced.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
§ 156.136 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any structure constructed within this district must have its first floor
elevation one foot above the elevation stated on the city’s FIRM.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
§ 156.137 LANDSCAPING.
   When there is a structure constructed with four or more dwelling units,
landscaping shall be required as per §§
156.450 through
156.461.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06) (Ord. 2007-37, passed 11-2-2007)
§ 156.138 TOWNHOME REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to any lot containing townhomes.
   (A)   Area regulations.
      (1)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than 25 feet
from the front property line to the front of the structure.
      (2)   Side yards. All interior lots shall have a minimum of not less than
eight feet from the side property line to the structure. Structures which are
two or more stories in height or have an eave height of more than 18 feet above
finished grade shall have one foot of side yard for each two feet of eave
height above finished grade.
      (3)   Side yards on corner lots. All lots which have a side yard abutting
a street shall have a minimum side yard setback of not less than 18 feet from
the property line to the structure.
      (4)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than
25 feet from the property line to the primary residential structure.
      (5)   Lot width. All lots shall have a minimum lot width of not less than
25 feet. Lot area. All lots shall have a minimum lot area of not less than
2,500 square feet.
      (6)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots within this zoning designation shall
not have more than 55% of its total lot area covered by permanent structures.
   (B)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories
in height.
   (C)   Off-street parking. A minimum of one 20-foot by 20-foot hard surface
off-street parking area must be provided for each single-family unit. All
drives used for the parking of motor vehicles shall be hard surfaced.
   (D)   Floodplain requirements. Any structure shall have a first floor
elevation one foot above the floodplain elevation shown on the most current
city FIRM (flood insurance rate map).
(Prior Code, § 18.05.06)
MANUFACTURED SINGLE-FAMILY HOMES, MODERATE DENSITY (MH-1)
§ 156.150 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   (1)   This district is to provide for medium density residential
development. The principal uses shall be manufactured homes which are mobile in
nature with approved skirting and are functionally compatible with intensive
residential uses.
      (2)   This district is for those who individuals who own their lots. In
no case shall there be more than nine lots per acre.
   (B)   No temporary merchants may be permitted in this district, nor shall
any temporary structure which is in conjunction with said merchant.
   (C)   Exception: Temporary structures which are in conjunction with an event
of three days or less may be permitted.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, a MOBILE HOME shall be defined as a
dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more sections at a location other
than the home site and has a manufacturer’s serial number in addition to being
designed to be towed on its own chassis. A perimeter frame or the placement of
such a unit upon a permanent foundation shall not be construed as creating a
dwelling unit as elsewhere defined in the city ordinances.
   (E)   (1)   Approved skirting shall consist of a solid boarder of wood, PVC
plastic or like material which is weather-resistive and is installed around the
perimeter of the unit from the bottom the mobile home to below grade, creating
a weather-tight barrier.
      (2)   Approved skirting must be installed before the mobile home may be
occupied.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07)
§ 156.151 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Detached single-family manufactured homes which are mobile in nature
with approved skirting;
   (B)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction
work;
   (C)   Accessory uses and buildings, as regulated in §
156.386, provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not
commonly include any commercial activity. Any accessory building shall be
located on same lot with the principal use and may not be located closer than
six feet to the principal use;
   (D)   Transportation and utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way; and
   (E)   Signs, as regulated in
Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07)
§ 156.152 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Accessory buildings such as laundry buildings, recreational buildings
and the like; and
   (B)   At-home businesses, subject to the use on review process outlined in §
156.496.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.153 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than 25 feet
from property lines.
   (B)   Side yard. All interior lots shall have a minimum side yard of not
less than ten feet from property lines.
   (C)   Corner lot side yard. All lots which have side yards abutting a street
shall have a minimum yard setback of not less than 18 feet from the property
line.
   (D)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than 25
feet from property lines.
   (E)   Lot width. All lots used in this zoning designation shall have a
minimum lot width of not less than 75 feet.
   (F)   Lot area. Shall have a minimum area of not less than 7,000 square
feet.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 35% of its
total area covered by permanent structures.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07)
§ 156.154 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Accessory structures shall exceed one story or 18 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07)
§ 156.155 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   A minimum of one 20-foot by 20-foot hard surface parking must be provided
for each single-family home. All drives intended for vehicle movement shall be
hard surfaced.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07)
§ 156.156 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any structure constructed within this district must have its first
floor elevation one foot above the elevation stated on the city’s FIRM.
   (B)   All mobile homes must be anchored as per the requirements of the
city’s flood ordinance or as per FEMA guidelines for floodplain management,
whichever is more restrictive.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.07)
MANUFACTURED SINGLE-FAMILY HOMES, HIGH DENSITY (MH-2)
§ 156.170 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is to provide for high density residential development.
The principal use of land is for manufactured homes (mobile homes) which are
functionally compatible with intensive residential uses. This district
primarily used for mobile home courts or those individuals who rent their lots.
   (B)   No temporary merchants are permitted in this district, nor shall any
temporary structure which is in conjunction with said merchant.
   (C)   Exception: Temporary structures which are in conjunction with an event
of three days or less may be permitted.
   (D)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME. A dwelling unit which is fabricated in one
or more sections at a location other than the home site and has a
manufacturer’s serial number in addition to being designed to be towed on its
own chassis. A perimeter frame or the placement of such unit upon a permanent
foundation shall not be construed as creating a dwelling unit as elsewhere
defined in the city ordinances.
      MOBILE HOME COURT. Any area, tract, site or plot of land which has three
or more lots which are under common ownership and which mobile homes are to be
placed or located for year-round occupancy.
   (E)   Approved skirting shall consist of a solid boarder of wood, PVC
plastic or like material which is weather-resistive and is installed around the
perimeter of the unit from the bottom of the unit to below grade, creating a
weather-tight barrier.
   (F)   Skirting must be installed before the mobile home may be occupied.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08)
§ 156.171 PERMITTED USES.
   Detached single-family manufactured homes which are:
   (A)   Mobile in nature with approved skirting;
   (B)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction
work;
   (C)   Accessory uses and buildings as regulated in §
156.386, provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not
commonly include any commercial activity. Any accessory building shall be
located on same lot with the principal use and may not be located closer than
six feet to the principal use;
   (D)   Transportation and utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way; and
   (E)   Signs, as regulated in
Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08)
§ 156.172 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Accessory buildings such as laundry buildings, recreational buildings
and the like; and
   (B)   At-home businesses, subject to the use on review process outlined in §
156.496.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017)
§ 156.173 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard. All lots shall have a minimum of not less than ten feet
from property lines.
   (B)   Side yard. All interior lots shall have a minimum side yard of not
less than ten feet from assumed property lines.
   (C)   Corner lot side yard. All lots which have side yards abutting a street
shall have a minimum yard setback of not less than 18 feet from the property
line.
   (D)   Rear yard. All lots shall have a minimum rear yard of not less than
ten feet from assumed property lines.
   (E)   Lot width. All lots used in this zoning designation shall have a
minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet.
   (F)   Lot area. Shall have a minimum area of not less than 5,000 square
feet.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. All lots shall not have more than 35% of its
total area covered by permanent structures.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08)
§ 156.174 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No accessory structures shall exceed one story or 18 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.175 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   A minimum of one 20-foot by 20-foot hard surface parking must be provided
for each single-family home. All drives utilized for vehicle traffic and/or
parking shall be hard surfaced.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08)
§ 156.176 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any structure constructed within this district must have its first
floor elevation one foot above the elevation stated on the city’s FIRM.
   (B)   All mobile homes must be anchored as per the requirements of the
city’s flood ordinance or as per FEMA guidelines for floodplain management,
whichever is more restrictive.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.08)
GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC-1)
§ 156.190 DESCRIPTION.
   This district is for personal and business services, including general
retail business.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.191 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Retail establishments, also manufacturing of food or beverages or the
manufacturing of goods for retail sales on the premises and distributed to
other locations;
   (B)   Drinking and/or dining establishments;
   (C)   Service and repair establishments, excluding automotive, motorcycle
and truck repair;
   (D)   Personal service establishment;
   (E)   Medical offices;
   (F)   Motel and hotels;
   (G)   Offices;
   (H)   Financial institutions;
   (I)   Private clubs or lodges;
   (J)   Newspaper printing firms or print shops;
   (K)   Churches;
   (L)   Commercial recreational structures, such as theaters, bowling alleys,
pool rooms, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges and
similar uses; and
   (M)   Temporary retail business that operate as transient or temporary
merchants. The following items, which are related to the above temporary
business, shall not protrude beyond the property line into the public right-of-
way:
      (1)   Canopies, signs, overhangs, anchors, guide wires or any item
similar in nature;
      (2)   Merchants which are temporary in nature shall not be permitted to
erect a tent, canopy, shelter or similar structure which is closer than five
feet to the property line which abuts a public right-of-way; and
      (3)   Exception: garbage cans, planters, temporary signs, which are
approved by the Planning and Permitting Department and/or canopies, which are
approved by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.192 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Uses permitted on review are:
      (1)   Auditoriums, libraries, art galleries, public and private schools
and other public oriented buildings;
      (2)   Any other store/shops for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional or business services which do not produce more noise, dust, odor,
vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated under permitted uses; and
      (3)   Dwellings and/or congregate residences.
   (B)   When the Building Code adopted by the city in §
150.025 requires the structure to be protected by a fire suppression system,
the above requirements will be enforced in addition to those requirements
dictated by the code.
   (C)   The property owner shall be required to comply with all Building
Department requirements prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the
Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.193 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. The following requirements shall apply to all uses
permitted in this district except as provided in §
156.388.
      (1)   Front yard. A front yard of not less than 25 feet shall be required
in all cases.
      (2)   Side yard. A side yard of not less than ten feet is required unless
a commercial district abuts a residential zoned area. In such case side yards
shall not be less than 25 feet. (This section also applies to corner lots.)
      (3)   Rear yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or
combination thereof, neither of which shall be less than 30 feet in depth.
Exclusive of any public right-of-way, the depth of a rear yard for which the
building is not serviced from the rear shall be not less than 15 feet exclusive
of the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Exception. The front and side-yard setback requirements listed in
divisions (A)(1) through (A)(3) above will not be applicable for permanent
structures which are located on Main Street between Middle Street and Fourth
Street or located on the south side of Lazelle Street between Junction and
Fourth Street or on the north side of Sherman Street between Junction and
Fourth.
   (C)   Temporary structures.
      (1)   Temporary structures shall not be placed closer than five feet of
any rear property line abutting any public right-of-way.
      (2)   No appendage such as overhangs, canopies and supports, guide wires,
poles, posts, stakes, signs and the like may be placed closer than five feet of
any public right-of-way to the rear of the structure.
      (3)   The Chief of Police or the Building Official, or their designees,
shall have the power to order the temporary structure or any portion of it,
which is in violation of this section, to be removed immediately.
   (D)   Lot width. Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less
than 50 feet.
   (E)   Lot area. In no case shall there be a lot area of not less than 7,000
square feet.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. Permanent main and accessory buildings shall
cover not more than 75% of the total lot area.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.194 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall be constructed more than four and one-half stories or 50
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.195 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   As regulated in §§
156.389 and
156.391; and
   (B)   All areas utilized for vehicle travel and/or parking shall be hard
surfaced material.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.196 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lots located within
floodplain areas as shown on the city’s FIRM, shall also be subject to the
provisions and requirements contained in the city’s Floodplain Ordinance
included in
Chapter 155.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
§ 156.197 LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping shall be installed as per §§
156.450 through
156.461.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09) (Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018)
RETAIL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC-2)
§ 156.210 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This commercial district is intended to provide an area for retail
sales and similar activities year-round where there in general are no
activities or sales conducted outside of the structure. This area should be
ascetically pleasing and, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission
and City Council, there are to be no items stored, displayed or sold outside of
the structure. Adequate parking and visibility for the business located on the
property shall be provided in all cases.
   (B)   There will be no temporary structures permitted in this district.
(Exception: seasonal green houses or similar garden type structures, which may
be an accessory to the existing business.) Transient/temporary merchants may be
permitted in this district, but they shall operate entirely within an enclosed
permanent structure. In no case shall a transient/temporary merchant be
permitted to operate on the exterior of the structure. In no case shall this
district have businesses such as lumber sales, new and used car sales, service
and repair stations or similar uses.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10)
§ 156.211 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Retail sales establishments, including manufacturing of goods for
retail sales on the premises, providing there are fewer than five employees
engaged in the manufacturing of the product and in no case more than 10% or the
building area is utilized for manufacturing;
   (B)   Financial institutions;
   (C)   Drinking and dining establishments;
   (D)   Convenience stores; and
   (E)   Personal service establishment.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 156.212 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Private clubs or lodges;
   (B)   Hotels and motels;
   (C)   Churches;
   (D)   Office buildings; and
   (E)   Gas stations, which are an accessory use to the primary business.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10)
§ 156.213 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard. A minimum setback of 25 feet from the front property line
shall be maintained.
   (B)   Side yard. There shall be a minimum setback of not less than ten feet
from property lines. When a commercial district abuts a residential zoned area,
the side yards shall not be less than 25 feet. This division (B) shall also
apply to corner lots.
   (C)   Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than 15 feet exclusive of any
public right-of-way, this area shall be left unobstructed to allow for
deliveries to the rear of the building.
   (D)   Lot width. Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less
than 75 feet.
   (E)   Lot area. No structures shall be constructed in this district with a
lot area of less than 10,000 square feet. Existing structures may be utilized
for businesses, but in no case may the lot area be less than 10,000 square
feet.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. Permanent main and accessory buildings shall
cover not more than 60% of the property.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.214 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall be constructed more than four and one-half stories or 50
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10)
§ 156.215 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   As regulated in §§
156.389 and
156.391; and
   (B)   All areas utilized for vehicle travel and parking shall be of hard
surfaced material.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10)
§ 156.216 LANDSCAPING.
   All property developed in this district shall comply with the landscaping
requirements of §§
156.450 through
156.461.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10)
§ 156.217 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lots located within
floodplain areas as shown on the city’s FIRM shall also be subject to the
provisions and requirements contained in the city’s Floodplain Ordinance
included in
Chapter 155.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.10)
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL/OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC-3)
§ 156.230 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This commercial district is intended to provide a place for those
types of institutional and commercial activities that are low-profile and
service-oriented in nature and are surrounded by landscaped yards and open
areas. Land, space and aesthetic requirements of this district are intended to
make the following uses desirable either in a central business location or a
suburban location near or integrated with a residential neighborhood.
   (B)   No outdoor sales or services may be provided at any time. No temporary
or transient merchants will be permitted in any case.
   (C)   No temporary structures in association with temporary merchants may be
permitted in this district.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11) (Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-31-2019) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.231 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Art galleries or businesses similar in nature;
   (B)   Assembly halls for nonprofit corporations, but not including the
serving or dispensing of alcoholic beverages;
   (C)   Hospitals, sanitariums, medical offices, not including veterinary
establishments, with pharmacies allowed as accessory use to permitted medical
facilities;
   (D)   Laboratories for medical research and testing;
   (E)   Libraries;
   (F)   Museums;
   (G)   Office buildings in which no activity is carried on catering to retail
trade with the general public and no stock or goods are maintained for sale to
customers. These shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, doctors,
dentist, lawyers, architects, chiropractors, engineers, real estate office,
insurance, appraisers, accountants, single chair barber shops or similar uses;
   (H)   Financial institutions;
   (I)   Single-family on-site, detached conventionally built homes.
Manufactured homes which are mobile in nature will not be permitted;
   (J)   No multi-family or attached single-family dwellings will be permitted
in this district;
   (K)   Auto repair/maintenance;
   (L)   Restaurant;
   (M)   Flower shop;
   (N)   Photography studio; and
   (O)   Apparel store and manufacturing.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11) (Ord. 2019-14, passed 12-31-2019)
§ 156.232 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Any retail or wholesale office where sales are conducted totally off-
premises; and
   (B)   Other uses which are consistent with the land, space and aesthetic
requirements of a residential neighborhood (not to include manufactured
housing).
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11)
§ 156.233 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district except as provided in §
156.388.
   (A)   Front yard. A minimum setback of 25 feet from property lines shall be
required.
   (B)   Side yard. There shall be a minimum setback of not less than ten feet
from property lines. When a commercial district abuts a residential zoned area,
the side yards shall not be less than 25 feet.
   (C)   Corner lot side yard. All lots which have side yards abutting a street
shall have a minimum yard setback of not less than 18 feet from the property
line.
   (D)   Rear yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or
combination thereof, neither of which shall be less than 30 feet in depth,
exclusive of any public right-of-way the depth of a rear yard which abuts a
residential district or where the building is not serviced from the rear, shall
be not less than 15 feet exclusive of the public right-of-way.
   (E)   Lot width. Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less
than 50 feet.
   (F)   Lot area. There shall be a lot area of not less than 7,500 square feet
maximum lot coverage: permanent main and accessory buildings shall cover not
more than 50% of the total lot area.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11)
§ 156.234 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall be constructed more than two and one-half stories or 35
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11)
§ 156.235 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   No parking in any case will be permitted in front of buildings within
this zoning district. All areas utilized for vehicle parking or travel shall be
hard surface materials.
   (B)   See also the regulations in §§
156.389 and
156.391.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11)
§ 156.236 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lots located within
floodplain areas as shown on the city’s FIRM shall also be subject to the
provisions and requirements contained in the city’s Floodplain Ordinance
included in Chapter 155.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11)
§ 156.237 LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping shall be installed as per §§
156.450 through
156.461.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.11)
HIGHWAY SERVICE (HS-1)
§ 156.250 DESCRIPTION, DEFINITIONS AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Description. This district is established for the accommodation of
those herein specified retail and business service activities that serve
persons in automobiles traveling on streets and highways, and typically may be
located along major street intersections or highway interchanges. These
businesses generate a considerable volume of vehicular traffic originating
within the community or traveling into the community.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONGREGATE SLEEPING ROOM. Any building or portion thereof containing
individual sleeping rooms for temporary occupancy with a centralized eating,
cooking and sanitation facilities. Said sleeping facilities shall not
accommodate more than ten persons.
      DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof that contains not more than two
dwelling units.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof that contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation,
as required by the building code. A single DWELLING UNIT shall not be occupied
by more than one family or ten unrelated persons.
      UTILITY LOT. Any platted lot used exclusively for the placement of
utilities, public works, wells, water storage, sewer systems,
telecommunications stations, electrical substations, high-pressured gas
stations and any other utility services approved by the City Council. Such lots
are only intended to be improved with the utility and any structures needed in
conjunction with the utility.
   (C)   Scope. For the purpose of Highway Service Zoning, dwellings, dwelling
units and congregate sleeping rooms meeting the following guidelines may be
permitted as uses permitted upon review, subject to §
156.498.
   (D)   Other regulations.
      (1)   On all floors of buildings containing dwelling units, each floor
shall be required to have a minimum of two egress routes. Each sleeping room
within a dwelling unit shall also be required to have a minimum of one egress
window. All dwellings units shall comply with all other requirements of the
Building Code adopted by the city in §
150.025 and the City Fire District, as described by ordinance.
      (2)   In buildings containing congregate sleeping rooms for temporary
use, all floors in said building shall have two means of egress. Although
individual sleeping rooms will not be required to have an egress window, one
access door shall exit into a hallway leading to an egress or exit point.
      (3)   Buildings containing congregate sleeping rooms for temporary use
shall also be required to install a central fire alarm system with smoke
detectors in each room and in hallways. Pull stations for the fire alarm system
shall also be installed on each floor and at exit points within the structure.
Said sleeping rooms may be occupied by only those individuals who are employed
by the business occupying the structure. Said sleeping rooms may not be rented
to or utilized by the general public.
      (4)   When the Uniform Building Code requires the structure to be
protected by a fire suppression system, the above requirements will be enforced
in addition to those requirements dictated by the code.
      (5)   The property owner shall be required to comply with all city
ordinances and requirements prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy from
the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 156.251 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All those permitted in GC-1 and GC-2. Not to include single-family
homes;
   (B)   Garden centers, green houses and nurseries;
   (C)   Churches;
   (D)   Drinking and dining establishments, including fast food or drive-in
establishments;
   (E)   Service stations/convenience stores;
   (F)   Recreational uses, such as amusement parks, bowling alleys and ice
rinks;
   (G)   Wholesale and distribution centers not exceeding 10,000 square feet in
building size or storage area;
   (H)   Temporary or transient businesses operating with a valid city vendor
license;
   (I)   Building material display and sales;
   (J)   New and used car sales lots (including motorcycle sales and service
and repairs);
   (K)   Large retail outlets or mercantile stores;
   (L)   Animal hospitals, pet shops, kennels and the like;
   (M)   Service and repair garages;
   (N)   Truck, trailer and U-Haul type rental and sales; and
   (O)   Farm implement and machinery sales.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 156.252 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Open storage uses, which shall comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   All open storage material or equipment shall be screened by
adequate ornamental fencing at the side and rear of the lot on which said open
storage or display occurs; provided, that screening shall be seven feet in
height;
      (2)   All of the lot used for parking of vehicles, for the storage and
display of merchandise and all driveways used for vehicle ingress and egress
shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt and maintained in good conditions;
      (3)   Entry curb-cuts shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of
curb returns unless otherwise approved by the City Street Committee and City
Engineer; and
      (4)   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of
reflectors and an intensity of lighting, which will not interfere with adjacent
land uses, or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of flashing or
intermittent type.
   (B)   Any other use similar in character to those enumerated above and which
in the opinion of the Common Council will not be injurious to the district;
   (C)   Outdoor advertising (see
Chapter 152);
   (D)   Outdoor recreational uses which are similar in nature and are not
harmful to the existing surrounding uses;
   (E)   Dwellings and/or congregate residences;
   (F)   Utility lots subjected to the following requirements:
      (1)   Platted access not less than 16 feet in width which may be either
dedicated public right-of-way or utility access easement;
      (2)   Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less than 50
feet;
      (3)   There shall be a lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet; and
      (4)   Any buildings shall not cover more than 75% of the total lot area.
   (G)   Utilities, public works, wells, water storage, sewer systems,
telecommunications stations, electrical substations, high-pressured gas
stations and any other utility services approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 156.253 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district except as provided in §
156.388.
   (A)   Front yard. A minimum setback of 35 feet from property lines shall be
required.
   (B)   Side yard. There shall be a minimum setback of not less than ten feet
from property lines. When a Highway Service District abuts a residential zoned
areas, the side yards shall not be less than 25 feet.
   (C)   Rear yard. Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the
rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or
combination thereof, neither of which shall be less than 30 feet in depth
exclusive of any public right-of-way, the depth of a rear yard which abuts a
residential district, or where the building is not serviced from the rear,
shall be not less than 15 feet exclusive of the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Temporary structures. As also regulated under
Chapter 150:
      (1)   Temporary structures shall not be placed closer than five feet of
any property line abutting a public right-of-way;
      (2)   No appendage such as overhangs, canopies and supports, guide wires,
poles, posts, stakes, signs and the like may be placed closer than five feet of
any right-of-way;
      (3)   The Building Official or their designee shall have the power to
order the temporary structure, or any portion of it which is within five feet
of any alley or other right-of-way, removed immediately; and
      (4)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties
provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Lot width. Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less
than 100 feet.
   (F)   Lot area. There shall be a lot area of not less than 10,000 square
feet.
   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. Permanent main and accessory buildings shall
cover not more than 75% of the total lot area.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.254 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall be constructed more than four and one-half stories or 60
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 156.255 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   As regulated in §§
156.385 through
156.397.
   (B)   All areas utilized for vehicle travel or parking shall be of hard
surface materials.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 156.256 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lots located within
floodplain areas as shown on the city’s FIRM shall also be subject to the
provisions and requirements contained in the city’s Floodplain Ordinance
included in
Chapter 155.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
§ 156.257 LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping shall be installed as per §§
156.450 through
156.461.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.12) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 3-21-2018)
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (GI-1)
§ 156.270 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This industrial district is established to provide areas which the
principal use of land is for manufacturing and assembly plants, processing,
storage, large warehousing, wholesaling and distribution in which operations
are conducted and adult-oriented businesses so that noise, odor, dust and glare
area and other adverse secondary impacts can be controlled or limited.
   (B)   No temporary structures may be permitted without approval of the
governing body.
   (C)   In addition, a portion of this zone shall consist of an adult overlay
district to provide areas where an adult-oriented businesses may locate. An
adult-oriented business, as described in §
156.004, may be allowed to occur within the adult overlay district only as a
conditional use.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
§ 156.271 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Large scale contractor’s equipment storage yards;
   (B)   Building material wholesale, storage and distribution centers;
   (C)   Public utility service yards of electrical receiving or transforming
stations;
   (D)   Freighting or trucking yards or terminals;
   (E)   Large/small manufacturing facilities;
   (F)   Building material display and sales;
   (G)   New and used car sales;
   (H)   Truck, trailer, U-Haul type rental and sales;
   (I)   Farm implement and machinery sales;
   (J)   Motorcycle sales and repair shops;
   (K)   Animal hospitals, pet shops, kennels and the like;
   (L)   Service and repair garages;
   (M)   Manufactured home sales;
   (N)   Wholesale warehouses for the distribution and sale of goods; and
   (O)   Large retail outlets or mercantile businesses which require large
parking areas in conjunction with larger storage buildings.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
§ 156.272 CONDITIONAL USE ON REVIEW.
   (A)   Generally. The Planning Commission may authorize special uses and a
conditional use permit for the location and operation thereof:
      (1)   Utility lots, subjected to the following requirements:
         (a)   Platted access not less than 16 feet in width which may be
either dedicated public right-of-way or utility access easement;
         (b)   Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less than
50 feet;
         (c)   There shall be a lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet;
and
         (d)   Any buildings shall not cover more than 75% of the total lot
area.
      (2)   Utilities, public works, wells, water storage, sewer systems,
telecommunications stations, electrical substations, high-pressured gas
stations and any other utility services approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Residential conditional use.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), a RESIDENTIAL CONDITIONAL USE
means a temporary residential use that is secondary in nature to a primary
permitted use of the structure in the General Industrial District. To be
permitted, the applicant must show that, because of its characteristics and
location with reference to surroundings, street or highway width, traffic
generation or other demands on public services, the use requires special
consideration relative to placement at specific locations in the zone to ensure
that proper integration with other existing or permitted uses in the same zone
or zones can be done safely. If such use is approved, then considering the
characteristics of the individual site and the proposed location within the
zone where proposed, it shall be approved with conditions to ensure proper
integration with other existing or permitted uses in the same zone or zones,
and that the proposed use is a significant and integral part of the proposed
use of the property for a period of 12 months.
      (2)   Residential use when the secondary in nature to a conforming
permitted use in the General Industrial District.
      (3)   Such secondary use shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in size,
including any designated entry or exit areas. The any area permitted for
residential use shall be contained within an existing building or provided for
in the plans submitted for new construction in the General Industrial Zone.
   (C)   Adult-oriented business.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may
authorize, an annual conditional use for adult-oriented business fronting upon
and having vehicle access from Mayer Avenue, Sturgis Street, Hansen Drive or
Industry Road, and selling merchandise, as defined in this chapter, subject to
the requirements in division (C)(2) below.
      (2)   A sexually-oriented business shall not be permitted to operate
within 300 feet of:
         (a)   A single-family residence, church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities;
         (b)   A public or private educational facility, including, but not
limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities; for the purpose of this division (C)(2)(b), SCHOOL
includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
         (c)   A public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other similar
public land within the city which is under the control, operation or management
of city park and recreation authorities; and
         (d)   Auditoriums, convention centers, fairgrounds, museums, art or
music centers and theaters.
            1.   For the purposes of this division (C)(2), measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where an adult-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property
line of the premises of those facilities or boundaries outlined in this
division (C)(2). (Compare preceding to §
156.273.)
            2.   An adult-oriented business shall not be permitted to operate
within 300 feet of another adult-oriented business.
            3.   For the purposes of this section, the distance between any two
adult-oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
            4.   Signage: All adult-oriented businesses operating within the
adult overlay district, and all other existing adult-oriented businesses uses
in operation on September 10, 2012, shall comply with all sign requirements
established by
Chapter 152, and all sign requirements included within this chapter, in
addition to the following sign requirements.
               a.   No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can
be viewed from persons walking or driving by the premises.
               b.   Window areas shall be covered and opaque.
               c.   Any billboards or on-premises signs located within the
adult overlay district shall be subject to the requirements of divisions (C)(2)
(d)1. and (C)(2)(d)2. above.
   (D)   Severability of provisions and applications. If a part of this section
is invalid, all valid parts that are severable from the invalid part remain in
effect. If a part of this section is invalid in one or more of its
applications, the part remains in effect in all valid applications that are
severable from the invalid application.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
§ 156.273 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district except as provided in §
156.388.
   (A)   Front yard. A minimum setback of 25 feet from property lines shall be
required.
   (B)   Side yard. A minimum setback of ten feet from property lines shall be
required except in the event the building being placed on the property and/or
the occupying use qualifies as a high hazard (Group H) as that term is defined
and recognized by the Building Code adopted by the city in §
150.025, or subsequent code adopted by the city. In the event the building and/
or occupying use qualifies as high hazard (Group H), a minimum setback of 25
feet from the property lines shall be required. Where an industrial building is
to be serviced from the side yard or rear yard and when no rear alley is
provided, at least one of the side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 30 feet
for side service and 25 feet for rear service.
   (C)   Rear yard. Where an industrial building is to be serviced from the
rear, and an alleyway is provided, the service court, rear yard setback or
combination thereof shall not be less than 30 feet in depth exclusive of any
public right-of-way. The depth of a rear yard which abuts a residential
district or where the building is not serviced from the rear shall be not less
than 15 feet exclusive of the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Lot width. Each lot shall have a width abutting the street of not less
than 100 feet.
   (E)   Lot area. There shall be a lot area of not less than 10,000 square
feet.
   (F)   Maximum lot coverage. Permanent main and accessory buildings shall
cover not more than 75% of the total lot area.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
§ 156.274 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall be constructed more than four and one-half stories or 60
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
§ 156.275 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   As regulated in §§
156.385 through
156.397; and
   (B)   All areas utilized for vehicle travel or parking shall be of hard
surface material.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
§ 156.276 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lots located within
floodplain areas as shown on the city’s FIRM shall also be subject to the
provisions and requirements contained in the city’s Floodplain Ordinance
included in §§
156.495 through
156.502.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.13) (Ord. 2012-03, passed 4-4-2012; Ord. 2013-13, passed
10-16-2013)
OPEN SPACE OR FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (OS-1)
§ 156.290 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is for the protection of drainage ways to permit the
unimpeded flow of surface runoff without endangering life and health or causing
property damage due to flooding by not allowing structures in this district
which generally located in the floodplain.
   (B)   No temporary structures or merchants may be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.14)
§ 156.291 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and other wild crop
harvesting;
   (B)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas;
   (C)   Private and public recreational uses not classified as park land, such
as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds,
parks and the like; and
   (D)   Storage of materials by the city that are not flood buoyant,
flammable, explosive or injurious to human or animal life.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.14)
§ 156.292 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The following uses may be permitted on review by the governing body in
accordance with provisions contained in §
156.498: No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or
structure, including railroads, streets, utility lines or for any such use
within this district.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.14)
TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT (NU)
§ 156.305 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is applicable to certain lands in which the construction
of permanent structures is prohibited pending study and survey of lands
involved by the governing body. The status may be applied to newly annexed land
area until a study is conducted to determine the best land use for the area or
if the area does not have a designation in the comprehensive plan.
   (B)   The investigation or study shall not be longer than three months or
120 days. In no event shall a parcel of land stay in a NU District for more
than one year. No structures or merchants may be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.15)
FAIRGROUNDS DISTRICT (FAIR)
§ 156.320 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is applicable to certain lands, which are owned and
operated by the city. Said land shall be intended for public recreation and
entertainment.
   (B)   Amenities which are incidental to the use of this land shall be
permitted in association with an event. (Example: portable toilets, water tanks
for livestock, portable corrals and the like.)
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16)
§ 156.321 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Public recreation areas (to include, but not be limited to, baseball/
softball fields, playgrounds, swimming pools and the like);
   (B)   Temporary structures;
   (C)   Temporary liquor/malt beverage structures;
   (D)   Temporary merchants;
   (E)   Sporting or entertainment events (to include, but not limited to,
horse racing, rodeos, car/motorcycle racing, concerts, circuses and the like);
   (F)   Public entertainment; and
   (G)   Livestock sales.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16)
§ 156.322 USE ON REVIEW.
   Uses which are not listed above and are recreational or entertaining in
nature may be permitted under a conditional use permit when approved by the
City Park Board and the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16)
§ 156.323 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all uses permitted in this
district, except provided in §
156.388.
   (A)   Front yard. All property utilized in this zoning district shall have
no permanent structures located closer than 25 feet to any public dedicated
right-of-way.
   (B)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet for
permanent structures located in this district.
   (C)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet for
permanent structures located in this district.
   (D)   Lot width. Property utilized for recreational uses within this
district shall abut a public right-of-way or public access road for a width of
not less than 100 feet.
   (E)   Lot area. Parcels of land receiving a Fairgrounds designation shall be
not less than one acre in area.
   (F)   Lot coverage. Permanent structures will not be permitted to encompass
more than 25% of overall parcel of land.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16)
§ 156.324 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Temporary structures, canopies, tents, awnings and the like may be set
up on this property when in conjunction with an event authorized by the city.
   (B)   Temporary structures may be erected for a time limit, which shall be
set by the City Park Board and City Council. Said temporary structure must be
removed from the property within 48 hours of the close of an event unless
otherwise permitted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16)
§ 156.325 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No principal or accessory building or structures shall be constructed
which exceeds 45 feet in height.
   (B)   Temporary structures which are erected for an event may be permitted
to exceed the 45 feet height at the discretion of the City Park Board and the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.326 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENT.
   No structures shall be constructed in a flood channel. Any building
constructed in the 100-year flood plan outside of the actual flood channel
shall be constructed not less than one foot above the base flood elevation
found on the FIRM for the city.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.16) Penalty, see §
156.999
RV, CAMPGROUND AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK DISTRICT (RV)
§ 156.340 DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This district is intended to provide for permanent and seasonal
campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks. Facilities within this district
shall be offering for rent spaces for overnight camping and for overnight
parking of recreational vehicles such as camping trailers, motor homes and
coaches. Any facility located within this district shall comply with all
applicable laws and regulations, including any State Department of Health
requirements for the operation of a campground, recreational vehicle park or
other such facility.
   (B)   Setbacks shall be the distance from any facility’s property line to
camping or parking sites and shall not include access roads or driveways.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.341 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Recreational vehicle park;
   (B)   Small retail convenience stores providing products and services
normally associated with a campground or recreational vehicle park; and
   (C)   Recreational vehicle dumping sites which are connected to the city
wastewater collection system and which have been approved by the City Public
Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.342 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   Temporary vending for a period not to exceed 14 calendar days per year in
conjunction with a specific event.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.343 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A campground or recreational vehicle park shall have a minimum area of
two acres.
   (B)   Retail and temporary vending area shall not exceed a total of 2,000
square feet or 1% of the gross area of the campground or recreational vehicle
park, whichever is greater.
   (C)   Any facility shall have a minimum front setback of 25 feet from the
public right-of-way.
   (D)   Any facility shall have a minimum of ten feet side yard setback. If
the side yard abuts a public right-of-way such as a side street it shall have a
minimum side yard setback of 18 feet. If the side yard abuts any residential
zoning it shall have a minimum side yard setback of 25 feet.
   (E)   Any facility shall have a minimum of ten feet rear yard setback. If
the rear yard abuts any residential district, it shall have a minimum rear yard
setback of 25 feet.
   (F)   Any facility shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a
dedicated public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.344 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories in height.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.345 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Each facility or campground within this district shall provide sufficient
on-premises parking, maneuvering and loading space so that all parking,
maneuvering and loading of camping units incidental to the use of the facility
shall be undertaken without the use of any public right-of-way, street, alley
or any private property not a part of the facility.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.346 UTILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Each campground, recreational vehicle park or any other such type facility
located within this district shall be connected to the municipal water supply
for the city, the municipal wastewater collection system and will be serviced
by the City Solid Waste Collection Department.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.347 SCREENING.
   (A)   Each campground, recreational vehicle park or any other such type
facility located within this district which abuts a residential district shall
provide a screening in the form of a solid fence, hedge or provide for other
appropriate means of shielding the facility from the adjacent residential
properties.
   (B)   Plans for compliance with this screening requirement shall be approved
by the Planning Commission and City Council prior to beginning construction of
the facility.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.348 SIGNAGE.
   Total signage not exceeding one square foot of surface for each one lineal
foot of lot frontage shall be allowed. Signs erected in conjunction with a
facility permitted by this chapter shall comply with any and all applicable
provisions of
Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
§ 156.349 FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building constructed within this district on lands located within the
floodplain areas as shown on the city’s FIRM shall be subject to the additional
provisions and requirements contained in the city’s Floodplain Ordinance
included in
Chapter 155.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.17) (Ord. 2006-15, passed 8-5-2006)
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
§ 156.360 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these provisions is to establish and regulate mobile food
vendors within the city.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.01) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 156.361 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter is in full force and effect at all times during the
year except between the dates of July 15 and August 20 of each year. During
this time frame, this subchapter only applies during city sponsored or approved
events where the city invests less than or equal to the amount as shall be set
forth in the city’s annual fee resolution in hosting the event. During the
dates of July 15 through August 20 of each year,
Chapter 113 regarding licensing of temporary businesses applies to all mobile
food vendors that operate during any city sponsored or approved event where the
city invests more than the amount as shall be set forth in the city’s annual
fee resolution in hosting the event, and at any other time not excluded under
this subchapter.
   (B)   These requirements include any special sanitation permits and
requirements as provided under
Chapter 50. Any conflict between this subchapter and Chapters
50 or
113 stemming from mobile food vendor activities or operation occurring during
July 15 through August 20 of each year, is construed in favor of Chapters
50 or
113.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.02) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 156.362 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE FOOD TRUCK. A licensed and operable vehicle or concession trailer
which is enclosed and self-contained, independent with respect to water, sewer
and power utilities, that contains equipment for the preparation and sale or
service of food or beverages with or without charge which are designed for
immediate consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING. The act of preparation and sale or service of food and
beverages with or without charge from a mobile food truck that are designed for
immediate consumption.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person or entity conducting the sale or service of
food and beverages with or without charge from a mobile food truck that are
designed for immediate consumption.
   OPERATE. All activities associated with the conduct of mobile food vending,
including setup and takedown and actual hours where the mobile food truck unit
is open.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.03) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 156.363 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All mobile food vendors must abide by all federal, state and local
laws, rules and regulations. Mobile food vendors must operate in compliance
with all state laws and regulations and must maintain continuous licensure with
the State Department of Health.
   (B)   Mobile food vendors may only vend on private property in the following
zoning districts:
      (1)   General Commercial (GC-1);
      (2)   Retail Commercial (GC-2);
      (3)   Highway Service (HS);
      (4)   General Industrial (GI); and
      (5)   RV, Campground and Recreational Vehicle Park (RV).
   (C)   Mobile food vendors may vend in a public right-of-way only with prior
city approval.
   (D)   Unless a mobile food vendor receives city approval to vend in a public
right-of-way, mobile food vendors may vend only on private property with
consent of the property owner and may not encroach into any right-of-way
adjoining the property with the mobile food truck or any accessory items such
as trash cans, tables, chairs and the like.
   (E)   Any food vending on private property must have sufficient parking for
both the mobile food truck, including any accessory items, and the existing
operations of the private property.
   (F)   The vendor must not conduct any vending in a way that causes
congestion or blocking of vehicle or pedestrian traffic or fire lanes. Each
vendor has an affirmative and independent duty to determine the safety and
suitability of any particular location of operation and to operate in a manner
reasonably calculated to avoid and prevent harm to people and to other
vehicles.
   (G)   All areas within and surrounding a mobile food service establishment
must be maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary condition. A mobile food
vendor must provide one private trash bin for public use with capacity of no
less than 13 gallons. Trash bins must be anchored or otherwise secured upright.
A mobile food vendor must remove all litter generated by its operation at the
vendor’s expense. The mobile food vendor must not place trash or litter from
the mobile food vending establishment in any unauthorized private or city
receptacle.
   (H)   Umbrellas and canopies must be designed to be secure during windy
conditions. Umbrellas and canopies must be at least seven feet above the ground
when open and may not protrude into the right-of-way.
   (I)   All mobile food vendors must ensure that individuals with disabilities
have comparable access to the mobile food vending establishment. If existing
designs cannot be modified to be accessible to people with disabilities, the
method of providing service must be modified to become accessible.
   (J)   A mobile food vending establishment cannot be permanently located on
any property and cannot function as a permanent structure.
   (K)   Mobile food vendors may not vend alcohol unless they comply with all
applicable city and state regulations.
   (L)   All mobile food vendors operating in the city must obtain a mobile
food vending permit.
   (M)   All mobile food vendors operating in the city must provide a monthly
sales tax report for all sales within the city boundary. The reports may be
submitted to the City Finance Office.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.05) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.364 DURATION OF ACTIVITY AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Any mobile food vendor may be parked at a single location for a
maximum of three consecutive days.
   (B)   Mobile food vendors may only operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 2:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.06) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 156.365 SIGNAGE.
   No signage is permitted except for what appears on the mobile food truck and
a small foldable sign placed within nearby proximity of the mobile food truck.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.07) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.366 HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION.
   Mobile food vendors must:
   (A)   Operate according to the minimum public health and food safety
requirements determined by the State Department of Health;
   (B)   Comply with all applicable fire and safety requirements;
   (C)   Comply with the licensing requirements of the state, including food,
sales tax and mobile food vending;
   (D)   Not broadcast loud noise that results in a nuisance to the surrounding
properties; and
   (E)   Abide by all operational requirements provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.08) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.367 MOBILE FOOD VENDING PERMIT.
   (A)   The operator of all mobile food trucks must apply for a mobile food
vending permit using CitizenServe through the City Planning and Permitting
Department.
   (B)   The operator is required to obtain a mobile vending permit for each
operating mobile food truck.
   (C)   The permit will remain in effect until December 31 of the year of
issuance. After expiration, the operator must obtain a new permit to operate in
the city.
   (D)   Permit fees shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution per
year regardless of what month the operator acquired the permit.
   (E)   Any permit issued under this section is nontransferable.
   (F)   While operating in the city, the permit must be displayed at all times
in a conspicuous place where it can be read by the general public on the mobile
food truck.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.09) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 156.368 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Every mobile food vendor operating in the city must maintain
commercial general liability insurance. The city must be named as an additional
insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any liability arising directly
or indirectly from operation within the city. A copy of the certificate of
coverage shall be provided to the city and notice of the termination of
insurance coverage shall be provided to the City Planning and Permitting
Department.
   (B)   The failure to maintain or lapse in commercial general liability
insurance while operating in the city will result in immediate revocation of
the permit issued under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.10) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 156.369 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked for violation of any applicable provision of this code, state law or
regulation.
   (B)   Upon the revocation, the permit shall immediately be surrendered, and
failure to do so shall be an offense under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.11) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.370 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision denying or revoking a permit made
under this subchapter shall be entitled to have said decision reviewed by the
city. If, after review, said person is unsatisfied, he or she may appeal the
decision to the City Council.
   (B)   The process shall be as follows.
      (1)   An aggrieved person shall first file a written request for review
with the city setting forth the basis for which he or she believes the decision
to be in error. The writing shall also include the person’s name and mailing
address.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city shall review
the challenged decision and mail a written response to the aggrieved person
within 20 days.
      (3)   If the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the decision of the
city following review, he or she may file a notice of appeal with the Finance
Officer. There shall be a fee set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution
assessed for filing an appeal, which shall be paid to the Finance Office at the
time of filing the written request for review.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Finance Officer shall
notify the City Council, and a public hearing on the appeal shall be held at a
regularly scheduled City Council within 30 days after the date said appeal was
filed. The Finance Office shall provide notice to the person specifying the
time, date and location of the hearing.
   (C)   The City Council may notify the aggrieved person of its decision
following the hearing; however, the Council shall issue a written decision to
the person within 20 days of the hearing. The Council may affirm or reverse the
decision.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.12) (Ord. 2022-02, passed 2-14-2022)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 156.385 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   In order to accomplish the general purpose of this chapter, it is necessary
to give special consideration to certain uses because they are unique in
nature, require large land areas, are potentially incompatible with existing
development or because the effects of such uses cannot definitely be foreseen.
The following uses shall be subject to compliance with the regulations in this
section and with the procedure for authorizing uses permitted on review as set
forth in §
156.498.
   (A)   Planned unit development.
      (1)   General description.
         (a)   The regulations established in this section are intended to
provide optional methods of land development which encourage more imaginative
solutions to environmental design problems. Planned development areas thus
established would be characterized by a unified building and site development
program, open space for recreation and the provision for commercial, religious,
educational and cultural facilities which are integrated with the total project
by unified architectural and open space treatment. In order to accomplish these
objectives, the customary district regulations may be modified, provided that
overall population densities do not exceed the densities of specific
residential districts.
         (b)   A planned unit development, occupying one acres or more, shall
be permitted in the General Residential (GR-1) and (GR-2) Districts, the
Single-Family Residential/Office Commercial District and the General Commercial
District.
      (2)   Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. The
following uses are permitted:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwelling;
         (b)   Two-family dwelling and semi-detached dwelling;
         (c)   Multiple-family and attached dwellings. The number of dwelling
units permitted shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the
minimum lot area per family required by the district or districts in which the
area is located. Net development area shall be determined by subtracting the
area set aside for churches, schools, commercial use and street right-of-way
from the gross development area. The area of land set aside for common open
space or recreational use shall be included in determining the number of
dwelling units permitted;
         (d)   Commercial uses. For each 100 dwelling units in the development
plan, one acre may be set aside for the following commercial uses:
            1.   Food markets, including specialty foods, such as:
               a.   Bakery goods;
               b.   Delicatessen goods; and
               c.   Meat market.
            2.   Drug stores or fountains, including:
               a.   Book and reading matter;
               b.   Stationery;
               c.   Tobacco;
               d.   Vanity goods; and
               e.   Pharmacy.
            3.   Bakeries whose products are sold only at retail and on the
premises;
            4.   Banks;
            5.   Barber shops and/or beauty shops;
            6.   Cleaning and pressing collection stations;
            7.   Gift shops;
            8.   Self-service laundries;
            9.   Service or filling stations;
            10.   Shoe repair and shoeshine services;
            11.   Professional and business offices;
            12.   Name plate and sign, as regulated in §
156.392; and
            13.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above uses.
         (e)   Educational uses; and
         (f)   Community facilities uses, such as churches and other religious
institutions, and nonprofit clubs, such as country clubs, swimming and/or
tennis clubs.
      (3)   Recreational uses.
         (a)   The amount of land set aside to provide for permanent usable
open space and recreational use may be up to 15% of the gross development area.
For good cause, this requirement may be met by a recreation payment in lieu
contained in the development agreement, or waived by the city. For the purpose
of this division (A)(3), a RECREATION PAYMENT IN LIEU is a payment by the
developer, proportionate to the value of the land that would meet the
recreational use standard of this chapter, set forth in the development
agreement, and intended for use by the city to develop and maintain the
recreation facilities available to the residents of the city.
         (b)   Recreation uses may include a community center, a golf course, a
swimming pool or parks, playgrounds, recreational trail, bike path or other
public recreational uses. Any structure involved in such uses shall have a 25-
foot setback from all property lines.
      (4)   Area regulations. All building setbacks from street right-of-way
lines and from the periphery of the project shall be subject to the approval of
the governing body.
      (5)   Development agreement. Before the modification of the zoning
requirements sought by the applicant for a planned unit development may be
approved, the applicant/developer shall submit a fully executed development
agreement for consideration and review by the Planning and Zoning Board, and
approval by the City Council.
      (6)   Off-street parking. As regulated in §
156.389.
      (7)   Administrative procedure for a planned unit development.
         (a)   In addition to the administrative requirements set forth in §§
156.495 through
156.502, a planned unit development shall not be permitted until the conditions
listed in division (A)(7)(b) below have been complied with.
         (b)   There shall have been filed with the governing body a written
application for approval, which application shall be accompanied with the
following information and documents.
            1.   The application must be accompanied by an overall development
plan showing the use or uses, dimensions and locations of proposed sites and
other open spaces with such other pertinent information as may be necessary to
determine the contemplated arrangement or use which makes it desirable to apply
regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable under
this chapter. The applicant shall obtain written comments on the proposed
development plan from the Fire Department, State Department of Water and
Natural Resources, all utility companies, Building Inspector and Recreation
Department and submit these with the applications. The proposed development
plan shall be prepared by and have the seal of an architect or engineer duly
registered to practice in the state.
            2.   The governing body shall review the conformity of the proposed
development and shall recognize principles of civic design, land use planning
and site planning. The governing body may impose conditions regarding layout,
circulation and performance of the proposed development and may require that
appropriate deed restrictions be filed.
            3.   The tract or parcel of land involved must be either in one
ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all
the property included or filed by any governmental agency.
            4.   The proposed development must be designed to produce an
environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with its
surrounding neighborhood and must provide standards of open space and areas for
parking adequate for the occupancy proposed. It must include provisions for
recreation areas to meet the needs of the anticipated population.
            5.   This proposed development may contain commercial and
professional uses as an integral part of a residential development. Such uses
shall be planned and gauged primarily for the service and convenience of
residents and people working within, although not residents of the planned
development and shall be authorized only to the extent that such uses are not
available to the residents in reasonable proximity.
            6.   Upon the abandonment of a particular project authorized under
this section or upon the expiration of three years from the authorization
hereunder of a planned development which has not then been completed or
commenced, and an extension of time for completion granted the authorization
shall expire and the land and structures thereon may be used without such
approval for any other lawful purpose permissible within the size, height and
area district in which the planned development is located.
            7.   A development agreement, prepared with language confirming
that all of the forgoing representations, plans and requirements for the
planned unit development are accepted by the applicant/developer and signed by
the applicant/developer and an authorized city official.
            8.   After the development agreement is signed and the planned unit
development project is approved by the City Council, a plat of the development
as finally approved shall be recorded and shall show building lines, common
land, streets, easements and other applicable features required by the
ordinance regulating the subdivisions of land. No building permit shall be
issued until a final plat of the proposed development is approved and recorded.
   (B)   Churches, schools, libraries and medical facilities. Churches,
schools, libraries and medical facilities are permitted in the GR-General
Residential District and MH-1- and MH-2-Mobile Home and Residential District
upon review by the governing body provided all of the following provisions are
met:
      (1)   Area regulations.
         (a)   Front yard. All structures shall have a front yard of not less
than 35 feet, and in no case shall an accessory building be located to extend
into the front yard.
         (b)   Side yard. All structures, including buildings accessory
thereto, shall set back a minimum of 35 feet from all side property lines.
         (c)   Rear yard. All structures, including accessory buildings, shall
have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
         (d)   Lot width. All structures shall be on lots which abut at least
one street for a minimum of 100 feet.
         (e)   Lot area. All structures shall have a lot area of not less than
10,000 square feet.
         (f)   Maximum lot coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall cover
not more than 75% of the lot area.
      (2)   Height regulations. No structure shall exceed four and one-half
stories or 45 feet in height except as provided in §
156.387.
      (3)   Off-street parking. As regulated in §
156.389.
   (C)   Mobile home parks.
      (1)   The following property development shall apply for all mobile home
parks.
         (a)   No parcel of land containing less than one acre and less than
ten mobile home spaces, available at the time of first occupancy, may be used
for the purpose permitted in the mobile home park.
         (b)   The mobile home park shall be subject to the density provisions
of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that there shall be
not less than 4,500 square feet of lot area for each space provided on the
site. This space ration shall include access roads, automobile parking,
accessory building space and recreational area.
         (c)   The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site,
properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of
water. All parts of the site upon which mobile home sites are to be provided
shall be above the regulatory flood protection elevation and shall meet all
requirements of the city’s Floodplain Ordinance in
Chapter 155, if applicable.
         (d)   Regulations for yards are as follows.
            1.   Each mobile home park shall have a front yard of 25 feet
extending for the full width of the parcel devoted to said use.
            2.   Each mobile home park shall have a rear yard and a side yard
on both sides of the parcel devoted to said use of not less than ten feet.
            3.   Where a side or rear yard abuts a street, the yard shall be
not less than 25 feet and all yards shall be landscaped and maintained.
         (e)   No building or structure erected or stationed in this park shall
have a height greater than one story or 15 feet.
         (f)   A mobile home park shall be entirely enclosed on the rear lines
and side lot lines, exclusive of driveways, at its external boundaries by a
solid wall, fence or evergreen hedge not less than seven feet in height. Such
wall, fence or hedge shall not be constructed or planted within the required
front yard setback.
         (g)   Each mobile home park shall be permitted to display on each
street frontage, one identifying sign of a maximum size of nine square feet.
Said sign shall contain thereon only the name and address of the mobile home
park and may be lighted by indirect lighting only.
      (2)   Each mobile home park shall be of sufficient size that, in addition
to the mobile home space, the following areas shall be provided.
         (a)   Each mobile home space shall be at least 40 feet wide, and such
space shall be clearly defined by permanent markers.
         (b)   There shall be a front yard setback of ten feet from all access
roads within the mobile home park.
         (c)   Mobile homes shall be harbored on each space so that there shall
be at least a 20-foot clearance between mobile homes or appurtenances,
provided, however, with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-
end clearance shall be not less than ten feet. No mobile home shall be located
closer than 20 feet from any building within the mobile home park.
         (d)   There shall be at least one paved, off-street parking space for
each mobile home space, which shall be on the same site as the mobile home
served and may be located in the rear or side yard of said mobile home space.
         (e)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a paved patio of
at least 200 square feet and have a storage locker of at least 100 cubic feet.
Storage lockers may be located in locker compounds.
      (3)   (a)   There shall be established and maintained within each park an
automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of spaces within this
area shall be equal to one for every four trailer sites.
         (b)   Access roads within a mobile home park shall be paved to a width
of not less than 24 feet. Where access roads are paved to a width of 35 feet or
more, the required guest parking area shall be waived.
         (c)   Mobile home spaces may abut upon a driveway of not less than 20
feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to the access road within
the mobile home park. Vehicular access shall be provided from a public street,
and all dead-end driveways shall include adequate vehicular turning space.
         (d)   A minimum of six inches of compacted gravel or other suitable
pavement material shall be installed for each trailer space. Size of pads shall
be at least ten feet by 45 feet but in no case smaller than the mobile home
occupying the site.
         (e)   Walkways not less than three feet wide shall be provided from
the mobile home spaces to the service building.
         (f)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a water meter and
a connection to a sanitary sewer.
         (g)   There shall be provided a park and recreation area having a
minimum of 150 square feet for each mobile home space. Areas shall be
consolidated into usable areas with minimum dimensions of not less than 30
feet.
         (h)   Axles and wheel drums, or similar devices, shall not be removed
from mobile homes. Mobile homes shall not be attached to or placed on the
ground in a manner that would prevent or obstruct their ready movement, except
for the purpose of making repairs.
         (i)   Trailers, with or without toilet facilities, that cannot be
connected to a sanitary sewer, shall not be permitted in a mobile home park.
         (j)   Entry way and other similar enclosed structures shall be subject
to a building permit and shall meet all setback requirements.
         (k)   Mobile homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential uses within the mobile home parks.
      (4)   Application for permit.
         (a)   An application for a mobile home park permit shall be as
regulated hereunder and as in the Building Code adopted by the city in §
150.025. The application for a permit shall be filed with and issued by the
Building Inspector. Each application shall be accompanied by three copies of
the plot plan drawn to scale, and prepared by a licensed engineer or architect.
Such copies shall be reviewed and approved by the governing body, the State
Department of Water and Natural Resources and the City Engineer or Building
Inspector.
         (b)   The following information shall be shown:
            1.   The location and legal description of the proposed mobile home
park;
            2.   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park;
            3.   The proposed use of buildings shown on the site;
            4.   The location and size of all mobile home spaces;
            5.   The location of all points of entry and exit for motor
vehicles and internal circulation pattern;
            6.   The location of all landscaping to be provided;
            7.   The location of all lighting standards to be provided;
            8.   The location of all walls and fences and the indication of
their height and the materials of their construction; and the name and address
of the applicant; and
            9.   Such other architectural and engineering data as may be
required to permit the City Engineer or Building Inspector and governing body
to determine if the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
         (c)   A time schedule for development shall be prepared, which shall
demonstrate the applicant’s readiness and ability to provide the proposed
services, and all required improvements and facilities shall be installed
within one year.
   (D)   Other uses permitted on review.
      (1)   Cemetery.
         (a)   The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the
development of a system of collector and larger streets in the vicinity of such
site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare.
         (b)   Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less
than 20 acres.
         (c)   All other structures, including, but not limited to, mausoleum,
permanent monument or maintenance building shall be set back not less than 25
feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.
         (d)   All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25
feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.
         (e)   All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained.
      (2)   Drive-in theater.
         (a)   The site must have direct access to a major public road.
         (b)   In addition to the required setbacks from streets and highways,
all yards shall be planted and maintained as a landscaped strip.
         (c)   The theater screen shall not be visible form any public street
within 1,500 feet. In addition, cars parked in the viewing area shall be
screened on all sides by a wall, fence or densely planted evergreen hedge not
less than six feet in height.
         (d)   Loading space for patrons waiting for admission to the theater
shall be equal to 20% of the capacity of the theater. All entrances and exits
shall be separated, and internal circulation shall be laid out to provide one-
way traffic.
         (e)   Sale of refreshments shall be limited to patrons of the theater.
         (f)   No central loudspeakers shall be permitted.
         (g)   All parking areas and access-ways shall be adequately lighted,
provided, however, that such lighting shall be shielded to prevent any glare or
reflection onto a public street or onto neighboring properties.
         (h)   Amusement parks or kiddylands shall be limited to patrons of the
theater.
         (i)   The connecting driveways shall be surfaced with permanent
paving, maintained in good condition and free of all weeds, dust, trash and
other debris.
      (3)   Public and private utilities and service. Where permitted, public
and private utilities and services shall be subject to the following
requirements.
         (a)   State Department of Water and Natural Resources Report.
Application for permission to operate waterworks and/or sewage treatment plants
shall be accompanied by a report and a recommendation from the State Department
of Water and Natural Resources. Such recommendations as to design and
construction, type of treatment, source of water, standards for testing and
sampling and standards for the quality of effluent shall be incorporated into
and made a part of the application.
         (b)   Lot area and location. The required lot area and location shall
be specified as part of the application and shall be determined in relating to
the proposed use, the intensity of such use and the effects of such use upon
the environment.
         (c)   Fencing and/or screening. Where findings indicate that a hazard
may result or that interference with the development or use and enjoyment of
surrounding residential properties may ensue, fencing or screening with an
evergreen hedge or other shielding material may be required in a manner
consistent with such findings.
      (4)   Private day nurseries and kindergartens.
         (a)   A fenced play area shall be provided. No portion of the fenced
play area shall be located closer than 35 feet to any public street.
         (b)   In addition to the requirements above, the facilities, operation
and maintenance shall meet the requirements of the Department of Social
Services.
      (5)   Automobile wrecking and junk yards.
         (a)   Location. Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote
the breeding of vermin, no such operation shall be permitted closer than 300
feet from any established residential district.
         (b)   Screening. All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking
operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence or wall,
excepting driveway areas, having a minimum height of eight feet. Storage
between the street and such fence or wall is expressly prohibited. Any fence or
wall erected for screening purposes shall be within the buildable area of the
lot and shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition.
         (c)   Off-street parking. As regulated in §
156.389.
         (d)   Ingress and egress.
            1.   The number of vehicular access driveways permitted on any
single street frontage should be limited to:
               a.   One driveway where the parcel to be used has a maximum
street frontage of 100 feet or less; and
               b.   Two driveways where the street frontage exceeds 100 feet.
            2.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be limited to 25
feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      (6)   Recreational fads. An application for a permit for recreational
fads, including trampoline centers, kart tracks and similar recreation
activities not specifically covered by these regulations, shall be reviewed by
the governing body.
      (7)   On-lot sewage disposal system. Any use involving a principal
structure which is not served by a sanitary sewer, in addition to other
requirements, shall have an approved on-lot sewage disposal system. Plans and
specifications for the on-lot sewage disposal system shall be approved by the
State Department of Water and Natural Resources. The approval may be made
contingent upon an agreement that the structure will be connected to a sanitary
sewer when plans indicate that such sewer will be extended or constructed and
become available. The approval may further stipulate an increase in lot size to
assure appropriate septic field, drainage and relation to abutting development
or any classified stream.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 1) (Ord. 2012-14, passed 8-21-2012) Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.386 ACCESSORY USES.
   The uses of land, buildings and other structures permitted in each of the
districts established by this chapter are designated by listing the principal
uses permitted. In addition to such principal uses, this section shall regulate
uses customarily incidental to any principal use permitted in the district.
   (A)   General provisions. Each permitted accessory use shall:
      (1)   Be customarily incidental to the principal use established on the
same lot;
      (2)   Be subordinate to and serve such principal use;
      (3)   Be subordinate in area, extent and purpose to such principal use;
and
      (4)   Contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity of users of
such principal use.
   (B)   Permitted accessory structures. Accessory uses shall be permitted as
specified above, and such accessory uses shall be applicable to the principal
use.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 2)
§ 156.387 HEIGHT.
   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and
supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in
this chapter.
   (A)   In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted
as a half story.
   (B)   The following structures or parts thereof are hereby exempt from the
height limitations set forth in the zoning districts:
      (1)   Agricultural buildings, such as barn, silo and windmill, but not
including dwellings;
      (2)   Chimneys, smokestacks, penthouse, spires, flagpoles, ventilators,
skylights, derricks, conveyors and cooling towers;
      (3)   Radio and television antennae and towers, observation towers and
power transmission towers;
      (4)   Water tanks and standpipes; and
      (5)   Other similar and necessary mechanical appurtenances pertaining to
and necessary to the permitted uses of the districts in which they are located,
provided that they are not used for human occupancy.
   (C)   Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and semi-
public buildings may exceed the height limitations of the district if the
minimum depth of the front, side and rear yards required in the district is
increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or
semi-public structure exceeds the prescribed height limit.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 3)
§ 156.388 YARD, BUILDING SETBACK AND OPEN SPACE EXCEPTIONS.
   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and
supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in
this chapter.
   (A)   No yard, open space or lot area required for a building or structure
shall, during its life, be occupied by any other building or structure except:
      (1)   Awnings and canopies, as provided for in the Building Code adopted
by the city in §
150.025;
      (2)   Bay windows and chimneys, not to exceed two feet, in front and rear
yards;
      (3)   Driveways, curbs, sidewalks and steps, provided, however, steps or
stairs to dwelling, non-enclosed, not to exceed three feet;
      (4)   Fences, walls and hedges, subject to the regulations as set forth
in this section;
      (5)   Flagpoles;
      (6)   Garbage disposal equipment, non-permanent;
      (7)   Landscape features, planting boxes and recreational equipment;
      (8)   Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than
five feet;
      (9)   Parking space subject to the regulations set forth in §
156.392;
      (10)   Signs, subject to the regulations set forth in §
156.392;
      (11)   Terraces (open) and porches (non-enclosed) not to exceed six feet
in front or rear yard;
      (12)   Trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants subject to the vision
requirements in this section; and
      (13)   Eaves and overhangs may extend up to 24 inches into any required
yard.
   (B)   The following regulations provide for the maximum safety of persons
using sidewalks and streets, and for the maximum enjoyment of the use of
property.
      (1)   On any corner lot where a front and side yard is required, no wall,
fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at
elevations between two and one-half feet and ten feet above the crown of the
adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained within a triangle formed by
measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot
lines a distance of 25 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting
the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot
adjacent to the street intersections.
      (2)   In any required front yard, except as provided in division (B)(1)
above, no fence, wall, hedge or yard ornament shall be permitted above the
height of three and one-half feet.
   (C)   The purpose here is to clarify certain conditions pertaining to the
use of lots and access points.
      (1)   In residential districts, if 25% or more of the lots on one side of
the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of
which have observed an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no
building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no
building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so
established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a
front yard of a greater depth than 50 feet.
      (2)   No recorded lot shall be divided into two or more lots by platting
or metes and bound description unless such division results in the creation of
lots each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the
district in which the property is located. No reduction in the size of a
recorded lot below the minimum requirements of this chapter shall be permitted.
      (3)   Where there are existing recorded lots which do not meet the
minimum lot area requirement and are under separate ownership, single-family
dwellings only may be constructed as long as side yards shall be not less than
four feet, and the sum of the side yards shall not be less than eight feet and
as long as all other requirements, except lot size, are met.
      (4)   Where a permitted use on land involves no structures, such use,
excluding agricultural uses, shall nonetheless comply with all yards and
minimum lot area requirements applicable to the district in which located, as
well as obtain any other license or permit applicable to that particular use.
      (5)   Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the
depth of the front yard shall be measured starting at a point 25 feet from the
centerline of the street easement.
      (6)   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at
least one street for at least 50 feet with the exception of lots fronting a
cul-de-sac, in which case a minimum width of 50 feet measured at the front
building line will be required. A street shall form the direct and primary
means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist,
shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress.
      (7)   An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street
shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the street right-of-way line. Where
the garage faces a side street on a corner lot, this distance shall be 18 feet.
      (8)   Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required front
yard.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 4)
§ 156.389 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. In all districts, except that portion of the General
Commercial District described as follows: (As illustrated on the zoning map on
file at the city’s Finance Office.) At any time any building or structure is
erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, there shall be provided off-
street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the following
requirements.
      (1)   All church structures existing at the effective date of this
chapter shall be allowed to increase their present seating capacity by 25%
without increasing their present off-street parking facilities.
      (2)   Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either
on the same lot or within 600 feet of the building it is intended to serve
measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the
off-street parking lot, provided, however, churches may establish joint parking
facilities not to exceed 50% of the required spaces, with institutions and
agencies that do not have a time conflict in parking demand. The joint parking
facilities shall be located no further than 400 feet from the church sanctuary.
      (3)   Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking
lot, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the lot
they are intended to serve.
      (4)   For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking
requirements shall be interpreted by the governing body.
      (5)   Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not
be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided
elsewhere.
      (6)   Off-street parking existing at effective date of these regulations
in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be
reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building
or use.
      (7)   Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required
off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall
be not less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses
computed separately.
      (8)   The required off-street parking shall be for occupants, employees,
visitors and patrons and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles. The storage
of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale or the repair of vehicles on such
parking area is prohibited.
      (9)   Every company car, truck, tractor and trailer normally stored at
the plant site shall be provided with off-street parking space in an area
reserved for the use as determined by the governing body.
      (10)   In cases of dual functioning of off-street parking where operating
hours do not overlap, the governing body may grant an exception.
      (11)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be
determined in accordance with the following table.
Table of Parking Spaces Required
Uses Parking Spaces Required
Table of Parking Spaces Required
Uses                                    Parking Spaces Required
                                        One space for each two employees, plus
Automobile wrecking, junk or salvage    one space for each 10,000 square feet
yard which offers for sale to the       of lot area, or two spaces for each 100
public any new or used merchandise.     square feet of floor area, whichever is
                                        the greater.
Banks, business or professional         One per 300 square feet of usable floor
offices.                                area, plus one per each three
                                        employees.
Barber shop or beauty parlor.           Two per barber or beauty shop chair.
                                        One space for each three boarders. One
Boarding or rooming house.              for each two guests provided overnight
                                        accommodations.
Bowling Alleys.                         Two and one-half per alley.
                                        One per four seats; or one per 30
Churches.                               square feet of usable floor area of
                                        auditorium, whichever is greater.
Commercial recreation uses.             One per three patrons, based on the
                                        design capacity of the facility.
Commercial or trade schools.            One per three students plus two per
                                        three employees.
Country clubs.                          One per five members.
Dormitories, fraternity or sorority.    One per each three permanent residents.
Dwellings (single, two-family and semi- Two per dwelling unit.
detached).
                                        One and one-fourth spaces per dwelling
Dwellings, (multiple-family and         unit for the first 20 units, plus one
attached).                              space for each dwelling unit exceeding
                                        20 units.
Establishments for sale and consumption One per each employee, plus one per 200
on the premises of beverages, food or   square feet of usable floor space.
refreshment.
Gasoline service stations.              One parking space for each employee,
                                        plus two spaces for each service bay.
                                        One per 300 square feet of usable floor
                                        area, plus one per each three
Governmental office buildings.          employees. Every governmental vehicle
                                        shall be provided with a reserved off-
                                        street parking space.
                                        One space for each four patients beds;
Homes for the aged, sanatoriums,        plus one space for each staff doctor,
convalescent or nursing homes.          plus one space for each two employees,
                                        including nurses.
                                        One per three patient beds, exclusive
                                        of bassinets, plus one space for each
Hospitals.                              two employees, including nurses on the
                                        maximum working shift, plus adequate
                                        area for parking emergency vehicles.
Hotel.                                  One per two rooms or suite, plus two
                                        per three employees.
Hotel (apartment).                      One parking space for each two
                                        individual rooms or apartments.
                                        One per two employees on the combined
                                        two largest successive shifts, plus
Industrial establishments.              adequate parking space for customer and
                                        visitor vehicles as determined by the
                                        governing body.
Library.                                One for each 400 square feet of floor
                                        space.
                                        Three patient parking spaces per staff
Medical clinics.                        doctor; plus one per staff doctor; plus
                                        two per three other employees.
                                        Five spaces per parlor or chapel unit,
Mortuaries or funeral parlors.          or one per four seats, whichever is
                                        greater.
Motels and tourist courts.              One per guest bedroom.
Private clubs, lodge or union           One per three members based on the
headquarters.                           design capacity of the facility.
Retail stores, supermarkets, department One per 200 square feet of retail floor
service establishments except as        space, plus one per employee.
otherwise specified herein.
                                        Two spaces per three teachers and
Elementary, junior high and the         employees normally engaged in or about
equivalent private or parochial         the building or grounds; plus one space
schools.                                for each 150 square feet of seating
                                        area, including aisles, in any
                                        auditorium.
                                        Two spaces per three teachers and
                                        employees normally engaged in or about
                                        the building or grounds, plus one space
Senior high schools and the equivalent  per five students, or one space for
private or parochial schools.           each 150 square feet of seating area,
                                        including aisles, in any auditorium,
                                        gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be
                                        used as an auditorium, whichever is the
                                        greater.
                                        Two parking spaces per three teachers
Kindergartens, day schools and the      and employees normally engaged in or
equivalent private or parochial         about the building or grounds, plus one
schools.                                off-street loading space per eight
                                        pupils.
                                        There shall be a ratio of four square
                                        feet of parking (including driveways
Shopping centers.                       required for ingress and egress and
                                        circulation ) to each one square foot
                                        of store area.
Stadiums and sports.                    One per four seats or 12 feet of
                                        benches.
Swimming pools.                         One per 30 square feet of water area.
Theaters, auditoriums and places of     One per three seats.
assembly with fixed seats.
Theaters, auditoriums and places of     One per three people based on the
assembly without fixed seats.           design capacity of the structure.
                                        One for every 50 square feet of
Wholesale establishments and business   customer service area, plus two per
services.                               three employees based on the design
                                        capacity of the largest shift.
 
   (B)   Off-street parking lot layout, construction and maintenance. Wherever
the required off-street parking requires the building of a parking lot, and
wherever a parking lot is built, such parking lot shall be laid out,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations.
      (1)   Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family uses, all
areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size
that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress.
      (2)   Each parking space shall be not less than 200 square feet in area
and shall be a definitely designated stall adequate for one motor vehicle.
      (3)   In any determination of parking requirements as set forth in this
section, where the resultant figure contains a fraction, any fraction less than
one-half may be dropped, and any fraction one-half or more shall be counted as
one parking space.
      (4)   Clearly defined driveways used for ingress and egress shall be
confined to and shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      (5)   All areas devoted to permanent off-street parking as required under
this section shall be of a hard-surface construction of either asphalt or
concrete and maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from
continuous use.
      (6)   The parking lot shall be drained to eliminate surface water.
      (7)   Where the parking lot abuts side lot lines of a residential
district, there shall be established a setback line ten feet from such side lot
line.
      (8)   Where the parking lot is contiguous to a residential district which
has common frontage in the same block with the parking lot, there shall be
established a setback line of 25 feet from the street lot line.
      (9)   Where the parking lot lies across the street and opposite a
residential district, wherein the lots front on such street, there shall be
established a setback line 25 feet from the street lot line.
      (10)   Where the parking lot abuts rear property lines of a residential
district, there shall be established a setback line five feet from the rear lot
line.
      (11)   Where parking is to be provided in the front yard of a multiple-
family dwelling, there shall be established a setback line ten feet from the
street lot line. The land between the setback line and the lot line in a
parking lot is for the purpose of this chapter called a buffer strip. The
ground in the front buffer strip shall be prepared and shall be planted with
trees, shrubs and grass.
      (12)   Plans for the layout of a parking lot must be approved by the
governing body.
      (13)   The governing body shall have the authority to approve off-street
parking in any district which is more restrictive than that required for the
major land use it is intended to serve subject to the preceding conditions. The
following conditions shall also apply.
         (a)   The parking lot shall not have access from the more restrictive
district.
         (b)   All sides of the lot, except those openings for ingress and
egress shall be enclosed with an opaque ornamental fence, wall or dense
evergreen hedge having a height of not less than five nor more than six feet.
Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good condition. Bumper stops
shall be provided so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the buffer
strip.
         (c)   The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be
such as not to interfere with residential districts.
         (d)   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs
used to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the
lot. Only non-intermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 5) (Ord. 2005-10, passed 5-20-2005; Ord. 2013-
20, passed 12-4-2013) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.390 STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types shall not be permanently
parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any
residential district except in accordance with the following provisions.
   (A)   Not more than one commercial vehicle per family living on the
premises, which does not exceed two tons rated capacity, shall be permitted;
and in no case shall a commercial vehicle of over two tons, used for hauling
gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted.
   (B)   In no case shall any vehicle containing explosives be permitted.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 6) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.391 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In all districts and on the same premises with every building,
structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage
warehouse goods, display, a department store, a wholesale store, a market, a
hotel, a hospital or other uses similarly involving the receipt or
distributions of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided
and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading
service adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading in order to
avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys.
   (B)   Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as follows.
      (1)   One off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided for
buildings up to and including 20,000 square feet of floor area, plus one
additional off-street loading and unloading space for each additional 20,000
square feet of floor area up to and including 100,000 square feet.
      (2)   There shall be provided an additional off-street loading and
unloading space for each additional 40,000 square feet of floor area in excess
over 100,000 square feet.
      (3)   Where trailer trucks are involved, such loading and unloading space
shall be an area 12 feet by 40 feet with a 14-foot height clearance and shall
be designed with appropriate means of truck access to a street or alley as well
as adequate maneuvering area.
      (4)   All areas devoted to permanent off-street loading and unloading as
required under this section shall be of a sealed-surface construction and
maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 7)
§ 156.392 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations.
   (A)   There shall be a building setback from all right-of-way lines a
distance of not less than 40 feet.
   (B)   Service stations shall not be constructed closer than 50 feet to any
residential district.
   (C)   The minimum distance between the intersection of right-of-way lines at
a corner lot and the driveway to a service station shall not be less than 40
feet.
   (D)   A raised curb at least six inches in height shall be constructed on
all street property lines, except at driveway openings.
   (E)   The length of curb openings shall not exceed 30 feet.
   (F)   When two curb openings are giving access to a single street, they
shall be separated by an island with a minimum dimension of 25 feet at both the
edge of the pavement and the right-of way line. Curb cuts for driveways shall
not be located closer than ten feet to any adjoining property line.
   (G)   To ensure that sufficient room be provided on either side of the pumps
without intruding upon sidewalks or on adjoining property, gasoline pumps shall
not be located closer than 50 feet from any residential district.
   (H)   Gasoline pumps shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any public
right-of-way line.
   (I)   A masonry wall or solid fence shall be constructed when service
station property abuts property zoned for residential purposes. Such wall shall
be not less than six feet in height and all required yards shall be landscaped
and maintained.
   (J)   Off-street parking shall be as regulated in §
156.389.
   (K)   Signs shall be as regulated in §
156.392.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 8)
§ 156.393 CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.
   This section defines customary home occupations and prescribes the
conditions under which such occupations shall be permitted.
   (A)   A customary home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession
conducted by members of the family residing on the premises and conducted
entirely within the dwelling. In connection with a home occupation, no stock in
trade shall be displayed outside the dwelling, and no alteration to any
building shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized
in whole or in part for any purpose other than a residential unit, including
permitted accessory buildings.
   (B)   The following occupations subject to the requirements of division (A)
above are permitted as customary home occupations:
      (1)   Antiques, provided, however, that outdoor display is prohibited;
      (2)   Artist, sculptor, author;
      (3)   Barber shop and beauty shop operated by only two members of the
residence;
      (4)   Dressmaker, milliner, seamstress, tailor, interior decorator;
      (5)   Professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer,
architect or accountant within a dwelling occupied by the same, provided that
not more than one paid assistant shall be employed;
      (6)   Teaching, including tutoring, musical instruction or dancing, but
limited to one pupil per teacher at any given time;
      (7)   Not more than 25% of the floor area in the structure can be sued
for customary home occupations; and
      (8)   Any other similar use which the governing body deems to be a home
occupation.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 9) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.394 TEMPORARY USES.
   The regulations contained in this section are necessary to govern the
operation of certain transitory or seasonal uses, non-permanent in nature.
   (A)   Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the Building
Inspector and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A survey or legal description of the property to be used, rented or
leased for a temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately
portray the property;
      (2)   A description of the proposed use; and
      (3)   Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, setbacks
of sanitary facilities and availability of parking space to service the
proposed use.
   (B)   The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall also be
subject to the specific regulations and time limits which follow, and to the
regulations of any district in which such use is located.
      (1)   Carnival or circus. In any nonresidential district, a temporary use
permit may be issued for a carnival or circus, but such permit shall be issued
for a period of not longer than 15 days. Such a use shall set back from all
residential districts a distance of 100 feet or more.
      (2)   Temporary buildings. In any district, a temporary use permit may be
issued for a contractor’s temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to a
construction project. Such office or shed shall not contain sleeping or cooking
accommodations. Such permit shall be valid for not more than one year but may
be renewed a maximum of two one-year extensions. However, such office or shed
shall be removed upon completion of the construction project or upon expiration
of the temporary use permit, whichever occurs sooner.
      (3)   Real estate sales office. In any district, a temporary use permit
may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any approved new
subdivision. Such office shall contain no sleeping or cooking accommodations.
Such permit shall be valid for not more than one year, but may be renewed a
maximum of three one-year extensions. Such office shall be removed or converted
to a conforming use upon completion of the development of the subdivision or
upon expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever occurs sooner.
      (4)   Spa malt beverage on/off-sale license.
         (a)   Any premises licensed under SDCL Chapter 36-15 may apply for
this temporary use during the period from July 30 through August 17 by
following the process set forth above.
         (b)   An application under this division (B)(4) shall include an
acknowledgment by the applicant that under the inspection provisions of SDCL §
35-2-2.1 any temporary use approved the Council shall not include any use from
July 31 through August 16, when the licensee shall be closed for inspection.
The application shall also contain a specific statement of the portions of the
IBC governing the bar and restaurant class of occupancy which applicant
requests be waived. The hours of serving a malt beverage must not be greater
than the hours that the establishment provides its principal services (spa and
health and/or beauty treatments) every day it is operational.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 10) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 156.395 TENTS.
   No tent shall be used, erected or maintained as living quarters.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 11) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.396 SWIMMING POOLS.
   The following regulations shall apply to swimming pools.
   (A)   A private swimming pool shall be any pool or open tank not located
within a completely enclosed building and containing or normally capable of
containing water to a depth at any point greater than one and one-half feet.
Private swimming pools are permitted in any residential district, provided:
      (1)   The pool is intended and is to be used solely for enjoyment of the
occupants of the property on which it is located and their guests;
      (2)   No swimming pool or part thereof, excluding aprons, walks and
equipment rooms, shall protrude into any required front or side yards; and
      (3)   The swimming pool area shall be so walled or fenced so as to
prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent
properties. Said fence or wall shall be not less than five feet in height and
maintained in good condition.
   (B)   A community or club swimming pool not open to the public shall be any
pool constructed by an association of property owners, or by a private club for
use and enjoyment by members of the association or club and their families and
guests. Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the following
conditions and requirements.
      (1)   The pool is intended solely for the enjoyment of the members and
families and guests of members of the association or club under whose ownership
or jurisdiction the pool is operated.
      (2)   The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used
by the bathers, shall be not closer than 50 feet to any property line of the
property on which located.
      (3)   The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be
so walled or fenced so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the
street or adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall be not less than five
feet in height and maintained in good condition. The area surrounding the
enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped with
grass, hardy shrubs and trees, and maintained in good condition.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 12) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.397 LIGHTING.
   Lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all
residential districts and shall be so situated so as not to reflect directly
onto any public rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. V, § 13)
DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 156.410 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   The Downtown District Overlay Zoning is added as an overlay district
to the existing zoning and signage for this area. All provisions of the
underlying district zoning are applicable. In instances where the Downtown
Overlay Zoning District requirements or allowances contradict the underlying
zoning district or signage regulations, the Downtown District Overlay Zoning
shall be controlling. When a building or feature identified within this overlay
or within the underlying zoning district is replaced, the replacement shall
conform to the regulations.
   (B)   This district is intended to preserve and enhance the unique character
of the area the district encompasses by establishing special standards that
address aesthetics, access, site development, screening, landscaping and
parking.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.01) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 156.411 BOUNDARIES.
   The Downtown Overlay District is generally located within the following
boundaries: property located north of Sherman Street to and including
properties fronting Lazelle, on the east properties fronting Middle Street and
to the west, properties fronting 4th Street.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.02) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 156.412 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   General building design.
      (1)   The architecture of buildings in this zone shall generally reflect
an urban main street quality. While variations in architectural style and
interest will be accommodated, the built environment should be developed to a
human scale and encourage pedestrian circulation.
      (2)   The following general building design criteria apply to development
within this zone.
         (a)   Buildings within the same development complex or setting shall
consistently use colors, materials, textures, patterns and rhythms found with
other buildings in the complex.
         (b)   The perceived mass of a building shall be broken down by using
building facade articulation, variations in roof forms, mass and void
techniques, modification of textures and colors, deep set windows, wide
building arcades, the accenting of building entries and the use of building
focal points or vertical accents. All elevations of the building shall express
consistent architectural detailing and character.
         (c)   Development design should encourage walking and biking rather
than driving between businesses.
   (B)   Mixed-use development.
      (1)   Mixed use development is highly encouraged, specifically providing
commercial retail on the street level and residential/office uses on second and
higher stories.
      (2)   The residential portion of a mixed-use building should incorporate
typical residential features such as porches and balconies that offer facade
articulation and transparency.
      (3)   Balconies may overhang a sidewalk and encroach into the public
right-of-way by no more than two-thirds of the width of the sidewalk up to a
maximum balcony width of six feet. Measurement for this dimension shall be in a
direct line from the property line to the back of the curb. No balcony shall be
permitted which encroaches into any state highway right-of-way-area.
      (4)   Additions shall be designed so as not to obscure, alter or destroy
the character of the original building when viewed from a public right-of-way.
      (5)   Setback regulations are as follows.
         (a)   All new construction shall have lot coverage of at least 50% of
the lot area.
         (b)   All new buildings constructed are encouraged to have set backs
of at least ten feet from the street right-of-way.
         (c)   All new buildings shall be set back from alleyways at least 25
feet to allow for parking.
   (C)   Awning and arcade design.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Sign lettering and/or logos shall comprise no more than 30% of
the total exterior surface of an awning or canopy and shall be included in the
calculation of the allowable sign area. Existing awnings or canopies that
exceed this requirement may remain until they are replaced.
         (b)   Awnings may be provided along the entire frontage of commercial
buildings. Marquees are encouraged where appropriate.
         (c)   Awnings or canopies shall be hung above the display window space
at least eight to ten feet above the public walkway with a minimum eight-foot
vertical clearance. They may extend six to eight feet over the walkway from the
building’s face.
      (2)   Fenestration.
         (a)   Buildings should meet the ground with a solid base treatment
that creates a visual transition from sidewalk to building wall.
         (b)   Windows shall not be opaque.
         (c)   Building entrances should be defined for ease of use. Weather
protection features are also encouraged. Display windows on the ground floor of
retail and commercial buildings shall be the predominant surface on the first
story. New commercial construction should provide a minimum of 40% of the first
floor wall surface in windows that face the street.
   (D)   Building materials.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Structures’ facades should consist of durable and natural
appearing materials.
         (b)   The use and design of materials in the composition of structures
shall consider pedestrian level durability.
      (2)   Building massing and articulation.
         (a)   Flexibility in the division of larger buildings into smaller
tenant spaces should be considered in the design and articulation of storefront
modules.
         (b)   Facades should be well composed and articulated with a variety
of materials and forms.
         (c)   Cornice lines, accent bands and other facade elements can create
interesting shadow effects, contributing to the visual interest of a facade.
         (d)   Building entrances shall be designed in a manner which breaks up
the building mass and aids in pedestrian orientation.
         (e)   Building forms shall be articulated by varying roof heights and
wall planes. Long, unbroken volumes and large, unarticulated wall and roof
planes are not appropriate.
         (f)   The layout of primary buildings and outlot buildings should be
varied to achieve an interesting visual environment.
         (g)   Multiple-story taller buildings may be acceptable where
compatible with adjoining uses and designed to minimize the appearance of
building bulk and mass. This can be accomplished through upper story setbacks,
changes in building materials and the articulation of building details.
   (E)   Signage and marketing display.
      (1)   Sign design for the Downtown Overlay District is not based on a
specific theme or style, but rather shall be an extension of the primary
building quality and aesthetics.
      (2)   Wall signs should be integrated to appear part of the building
facade.
      (3)   When there are multiple tenants for commercial uses, all signs
shall be consistent and architecturally integrated in the form of size, shape,
color, materials, lighting and placement.
      (4)   Visible raceways and transformers for individual letters are
discouraged.
      (5)   In general, signs shall enhance the visual interest and remain
subordinate to the overall character of the downtown area.
      (6)   Wall signs shall be located on the upper portion of the first floor
storefront and shall be centered within an area uninterrupted by doors, windows
or architectural details.
      (7)   Sign mounting brackets and support structures shall match other
fixture materials used on the facade of the building.
      (8)   To convey a subtle appearance, the use of back-lit or reverse
channel letters with halo illumination rather than internally-lit signs are
encouraged.
      (9)   Facade-mounted fin signs should be perpendicular to the facade of
the building and at least eight feet above the sidewalk. The outside edge must
be at least two feet from the curb line, and no more than four feet from the
face of the building.
      (10)   Window signs shall be limited to 25% coverage of the window area,
including temporary and “sale” signs.
      (11)   Internally illuminated flashing signs in windows are prohibited.
      (12)   Wall-mounted signs located above the store front area, or signage,
should be integrated into the design of the facade, taking on characteristics
of the scale, lines and features of the facade.
      (13)   For two-story buildings a horizontal transition element should be
utilized between the first floor and upper stories. Typically, this is a
location for signage, canopies or awnings. The detail shall break the plane of
the wall surfaces and create a frame for the first floor storefront design.
      (14)   Display or placement of any retail merchandise outside of a
building during non-business hours shall not be more than six feet from the
front exterior wall of the building. Retail merchandise shall not include
retail landscaping merchandise and products.
   (F)   Parking lots.
      (1)   Surface parking lots shall not create significant gaps along the
street and sidewalk. Any surface lot in the district shall:
         (a)   Use landscaping, trees, colonnades or other construction to
maintain the line formed by buildings along the sidewalk;
         (b)   Make sure there is adequate perimeter landscaping that is high
enough to screen but low enough to let people feel safe;
         (c)   Interior landscaping should especially include shade trees;
         (d)   Provide adequate direction and information signs for motorists;
and
         (e)   Be hard surfaced (asphalt, concrete or pavers).
      (2)   Parking lots fronting Main Street are allowable as long as they
directly service an adjoining business and do not represent a majority of the
landowner’s holding. Curb cuts into the parking area from Main Street would be
allowable to allow vehicular ingress into the parking area.
   (G)   Lighting.
      (1)   Lighting of building facades or the use of architectural lighting
that results in hot spots on a building wall is highly discouraged.
      (2)   The use of bollard lighting for pedestrian pathways and parking
areas is encouraged and is preferable to lights mounted on walls, posts or
standards.
   (H)   Access, parking and circulation. Access, parking and circulation shall
provide walkways adjacent to roadways, but separate from the curb whenever
possible with landscaping, a bicycle lane or on-street parking. All multi-
family dwelling units shall provide a minimum of one off-street parking space
per dwelling unit. For multi-family dwelling units of five and above, there
shall be additional spaces for guest parking as provided in the following
chart.
Dwelling units Guest Parking Spaces
Dwelling units Guest Parking Spaces
5-7            1
8-11           2
12-15          3
16-19          4
20-23          5
24-27          6
28 +           1 additional space per dwelling unit
 
   (I)   Open space and amenities.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Outdoor common areas, including hardscape plazas, green spaces,
water features and play areas, are desirable elements and should be treated as
visual and functional focal points.
         (b)   The use of public art is encouraged.
         (c)   Integrate plazas and other spaces of varying scales to provide
rest, relaxation and outdoor dining opportunities for shoppers and other
visitors. Spaces should be conveniently positioned adjacent to walkways and
buildings.
         (d)   Site features should be varied in color, pattern and texture
within a coordinated palette that relates to the building architecture. High
quality materials and finishes shall be used throughout.
         (e)   Where practical, benches, water fountains and waste receptacles
should be visually and functionally coordinated with the overall site design.
The location of waste receptacles shall be provided as part of the development
plan.
         (f)   Any newly developed or improved open space accessible to the
public should generally:
            1.   Create a comfortable and interesting place to rest;
            2.   Let people clearly know it is there and that it is accessible;
            3.   Provide plenty of seating (approximately one linear foot for
every 30 square feet of paved open space);
            4.   Have enough lighting to create a safe nighttime environment;
            5.   Use fountains or other water features; and
            6.   Incorporate public art.
      (2)   Landscaping.
         (a)   For the sake of visual continuity, large shade trees should be
planted in the right-of-way every 25 feet to 35 feet along the curb line in
order to create a continuous canopy.
         (b)   A mix of ornamental and shade trees can be planted outside the
right-of-way for both shade and visual variety.
   (J)   Screening.
      (1)   Utility cabinets and pedestals must be located where they can be
screened from view.
      (2)   Utility cabinets and pedestal shall not be located within a
landscaping island in a parking lot where they are subject to vehicle damage.
Consideration shall be given to accessibility for required service and
maintenance of such facilities.
      (3)   Dumpsters shall be fully screened from view with durable building
materials that are coordinated with the overall building design.
      (4)   Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened by architectural
elements and painted to match the color of the roof.
      (5)   Where feasible, loading, service and equipment areas shall not be
visible from public roadways or parking areas.
      (6)   Outdoor storage areas must be located behind or beside buildings
and be shielded from view of the street or alley. Effective October 1, 2019, no
metal Conex-style storage containers larger than 144 square feet, or semi-
trailers may be used for storage in this district unless completely screened,
as defined in this division (J), from view of the public from the right-of-way.
Use of chain-link fencing as screening is not allowed. During the Rally period
of July 15 through August 15, this provision will be suspended.
   (K)   Snow removal areas. For any multi-family dwelling of three or more
units, a snow removal area shall be designated that will not interfere with the
normal requirements for parking, sight triangles or landscaping.
   (L)   Garbage collection areas. For any multi-family dwelling of three or
more units, a garbage collection area shall be designated. The designated
garbage area must be screened.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.03) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.413 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   All proposed developments within this zoning overlay district shall
apply for a building permit through the City Planning and Permitting Office.
The plan review shall include the proposed development’s consistency with the
guidelines established in this chapter. If the city staff believes that the
project is insufficient, the project will be referred to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval.
   (B)   If the project does not receive approval from the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the developer may appeal the denial to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.04) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 156.414 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY AND TEMPORARY VENDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Effective January 1, 2014, all structures located within the Downtown
Overlay District shall be inspected to show the structure meets all state
electrical and plumbing requirements whenever a change of occupancy (as defined
in the most current building code adopted by the city) occurs or when a
temporary vending permit is requested for any area within the structure. Any
deficiencies found that threaten the safety of occupants must be rectified in
accordance with State Electrical and Plumbing Code requirements before a
certificate of occupancy may be issued for a change in use or before a
temporary vending permit may be issued. Once a property has been inspected as
required by this chapter and found to be in compliance, and any subsequent
temporary occupancy from year to year is unchanged, then no further inspection
is required as a result of the temporary occupancy. This requirement shall not
apply to an application for a temporary vending permit for areas completely
outside of the building.
   (B)   Effective January 1, 2014, all structures located within the Downtown
Overlay District shall be inspected, by the City Building Official or designee,
whenever a change of occupancy occurs, or a temporary vending permit is
requested, to ensure compliance with the requirements of the most current
Building Code adopted by the city at §
150.025 and that the structure meets all for structural and mechanical
requirements. Any deficiencies found that threaten the safety of occupants must
be rectified before a certificate of occupancy may be issued for a change in
use or before a temporary vending license may be issued. Once a property has
been inspected as required by this chapter and found to be in compliance, and
any subsequent temporary occupancy from year to year is unchanged, then no
further inspection is required as a result of the temporary occupancy. All
property owners shall apply for a review at least 30 days prior to a
certificate of occupancy permit or temporary vending permit is desired to be
issued. This requirement shall not be necessary if the temporary vending permit
is requested for an area completely outside of the building.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.05) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of building code, see §
150.025
Statutory reference:
   State electrical code, see ARSD § 20:44:22:01
   State plumbing code, see ARSD § 20:54:02:01
§ 156.415 DEMOLITION PERMIT.
   Before a demolition permit is authorized within the overlay district, the
applicant shall also apply for a building permit for a replacement building
that complies with this chapter. If construction is not substantially or fully
completed within 18 months, no temporary vending permit(s) shall be issued for
the entire property until construction is completed.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.06) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 156.416 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Residential units, either single-family or multi-family shall be
permitted uses within the district. The design of new buildings shall coincide
with the standards previously described. Residential units shall be allowed on
the upper levels throughout the district. Ground floor units shall be allowed
on Main Street between Middle and Junction and on Main Street between 2nd
Street and 4th Street.
   (B)   Automotive, motorcycle, ATV and the like dealerships shall be
conditionally permitted uses within the district. All proposed dealerships
shall have adequate parking and off-street and off-alley service areas.
(Prior Code, § 18.5.15.07) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 3-5-2019)
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES OF LAND
§ 156.430 PURPOSE.
   Any otherwise lawful use of land or structure existing at the time of
adoption of these regulations may be continued, maintained and repaired, except
as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.431 CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   The lawful operation of a nonconforming use as such use existing on the
effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, by which the use
became a nonconforming use, may be continued; provided, however, that the
number of dwelling units in a nonconforming dwelling use shall not be increased
over or exceed the number of dwelling units existing in the nonconforming use
on the effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.432 EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USES IN STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming use in a structure may be extended throughout the structure,
provided no structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance,
are made therein.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.433 CHANGES IN NONCONFORMING USES.
   The nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming
use that is in the same (or higher) use group as the previous nonconforming use
until the building is removed; provided, however, that a certificate of
occupancy must be obtained before the change is made.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.434 TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, a nonconforming use that has been abandoned
or discontinued for more than one year shall not hereafter be reestablished. In
the event of such discontinuance or abandonment for more than one year, the
Building Inspector shall give notice to the property owner by registered or
certified mail that the nonconforming use is to be eliminated within a time
frame set by the Common Council in each instance.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.435 OPEN LAND, NONCONFORMING USE OF.
   A nonconforming use not enclosed in a building or structure, or one in which
the use of the land is a use exercised principally out-of-doors and outside of
a building or structure shall, after three years form the date of notification,
become a prohibited and unlawful use and shall be discontinued.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.436 DESTRUCTION, DAMAGE OR OBSOLESCENCE OF STRUCTURE.
   The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming use shall terminate
whenever the structure or structures in which the nonconforming use is operated
and maintained are damaged, destroyed or become obsolete or substandard beyond
the limits hereinafter established for the termination of nonconforming
structures.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.437 CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, any nonconforming structures may be occupied
and operated and maintained in a state of good repair.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.438 ENLARGEMENT OR EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming structure in which a nonconforming use is operated shall not
be enlarged or extended; a nonconforming structure in which only permitted uses
are operated may be enlarged or extended if the enlargement or extension can be
made in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter established for
structures in the district in which the nonconforming structure is located.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
§ 156.439 RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming structure damaged in any manner and from any cause
whatsoever to the extent of not more than 50% of its replacement cost may be
restored; provided, that restoration is completed within one year of the date
of the damage; and provided, that if a nonconforming residential structure is
damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost, it may be
restored by the person who is the owner of the nonconforming structure at the
time that it became a nonconforming use and may restore said structure,
provided restoration is completed within one year from the date of the damage.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VI)
LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
§ 156.450 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The purpose and objective of this subchapter is to provide for the
orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city in order to
establish requirements of the installation and maintenance of landscape
elements and other means of site improvements in off-street parking areas and
other developed properties.
   (B)   The justification for such regulations is as follows:
      (1)   To aid regulating and controlling vehicular and pedestrian
circulation in parking areas;
      (2)   To enhance the environmental and aesthetic conditions which exist
in the Black Hills area;
      (3)   To protect and preserve the value of the property;
      (4)   To reduce the amount of stormwater runoff from paved areas:
      (5)   To reduce heat and noise, wind and air turbulence and the glare of
automobile lights:
      (6)   To reduce the level of carbon dioxide and return pure oxygen to the
air; and
      (7)   To reduce the glare of sunlight from parking lot pavements.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 1) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.451 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS-WAY. A paved area intended to provide ingress and egress of vehicular
traffic from public right-of-way to an off-street parking area or loading area.
   ADJACENT. An area where the property lines are contiguous or are separated
by a street, alley, easement or right-of-way.
   BERM. A mound of dirt used for screening or landscaping purposes which is
planted with low-lying shrubs or ground cover so as to prevent erosion.
   BUFFER. A visual screen, composed of masonry, wood or plantings or a
combination thereof which will be a minimum of 80% opaque.
   FRONTAGE. Lineal distance measured along all abutting street right-of-way.
   GROUND COVER. Low-growing plants planted in such a manner as to form a
continuous cover over the ground.
   LANDSCAPING OR LANDSCAPE MATERIAL. Trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines,
grasses, earthen berms or any combination thereof, installed in planting areas
for the purpose of fulfilling the requirements of these regulations.
   LIVING PLANT MATERIAL. All perennial plants and grass.
   PARKING LOT. Any lot which is paved or unpaved for which any development,
alteration or demolition has taken place and year around parking is permitted.
Said LOT may or may not facilitate a structure.
   RECONSTRUCTION. Rehabilitation or replacement of structure or structures on
property, which either have been damaged, altered or removed.
   STREET LINE. The line limiting the right-of-way of the street and being
identical with the property line of persons owning property fronting on the
street.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any alteration or improvement to property which is
equal to or more than 5% of the current property valuation as listed with the
County Equalization Office.
   UNIMPROVED OR UNPAVED LOT. Any vacant lot which is utilized for any purpose,
including, but not limited to, the following: storage of vehicles and/or
materials; vending; selling of goods of any kind; and distribution of goods of
any kind.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 2) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.452 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The requirements and standards for the installation and maintenance of
landscape elements, as set forth herein, shall apply to all areas within the
city which have been rehabilitated, demolished, altered, remodeled or
substantial improved and are located in the following zoning districts:
Industrial, Highway Service, Commercial, Multifamily, Office Commercial/
Residential or in any area where a parking lot abuts against a street right-of-
way or a residential zoned area.
   (B)   Exception: Main Street running from Middle Street to Fourth Street
shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 3) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.453 REQUIRED AMOUNT OF LANDSCAPE MATERIAL.
   The amount of landscape material required shall be as follows.
   (A)   In large parking lots or parking areas of 100 or more spaces, interior
planting areas shall be provided at the ratio of one such area for every 25
parking spaces. Each planting area shall contain a minimum of 200 square feet
of living plant material which is perennial in nature. If no structures are
existing in conjunction with said lot, there shall be not less than 5% of the
lot put into living landscape material in addition to the interior plantings.
   (B)   All areas for parking which have 99 or fewer parking spaces shall
provide landscaping (living plant material) on the perimeter, which is equal to
or greater than 10% of the overall lot area.
   (C)   In all cases, lots utilized for parking shall be hard surfaced of
either concrete or asphalt pavement.
   (D)   All unimproved or unpaved lots within the above stated zoning
districts which are used for other than parking shall provide a minimum
landscaped area in the amount of not less than 10% of the total lot area if
structures are not constructed on the parcel. All landscaping shall be living
plant material. If a structure is erected on the property, other provisions in
this subchapter will apply.
   (E)   On all properties other than those listed above, a minimum of 10% of
the property shall be covered by living plant material which has been approved
by the City Planning Committee.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 4) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.454 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise permitted by the City Planning Commission and/or
Council, all landscape material shall be located in the required front yard of
the lot in question.
   (B)   All living plant material shall be selected from the City Parks
Department plantings booklet unless otherwise approved by the Urban Forestry
Committee.
   (C)   All required landscaping shall be installed as per plans, which shall
be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
   (D)   All landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner and
according to accepted good planting procedures.
   (E)   The following minimum standards shall be observed.
      (1)   Deciduous trees. Trunk diameter shall be one and one-half inches at
the time of planting.
      (2)   Evergreen trees. Trees shall be four feet in height at the time of
planting.
      (3)   Shrubs. Shrubs shall be one foot in height at the time of planting.
      (4)   Ground cover. Ground cover shall be planted in such a manner as to
present a finished appearance within a reasonable time not exceeding one year
from time of planting.
      (5)   Grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as
permanent lawns within the area and shall present a finished appearance within
a time period not exceeding one year from date of planning.
   (F)   Synthetic or artificial lawns or plants shall not be used in lieu of
plant requirements.
   (G)   Trees and shrubs shall be chosen from a list of plant material
recommended by the local Urban Forestry Board.
   (H)   If at the time of final inspection, all the requirements of these
regulations have not been completed in satisfactory manner, a certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued unless the builder or owner has provided a
monetary security guarantee.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 5) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.455 SITE DISTANCE FOR LANDSCAPING ADJACENT TO PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When an access-way intersects a public right-of-way or when the
subject property abuts the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way,
all landscaping within the triangle areas described herein shall provide
unobstructed cross visibility at a level between three feet and six feet;
provided, however, that trees having limbs and foliage are trimmed in such a
manner that no limbs or foliage extend into or across the visibility area shall
be allowed, provided they are so located and are of such a size so as to not
create a traffic hazard.
   (B)   A 25-foot site triangle is required on both sides of an access-way
formed by the intersection and the access-way and the public right-of-way. A
30-foot site triangle is required at a corner by the intersection of two or
more public rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 6) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.456 SECURITY GUARANTEE.
   (A)   If at the time of final inspection, all the requirements of the
landscape regulations are not completed in a satisfactory manner and approved
by the Building Official or his or her designee, a certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued unless the builder or owner has provided a monetary
security guarantee or bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of
installation of the required improvements whereby the improvements will be made
and installed without cost to the city in the event of default of the owner.
   (B)   If a security guarantee is being used, the required improvements shall
be installed within nine months from the date of issuance of an occupancy
certificate. All required landscaping should be installed as per plans
submitted. The City Attorney shall approve all bonds and other methods of
guarantee.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 7) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.457 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the power to grant variances in special
cases where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships created in meeting the requirements of these regulations.
   (B)   The guidelines to be used in determining whether a variance should be
granted are as follows:
      (1)   The hardships or difficulties of meeting the requirements of these
regulations are peculiar to that property and not general in character; and
      (2)   Financial hardship due to meeting the requirements of these
regulations is not sufficient to show unnecessary hardship unless the financial
difficulties amount to confiscation of property.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 8) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.458 MAINTENANCE.
   The owner of the building or his or her manager or agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas which shall be
maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times
and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Maintenance shall include the
replacement of all dead plant material. In no case shall a landowner maintain
less than 10% of the property with living plant material.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 9) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.459 PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Although it is not required, it is recommended that a landscape
architect or person of related profession prepares the plan.
   (B)   Two copies of the plans showing proposed landscape development shall
be submitted to the Building Official at the time a building permit is
required. Such plan shall consist of a plot plan drawn to scale normally of not
less than one inch equals 30 feet, including dimensions and distances and
clearly delineating any existing and proposed landscape development. Such plot
plan shall also include drawings of the entire off-street parking area and the
locations of the proposed building.
   (C)   In addition to indicating those areas to be landscaped, the plot plan
shall indicate the types, locations and sizes of all landscaping materials to
be used.
   (D)   This plan must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to
issuance of a building permit.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 10) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
§ 156.460 ENFORCEMENT.
   These regulations shall be a minimum standard and shall apply to the
incorporated area of the city. The Building Official or his or her designated
representative shall be the enforcing official.
   (A)   The enforcing official is charged with the duty of administering the
provisions of these regulations and securing compliance within. The enforcing
official shall have the following responsibilities:
      (1)   To make such inspections as may be necessary to accomplish the
purposes and intent of these regulations and to initiate appropriate action to
bring about compliance with these regulations; and
      (2)   To order in writing as set out in the regulations the remedy of all
conditions or violations of these regulations found to exist in or on any
premises.
   (B)   The enforcing official is authorized and directed to lawfully enter in
or upon all premises at reasonable times to determine their condition insofar
as the provisions of these regulations exists, and he or she shall take action
as follows:
      (1)   Give written notice of the violation to the management agent or the
owner of the property as shown by the records at Director of Equalization
Office; and
      (2)   The notice shall include:
         (a)   A description of the location of the property involved, either
by address or by legal description;
         (b)   A statement indicating the nature of the violation and reason or
reasons why the notice of the violation is being issued;
         (c)   A specification of the section of sections of these regulations
upon which the notice of violations is based;
         (d)   A general description of the things that are required to be done
to bring the premises into compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
and
         (e)   The notice shall state that the property owner will have 15 days
to comply with the notice or appeal the decision to the City Legal and Finance
Committee.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 11) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999) Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.461 DESIGN CRITERIA STANDARDS.
   (A)   Trees used in parking lots should be placed far enough back from the
curb to accommodate the overhang of the automobile.
   (B)   When planters used in parking lot interiors, a surface area should be
made available for aeration and water infiltration of at least 25 square feet
per tree. This will help ensure that the tree remains healthy and vigorous.
   (C)   If possible, the parking lot should be located to the rear or side of
the building. This will reduce visual clutter and confusion along the street
and open a better view to the building.
   (D)   Curb or some form of physical barrier should be installed around plant
material located within the parking lot. This will reduce the possibility of
damage to the plant material.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 12) (Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999)
CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 156.475 INTENT.
   In order to minimize the negative effects cannabis establishments have on
adjacent land uses, and to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city, the City Council adopts the following regulations,
recognizing that it has a great interest in the present and future character of
the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods. Adoption of these
regulations is not intended to unreasonably restrict the opportunity of
cannabis establishments to locate in the city, but is for the purpose of
preventing a concentration of certain cannabis establishments in any one area.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-1) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
§ 156.476 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions, and the
definitions for cannabis-related terms in SDCL § 34-20G-1, shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLIGHTED AREA. An area characterized by traits such as dilapidation,
overcrowding, deterioration, dangerous structures, unsanitary, inadequate
infrastructure, nuisance or other factors which inhibit the growth and
development of an area.
   CANNABIS or MARIJUANA. All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether
growing or not, in its natural and unaltered state, except for drying or curing
and crushing or crumbling. The term includes an altered state of marijuana
absorbed into the human body. The term does not include fiber produced from the
mature stalks of such plant, or oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant.
The term does not include the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of that
plant, including the seeds thereof and all derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids,
isomers, acids, salts and salts of isomers, whether growing or not, with a
delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than 0.3% on a dry
weight basis.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY. A licensed entity that acquires, possesses,
cultivates, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or sells cannabis and
related supplies to a cannabis establishment.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A licensed entity that acquires, possesses, stores,
delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses cannabis,
cannabis products, paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials.
   CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis testing
facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility or a cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. A licensed entity that acquires,
possesses, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, supplies or sells
cannabis products to a cannabis dispensary.
   CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY. A licensed entity legally authorized to analyze
the safety and potency of cannabis.
   MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY. An entity engaged in diagnosing, treating, caring
for or counseling people requiring mental health services, including substance
abuse disorders, but which does not regularly provide other types of personal
health services.
   NON-LICENSED CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT. An entity which would otherwise meet
the definition of a cannabis establishment, but which is not licensed.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-2) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
§ 156.477 REGULATIONS RELATING TO CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITIES.
   No cannabis cultivation facility may be owned or operated at a location
within the city’s zoning jurisdiction except as provided by this section. A
cannabis cultivation facility is a permitted use in the following districts:
G1-1 General Industrial. All facilities must include alarm systems, camera
systems and safes as approved by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-3) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.478 REGULATIONS RELATING TO CANNABIS TESTING FACILITIES.
   No cannabis testing facility may be owned or operated at a location within
the city’s zoning jurisdiction except as provided by this section. A cannabis
testing facility is a permitted use in the following districts: G1-1 General
Industrial. All facilities must include alarm systems, camera systems and safes
as approved by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-4) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.479 REGULATIONS RELATING TO CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITIES.
   No cannabis product manufacturing facility may be owned or operated at a
location within the city’s zoning jurisdiction except as provided by this
section. A cannabis product manufacturing facility is a permitted use in the
following districts: G1-1 General Industrial. All facilities must include alarm
systems, camera systems and safes as approved by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-5) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.480 REGULATIONS RELATING TO CANNABIS DISPENSARIES.
   (A)   No cannabis dispensary may be owned or operated at a location within
the city’s zoning jurisdiction except as provided by this section. A cannabis
dispensary is a permitted use in the following districts: GC-1 General
Commercial; and GC-2 Retail Commercial District; and HS-1 Highway Service. All
facilities must include alarm systems, camera systems and safes as approved by
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   No cannabis dispensary may operate within 200 feet of a residential
zone within the city. No cannabis dispensary may operate within 1,000 feet of
another cannabis dispensary. Distances are measured from the closest point of
the property lines but exclude public rights-of-way. Such buffer distance
requirements may be waived via the variance process so long as the zoning
district for the proposed location would be allowed if the applicable buffer
distance requirement were waived.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-6) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
§ 156.481 PROHIBITED DISTRICTS FOR CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   All types of cannabis establishments are prohibited in every other
district not described in the preceding sections of this subchapter. These
include: all residential districts, AG-1 Agricultural, Park Land, Public Land,
GC-3 Single-Family Residential/Office Commercial, OS-1 Open Space or
Floodplain, NU Transitional, FAIR Fairgrounds, RV-RV Campground and
Recreational Vehicle Park.
   (B)   Unlicensed cannabis establishments are prohibited in all zoning
districts.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. XI, § 11-1-7) (Ord. 2021-07, passed 10-5-2021)
Penalty, see §
156.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.495 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Administrative officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be
administered by the City Engineer or Building Inspector who shall:
      (1)   Issue all building permits and make and maintain records thereof;
      (2)   Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (3)   Issue and renew where applicable all temporary use permits and make
and maintain records thereof;
      (4)   Maintain and keep current zoning maps and records of amendments
thereto;
      (5)   Conduct inspections as prescribed by this chapter and such other
inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the various provisions
of this chapter; and
      (6)   Issue all mobile home park permits and make and maintain records
thereof.
   (B)   Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Established. The establishment of a Board of Adjustment, hereafter
referred to as the “Board” or “the Council” is hereby authorized. The Board
shall be composed of the City Council.
      (2)   Officers; requirements.
         (a)   The Mayor shall act as Chairperson of the Board and the City
Auditor shall act as Secretary. The Board shall meet at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other items as the Board may determine at a fixed time
and place. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the City Auditor and shall be a
public record. It shall have the power to call on any other departments for
assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such
other departments to render all such assistance as may be reasonably required.
         (b)   In the case of all appeals, the concurring vote of at least two-
thirds of the members of such Board as so composed shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is
required to pass under any zoning ordinance, or to effect any variation in such
ordinance.
      (3)   Powers of the Board of Adjustment. The Board has the authority to
compel the attendance of witnesses at hearings and to administer oaths, and in
the furtherance of its duties shall have the following powers:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals wherein it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official;
         (b)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any
such ordinance, requests for special exceptions or for interpretation of the
zoning map;
         (c)   Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, in any way, the Board shall
have the power, in passing upon appeals, to authorize such variance from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and so
that the intent of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice
done;
         (d)   Establish such rules of procedure as are necessary to the
performance of its functions hereunder;
         (e)   Review and decide all applications for uses permitted on review
in accordance with §
156.385 and this subchapter; and
         (f)   Study and report on all proposed amendments to this chapter;
further, to review annually this chapter and on the basis of such review,
suggest amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 1)
§ 156.496 NOTICE PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION FOR USES ON REVIEW, CONDITIONAL USES
AND VARIANCES.
   (A)   Typical notice procedure.
      (1)   Any applicant for a use on review, conditional use or variance
shall complete the necessary forms provided by the city or his or her designee.
Upon the completion of all required materials, the city shall provide a written
notice of the applicant’s intentions and an analysis of the impact of the
proposal to owners of all parcels located within the area required to receive
notice. The notice shall include the scheduled date when the item shall be
discussed at the Planning and Zoning Commission. The notice shall state that
any recipient opposed to the proposed application should notify the city of his
or her opposition and provide reasons for the opposition. In addition to the
mailed written notice, the applicant shall be required to have placed on the
property in a place clearly visible from the busiest public right-of-way, a
sign, at least 24 inches wide and 18 inches tall, provided by the city, stating
in bold lettering that the property is under consideration for a use on review,
conditional use or variance, and provide information regarding the hearing. The
sign may also provide that more information may be obtained by contacting the
city. In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall be responsible at
the time of submitting the application for payment of the cost of notice by
certified mail to all required parcels as well as an administrative fee of 10%
of the cost of notice by certified mail.
      (2)   Any consent requirements provided under §
156.500 do not apply to any request or application for a use on review,
conditional use or variance.
   (B)   At-home business use on reviews.
      (1)   The city recognizes that at-home businesses can be a part of a
healthy, vibrant community. The provisions of this use on review procedure are
solely related to the application of this chapter. These provisions do not in
any way override or alter private property use agreements or covenants which
may be in existence.
      (2)   At-home businesses are required to proceed with the use on review
process if any of the following attributes applied:
         (a)   The business would have one or more nonresident employees;
         (b)   The business would have one or more customers who would visit
the at-home business;
         (c)   The business would have business inventory, storage and the like
visible from the public right-of-way;
         (d)   The business would create any increase in the amount of traffic,
noise or odor typical of a residential neighborhood;
         (e)   The business would create a perceived or actual decrease in the
expected safety in a neighborhood;
         (f)   The business would require any type of land or premises approval
from the state or federal government (this does not imply a professionally
licensed individual);
         (g)   There has been a verified complaint to the Planning and
Permitting Office regarding an at-home business regarding an impact of similar
nature though not specifically listed to those listed above; or
         (h)   In no circumstance would a residential camping or home leasing
qualify as an at-home business requiring a use on review.
      (3)   During the initial use on review, the applicant shall be required
to:
         (a)   Pay all costs associated with the city sending a certified
letter to all landowners within 200 feet of the subject property; and
         (b)   Have placed on his or her property, in a place clearly visible
from the busiest public right-of-way, a sign provided by the city stating that
the property is under consideration of a use on review and meeting the notice
requirements in division (A) above. Said sign shall be placed on subject
property for a minimum of 21 days.
      (4)   Following final approval by the Common Council and completion of
each 365-day period, the city shall list the at-home business name, property
address and type of business in the monthly community newsletter. The listing
shall indicate that the at-home business is under its annual use on review.
Should there be any complaint throughout the 365-day period or should negative
comments arise after the notice in the Community Newsletter, the Planning and
Permitting Department shall present the use on review to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Should the Commission approve another year, no further
action is required until 365 days has passed. Should the Commission recommend
disapproval, the use on review denial shall be submitted to the Common Council
for final consideration.
      (5)   Should a business be required to complete a use on review process,
all the following conditions will be applied.
         (a)   Copies of all state sales tax returns shall be submitted to the
City Finance Office (these records shall be retained and considered
confidential).
         (b)   No signage on the property (with the exception of vehicles)
shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
         (c)   The actual average daily vehicle count of the subject property
shall not exceed 1.25 times the AADT (annual average daily traffic) for the
type of subject property. In circumstances where the subject business is of
significant importance to the community, the limit maybe extended but shall in
no circumstance exceed three times the AADT for the type of subject property.
         (d)   The subject property shall not create noise beyond the times of
7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. In addition, the types of sounds nor the volumes of
those sounds created during these hours shall not exceed those typical in a
residential neighborhood.
         (e)   No odor beyond that typical of a residential neighborhood shall
be permissible.
         (f)   If the business causes an impact to the utility services beyond
those typical of a residence, then all utility rates shall be charged as
commercial (two separate unit charges for all city utilities).
         (g)   The county may assess portions of the property at commercial
versus residential rates.
         (h)   All use on reviews shall be applicable for one year. At the
expiration of one year, they shall be completed again.
   (C)   Paving requirements. A use on review can be applied for to allow any
property owner in any district to not complete the hard-paving requirement of
the construction. In reviewing the application, the planning and permitting
staff and Common Council shall consider if the required paving area is
connected to a paved public right-of-way. At no time should the required hard
paving area be less than 30 feet if it is connected to a paved public right-of-
way. Any approval of the use on review will be reviewed if existing conditions
change (thereby requiring the paving of the area). Such a cause for a review
would be if the adjoining public right-of-way is paved or if excess dirt and
debris is brought onto a public right-of-way. This use on review shall be
granted by planning and permitting staff with the applicant being able to
appeal a denial to the Common Council.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 2) (Ord. 2016-13, passed 1-25-2017; Ord.
2021-09, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 156.497 VARIANCES.
   The purpose of the variance is to modify the strict application of the
specific requirements of this chapter in the case of exceptionally irregular,
narrow, shallow or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions,
whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship which would deprive an owner of the reasonable use of his
or her land. The variance shall be used only where necessary to overcome some
obstacle which is preventing an owner from using his or her lot as this chapter
intended.
   (A)   Application. An application shall be filed with the governing body for
review. Said application shall show: the location and intended use of the site;
the names of the property owners and existing land uses within 200 feet; and
any other material pertinent to the request which the governing body may
require.
   (B)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application and fee, the Board
shall give notice of public hearing within 35 days. Such notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in the legal newspaper of the city ten
days prior to that public hearing. The Board shall consider and decide all
applications for variance within 30 days of such public hearing and in
accordance with the standards provided below.
   (C)   Standards for variances. In granting a variance, the Board shall
ascertain that the following criteria are met.
      (1)   Variances shall be granted only where special circumstances or
conditions (such as exceptional narrowness, topography or when the relaxation
of a restriction of the code, granted by the Board of Adjustment shall provide
a quantifiable benefit to the city and the surrounding neighborhood of the
parcel) are fully described in the finding of the Board.
      (2)   Variances shall not be granted to allow a use otherwise excluded
from the particular district in which requested.
      (3)   For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the board, the
aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of
the provisions would deprive the applicant of any reasonable use of his or her
land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variance, there must be a
deprivation of beneficial use of land.
      (4)   Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall be
the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land.
      (5)   The granting of any variance is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare or in conflict with the
comprehensive plan for development.
      (6)   A fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee resolution due
and payable at the time of the appeal shall be paid to the City Treasurer to
cover the costs of notices and other expense incidental to the hearing.
      (7)   Any subdivision of land within the city or one mile thereof, after
January 1, 1993, shall not be eligible for variances under the provisions set
forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Requirements for the granting of a variance. Before the Board shall
have the authority to grant a variance, the person claiming the variance has
the burden of showing:
      (1)   The granting of the permit will not be contrary to the public
interest;
      (2)   The literal enforcement of the provisions will result in
unnecessary hardship;
      (3)   By granting the permit contrary to the provisions, the spirit will
be observed; and
      (4)   By granting the permit, substantial justice will be done.
   (E)   Court review of Board.
      (1)   Any person/firm or corporation aggrieved by any decision of the
Board may present to the court of competent jurisdiction a petition fully
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the
court within 30 days after publication in the city’s legal newspaper of the
minutes of the Board action. Such petition shall not be filed with respect to
the decision of the Building Inspector or any administrative officer without
recourse to the Board.
      (2)   Upon presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of
certiorari directed to the Board to review such decision of the Board. The
Board shall be required to turn over to the court certified copies of all
papers acted on by it, and any other information as may be pertinent and
material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from. If, upon the
hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the
proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to
take evidence, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the
determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
      (3)   Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear
to the court that the Board acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with
malice in making the decision appealed from.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 3) (Ord. 2003-12, passed 11-28-2003; Ord.
2013-20, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 156.498 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No new building shall be occupied, and no change in use of a building or
part of a building shall be made, until after the Building Inspector shall have
issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as regulated in the Building Code
adopted by the city in §
150.025.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 4) (Ord. 2013-13, passed 10-16-2013)
§ 156.499 PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZING USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The following procedure is established to integrate property the uses
permitted on review with other land uses located in the district. These uses
shall be reviewed by the governing body and authorized or rejected under the
following procedure.
   (A)   Application. An application shall be filed with the governing body for
review. Said application shall show: the location and intended use of the site;
the names of the property owners and existing land uses within 200 feet; and
any other material pertinent to the request which the governing body may
require.
      (1)   Application; filing. Any person desiring a conditional use permit
provided for in this chapter may file an application with the Planning and
Permitting Department, except that no application shall be filed or accepted if
final action has been taken within one year prior thereto on an application
requesting the same, or substantially the same permit.
      (2)   Application; information required. An application for a conditional
use permit shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any
or all of the property proposed to be used, including clear evidence that the
applicant is the owner of the premises involved, or has written proof of
permission from the owner or owners that they consent to the use proposed in
such application;
         (b)   Location of subject property (address or vicinity) and the legal
description of the property involved;
         (c)   The nature of the proposed use, indicating the primary business
use to be permitted, and purpose for which such building, structure or
improvement is to be erected, constructed or as proposed to be altered,
enlarged, moved, occupied or used;
         (d)   A statement of the nature, condition and development of the
property for which the conditional use permit is being applied for and the
nature, condition and development of the adjacent uses, buildings and
structures;
         (e)   Provide a site plan drawn to a scale satisfactory to and provide
at least five copies indicating the area and dimensions of the site or location
of the proposed use, and showing the location and dimensions of all structures,
yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other
development features;
         (f)   Describe the dimensions and state of improvement of the
adjoining streets and highways providing access to the proposed site of the
requested use;
         (g)   List all other permits applied for and/or secured in compliance
with the provisions of other applicable ordinances for the subject property;
         (h)   Provide a list, certified to be correct by affidavit or by a
statement under penalty of perjury, of the names and addresses of all persons
who are shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county as owners
of the subject parcel of land and as owning property within a distance of 200
feet from the exterior boundaries of the parcel of land to be occupied by the
use. One copy of said map shall indicate where such ownerships are located;
         (i)   Provide proof satisfactory to the Planning and Permitting
Department that water will be available in quantities and pressures required by
Chapter 51; and
         (j)   Provide such other information as the Director may require,
including necessary verification of the accuracy of all information, maps and
lists submitted.
      (3)   Application; burden of proof. In addition to the information
required in the application, the applicant shall substantiate the following
facts:
         (a)   The requested use at the location and in the proposed structure
will not:
            1.   Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of
persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
            2.   Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation
of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; and/or
            3.   Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the
public health, safety or general welfare.
         (b)   The proposed site and structure is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the yards, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and
other development features required in order to integrate said use with the
uses in the surrounding area;
         (c)   The proposed site is adequately served by highways or streets of
sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of
traffic such use would generate;
         (d)   The proposed site is adequately served by other public or
private service facilities as are required;
         (e)   At no time may any area be authorized for a conditional use
permit for a secondary residential use exceeding 1,000 square feet; and/or
         (f)   The structure subject to the conditional use permit shall meet
all applicable city ordinances, International Building Codes and state
regulations that apply.
      (4)   Application; fee and deposit. When an application is filed, it
shall be accompanied by the filing fee and deposit as required.
      (5)   Application; denial for lack of information. An application for a
conditional use permit may be denied without hearing if such application does
not contain the information required by this section.
      (6)   Application; public hearing required; exception. In all cases where
an application for a conditional use permit is filed in proper form, the public
hearing shall be held pursuant to the procedure herein unless the application
is withdrawn.
   (B)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Upon receipt of an application, the Board shall give notice of
public hearing within 35 days. All applicable landowner notice and signage
requirements as provided under §
156.496, must be complied with prior to public hearing. Such notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be published in the legal newspaper of the city
ten days prior to that public hearing.
         (b)   The Board shall consider and decide all applications for uses
permitted on review within 30 days of such public hearing and in accordance
with the standards provided below. The Board or City Planning Commission may
require the applicant to give additional notice to all property owners affected
by the granting of the relief request. The form and content of the notice shall
be as prescribed by the Board and/or Planning Commission.
      (2)   Grant or denial; findings and decision at public hearing.
         (a)   An application for a conditional use permit may be approved
where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public
hearing substantiates the following findings:
            1.   The proposed use will be consistent with the adopted general
plan for the area;
            2.   The requested use at the location proposed will not:
               a.   Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of
persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
               b.   Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or
valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site; or
               c.   Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to
the public health, safety or general welfare.
            3.   The proposed use is significant and integral part of the
planned primary use of the structure for the next 12 months;
            4.   The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate
the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other
development features prescribed in this chapter, or as is otherwise required in
order to integrate said use with the uses in the surrounding area; and
            5.   The proposed site is adequately served by: highways or streets
of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of
traffic such use would generate; and by other public or private service
facilities as are required.
         (b)   The application shall be denied where the information submitted
by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing fails to substantiate all
such findings that are required by this chapter.
   (C)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Generally. In the exercise of its approval, the governing body may
impose such conditions regarding the location, character or other features of
the proposed use or buildings as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of
the general purposes of this section.
      (2)   Permit; additional conditions imposed when.
         (a)   In approving an application for a conditional use permit, the
decision shall state the conditions as necessary to ensure that such use will
be in accord with the findings.
         (b)   Such conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the
establishment, operation and maintenance of the requested use, including, but
not limited to:
            1.   Special yards, open spaces and buffer areas;
            2.   Fences and walls;
            3.   Parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress and
the surfacing or parking areas and driveways to specified standards;
            4.   Street and highway dedications and improvements, including
sidewalks, curbs and gutters;
            5.   Water supply and fire protection in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
            6.   Landscaping and maintenance of grounds;
            7.   Regulation of nuisance factors, such as noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic
disturbances and radiation;
            8.   Regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal
neighborhood schedules and functions;
            9.   Regulation of signs, including outdoor advertising;
            10.   A specified validation period limiting the time in which
development may begin;
            11.   Provisions for a bond or other surety that the proposed
conditional use will be removed on or before a specified date;
            12.   A site plan indicating all details and data as prescribed in
this chapter; and
            13.   Such other conditions as will make possible the development
of the proposed conditional use in an orderly and efficient manner and in
general accord with all elements of the general plan and the intent and purpose
of this chapter.
   (D)   Issuance of permit. Unless specifically modified by a conditional use
permit, all regulations prescribed in the zone in which such conditional use
permit is granted shall apply. Upon completion of the necessary application,
hearing and approval of the governing body, the Building Inspector shall issue
the building permit subject to all applicable rules, regulations and
conditions.
   (E)   Validity of plans. All approved plans, conditions, restrictions and
rules made a part of the approval of the governing body shall constitute
certification on the part of the applicant that the proposed use shall conform
to such regulations at all times.
   (F)   Time limit. All applications for uses permitted on review shall be
decided within 30 days of the date of public hearing.
      (1)   Expiration date of unused permits. A permit which is not used
within the time specified in such permit, or, if no time is specified, within
two years after the granting of the permit, becomes null, void and of no effect
at all. A permit issued may be extended for a period of not to exceed one year,
provided an application requesting such extension is filed prior to such
expiration date. In the case of a nonprofit corporation organized to provide
low-income housing for the poor or elderly, there may be an additional one-year
extension, provided that an application requesting such extension is filed
prior to the expiration of the first such extension. In the case of a
conditional use permit filed and heard concurrently with a land division, the
limits and extensions allowed shall be concurrent and consistent with those of
the land division. A conditional use permit shall be considered used, within
the intent of this section, when construction or other development authorized
by such permit has commenced that would be prohibited in the zone if no permit
had been granted.
      (2)   Expiration following cessation of use. A conditional use permit
granted by the Council shall automatically cease to be of any force and effect
if the use for which such conditional use permit was granted has ceased or has
been suspended for a continuous period of 12 months.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 5) (Ord. 2021-09, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 156.500 AMENDMENTS UPON APPLICATION BY PROPERTY OWNER.
   The regulations, restrictions, boundaries and options set forth in this
chapter may be amended, supplemented, revised or repealed from time to time as
conditions warrant, upon application by the property owner, regardless of
whether applicant is an individual, corporation, trust, private or public
organization, and subject to the following conditions. This section does not
apply to governmental organizations.
   (A)   Applications.
      (1)   An application for an amendment shall be filed with the City Office
of Planning and Permitting.
      (2)   The above-mentioned application is available online by using
CitizenServe and, when completed and submitted, shall demonstrate written
consent of property owners constituting at least 40% of the total aggregate
property area having a right to protest as provided in SDCL § 11-4-5. The total
aggregate property area includes lots located within the affected district, and
property lots located within 250 feet from any part of such proposed amended
district. The required notice distance shall not include intervening streets
and alleys or other public property. Any abstaining or non-reporting property
owners will not be construed as consenting property owners.
      (3)   A corporation, trust or any organization, whether private or
public, is construed as one owner. If parcels of land are in the name of more
than one person, ownership representation for the specific parcel is in
proportion to the number of signers who consent in relation to the total number
of owners of the specific parcel.
      (4)   Any administrative denial by the City Office of Planning and
Permitting because of an applicant’s failure to obtain the written consent
threshold may appeal the administrative decision following the procedures
outlined under §
150.010.
      (5)   If, under the procedures provided in §
150.010, the appeal reaches the City Council, acting as the Board of Adjustment
as provided under §
156.495(B), the City Council must not consider the overall substantive merit of
the application, but only whether there is a minimum sufficient basis to
support reversing the administrative denial and moving the application forward
to the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided under division (B) below. The
concurring vote of at least two-thirds of the Board is necessary to reverse the
administrative denial. If the administrative denial is reversed, the
application will be considered as if the applicant initially met the written
consent threshold.
   (B)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Upon receiving the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall file with the governing body a preliminary report and shall hold
hearings, notice of which shall be published in a manner to allow the public
hearing to be held one week prior to the date of making the preliminary report
to the governing body.
      (2)   The governing body may adopt any changes in the regulations,
restrictions or boundaries after having published notice of hearing at least
ten days prior to the date of adoption of any amendments in the ordinance as
notice of the time and place where all persons interested shall be given a
full, fair and complete hearing. The ordinance, if adopted, shall be adopted as
other ordinances with the same publication requirements.
   (C)   Time limit. The report of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding
any such proposed amendment upon application shall be submitted to the
governing body within 30 days of the public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Standards for amendments upon application. The following conditions
shall be met for all amendments.
      (1)   The proposed amendment shall be necessary because of substantially
changed or changing conditions of the area and districts affected.
      (2)   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the intent and
purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   The proposed amendment shall not adversely affect any other part of
the city, nor shall any direct or indirect adverse effects result from such
amendment.
      (4)   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the comprehensive
plan as adopted by the city, including, but not limited to, the major road
plan, land use plan, community facilities plan and other portions of the
comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 6) (Ord. 1997-06, passed 5-12-1997; Ord.
2013-20, passed 12-4-2013; Ord. 2021-09, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 156.501 FEES.
   Fees for all permits required herein, and fees required for filing of
appeals and fees for applications for amendments to this chapter shall be
established as follows and be collected by the following.
 Fees Collected by
            Fees                                                  Collected by
                                                                  City Finance
            The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Officer and
Amendments  resolution                                            credited to
                                                                  the General
                                                                  Fund
Building    As regulated by City Finance Officer and ordinance credited to the
permits     General Fund
                                                                  City Finance
Mobile home The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Officer and
park permit resolution                                            credited to
                                                                  the General
                                                                  Fund
                                                                  City Finance
Temporary   The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Officer and
use permits resolution                                            credited to
                                                                  the General
                                                                  Fund
                                                                  City Finance
Use on      The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Officer and
review      resolution                                            credited to
permit                                                            the General
                                                                  Fund
                                                                  City Finance
            The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Officer and
Variances   resolution                                            credited to
                                                                  the General
                                                                  Fund
                                                                  City Finance
Zoning      The fee shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee Officer and
amendment   resolution                                            credited to
                                                                  the General
                                                                  Fund
 
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 7) (Ord. 2003-12, passed 11-28-2003)
§ 156.502 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER LAWS.
   In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter,
these provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, morals, safety and the general welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are a variance with the requirements
of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinance, the most restrictive
or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 10)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter is a Class 2 misdemeanor punishable by
the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the state pursuant to SDCL §
22-6-2. Said punishment may also include payment of any costs and restitution
authorized by this chapter or state law. Violations may also be subject to
administrative citations pursuant to
Chapter 37.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.19.04)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain
or sue any building or structure, or to use any land in violation of any
regulation in this chapter. Any person, firm, association or corporation who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine as shall be set forth in the city’s annual fee
resolution together with the cost of the action; every day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Compliance therewith may also be enforced by
injunctional order at the suit of the city or the owner or owners of real
estate within the district affected by the regulation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. VII, § 8)
   (C)   Any violation of §
156.193 shall be considered a Class 2 misdemeanor for each day in violation.
(Prior Code, § 18.05.09)
   (D)   Any person violating §§
156.450 through
156.461 or portions thereof shall be subject to punishment as per a Class 2
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 13)
   (E)   Failure to comply with the notice described in §
156.460 will result in punishment as per a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, Title 18, Art. IX, § 11)
(Ord. 1999-07, passed 4-30-1999; Ord. 2018-13, passed 10-27-2018; Ord. 2022-02,
passed 2-14-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                    
-        -           Granting electric utility franchise to Black Hills Power
                     and Light Company.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 10.02)
-        -           Granting gas utility franchise to Montana- Dakota
                     Utilities Company.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 10.03)
-        -           Granting telephone utility franchise to Century Link.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 10.04)
2023-1   3-8-2023    Granting a cable television franchise to Bluepeak and
                     Midcontinent Communications.
                   (Prior Code, Chapter 10.05)
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
SDCL Cites Code Section
SDCL Cites                Code Section
1-19A-11.1                150.029
1-27-1.5                  35.01
1-27-1.6                  35.01
9                         10.04
                          10.02;
9-1-1                     10.04;
                          110.040
9-1-1.1                   110.040
9-8-7                     30.10
9-12-6                    10.04
9-12-11                   34.47
9-12-13                   155.01
9-12-18                   95.015
9-13-6                    30.10
9-13-7                    30.10
9-13-9                    30.10
9-13-13                   30.10
9-13-14                   30.10
9-14-13                   31.01;
                          31.15
9-19-1                    10.04
                          10.99;
9-19-3                    51.16;
                          74.99;
                          114.99
9-19-13                   34.05;
                          116.17
9-21A                     156.037
9-21A-2                   156.037
9-21A-6                   156.037
9-22-6                    96.042
9-30-2                    151.048
9-31-3                    71.061
                          113.01;
9-34                      113.02;
                          113.30
9-34-17                   50.081;
                          50.082
9-38                      90.029
9-46                      151.105
                          36.01;
9-55                      36.15;
                          36.19;
                          36.35
9-55-2                    36.19
9-55-3                    36.01;
                          36.35
9-55-7                    36.19
9-55-13                   36.19
10-4                      36.20
                          34.26;
10-45                     34.31;
                          34.32;
                          34.99
                          50.093;
10-45-1                   113.02;
                          113.17
10-45-85                  50.093;
                          113.17
10-45-87                  50.093;
                          113.17
10-45D-1(1)               36.37
                          34.27;
10-46                     34.31;
                          34.99
10-52                     34.25;
                          34.30
10-52A                    34.25;
                          34.32
11-4                      155.01
11-4-3.1                  116.17
11-4-5                    156.500
11-6                      32.27
11-06                     154.015
11-6-26                   154.016
21-10-6                   94.022
                          32.99;
                          34.99;
                          36.99;
                          50.999;
                          70.99;
                          90.999;
                          91.99;
                          92.999;
                          93.99;
                          94.999;
22-6-2                    95.999;
                          96.999;
                          112.99;
                          113.99;
                          115.99;
                          130.999;
                          150.999;
                          151.999;
                          152.999;
                          153.999;
                          154.999;
                          156.999
                          10.99;
22-6-2(2)                 74.99;
                          114.99
                          94.154;
22-22                     94.155;
                          94.161
                          94.154;
22-23                     94.155;
                          110.076
                          94.154;
22-24                     94.155;
                          94.161
22-25-1                   112.15
22-25-23                  112.15
22-25-24                  112.15
22-25-25(5a)              112.23
                          112.24;
22-25-25(6)               112.25;
                          112.28
22-25-25(7)               50.046;
                          113.17
22-25-28 through 22-25-51 112.26
22-34                     94.161
23-7-7.4                  130.091
32-14-13                  74.16
32-14-14                  74.15
32-15                     114.02
32-15-20                  74.17
32-17-46                  74.17
32-31                     115.39
34                        50.064
                          Ch. 115;
34-11                     115.15;
                          115.35—
                          115.37
34-11-3                   115.16
34-11-9                   115.15
34-18-20                  91.01
                          116.02;
34-20G-1                  116.17;
                          156.476
34-20G-72                 116.17
34-26A                    95.045
34-46-13                  114.27
34-46-14                  114.27
                          94.162;
                          110.002;
                          110.015;
35                        110.030;
                          110.039;
                          110.041;
                          110.075
                          34.32;
35-1-1                    110.016;
                          110.017
35-1-5.3                  110.034
35-2-2.1                  156.394
35-4                      150.058
35-4-2                    110.017;
                          110.038
35-4-2(3)                 50.046
                          50.046;
                          110.002;
35-4-2(4)                 110.021;
                          110.023;
                          110.038
35-4-2(6)                 110.023
35-4-2(11)                110.038
35-4-2(12)                110.002;
                          110.023
35-4-2(14)                110.038
                          50.046;
                          110.002;
35-4-2(16)                110.016;
                          110.021;
                          110.023
                          50.046;
35-4-2(17)                110.016;
                          110.021;
                          110.038
35-4-10                   110.027
35-4-11                   50.046;
                          110.026
35-4-11.4                 110.016
35-4-60.2                 110.016
35-4-77.1                 151.007
35-4-79                   110.040
35-4-81.2                 110.028
35-4-124                  110.002;
                          110.023
35-12                     110.023
36-4                      50.080
                          110.056;
36-15                     110.063;
                          156.394
36-16-36                  150.071
                          93.02;
38-18                     93.03;
                          93.99
38-18-3                   93.06
45-10-1                   113.17
                          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2025 Code
Prior Code                2025 Code
1.01.05                   10.04
1.01.07                   10.99
2.01.01                   150.001
2.01.02                   150.002
2.01.03                   150.003
2.01.04                   150.999
2.02.01                   150.025
2.02.02                   150.026
2.02.03                   150.027
2.02.04                   150.028
2.02.05                   150.029
2.02.06                   150.030
2.02.07                   150.031
2.02.08                   150.032
2.03.01                   150.045
2.03.02                   150.046
2.03.03                   150.047
2.03.05                   150.048
2.03.06                   150.049
2.03.07                   150.050
2.03.08                   150.051
2.03.09                   150.052
2.03.12                   150.053
2.03.10                   150.053
2.03.11                   150.053
2.03.13                   150.054
2.03.14                   150.055
2.03.15                   150.056
2.03.16                   150.057
2.03.17                   150.058
2.04.01                   150.070
2.04.02                   150.070
2.04.03                   150.070
2.04.04                   150.070
2.04.05                   150.070
2.04.06                   150.070
2.04.07                   150.070
2.04.08                   150.070
2.05.01                   150.071
2.05.02                   150.071
2.05.03                   150.071
2.05.06                   150.071
2.05.04                   150.071
2.05.05                   150.071
2.06.01                   150.072
2.06.02                   150.072
2.06.03                   150.072
2.06.04                   150.072
2.06.05                   150.072
2.07.01                   150.085
2.07.02                   150.086
2.07.03                   150.087
2.07.04                   150.088
2.07.05                   150.089
2.07.06                   150.090
2.08.01                   150.105
2.08.02                   150.106
2.08.03                   150.107
2.08.04                   150.108
2.08.05                   150.109
2.08.06                   150.110
2.08.07                   150.111
2.08.08                   150.112
2.08.09                   150.113
2.08.10                   150.114
2.08.11                   150.115
2.08.12                   150.116
2.09.01                   150.073
2.09.02                   150.073
2.09.03                   150.073
2.09.04                   150.073
2.09.05                   150.073
2.10.01                   150.074
2.10.02                   150.074
2.11.01                   150.130
2.11.02                   150.131
2.11.05                   150.132
2.11.03                   150.132
2.11.04                   150.132
2.11.06                   150.133
2.12.01                   150.145
2.12.02                   150.146
2.12.03                   150.147
2.12.04                   150.148
2.12.05                   150.149
2.12.06                   150.150
2.12.07                   150.151
2.12.08                   150.152
2.12.09                   150.153
2.12.10                   150.154
2.12.11                   150.155
2.12.12                   150.156
2.12.13                   150.157
2.13.01                   150.004
2.13.02                   150.005
2.13.03                   150.006
2.13.04                   150.007
2.13.06                   150.008
2.13.07                   150.009
2.14                      150.010
3.01.01                   110.001
3.01.02                   110.002
3.01.03                   110.999
3.02.01                   110.015
3.02.02                   110.016
3.02.03                   110.017
3.02.04                   110.018
3.02.05                   110.019
3.02.06                   110.020
3.02.07                   110.021
3.02.08                   110.022
3.02.09                   110.023
3.02.10                   110.024
3.02.11                   110.025
3.02.12                   110.026
3.02.13                   110.027
3.02.14                   110.028
3.02.15                   110.029
3.02.16                   110.030
3.02.17                   110.031
3.02.18                   110.032
3.02.19                   110.033;
                          110.999
3.02.20                   110.034
3.02.21                   110.035
3.02.22                   110.036
3.02.23                   110.037
3.02.24                   110.038
3.02.25                   110.039
3.02.26                   110.040
3.02.27                   110.041
3.03.01                   110.055
3.03.02                   110.056
3.03.03                   110.057
3.03.04                   110.058
3.03.05                   110.059
3.03.06                   110.060
3.03.07                   110.061
3.03.08                   110.062
3.03.12                   110.063
3.04.01                   110.075
3.04.02                   110.076
3.04.03                   110.077
3.04.04                   110.078
3.04.05                   110.079
3.04.06                   110.080
3.04.07                   110.081
3.04.08                   110.082
3.04.09                   110.083
3.04.10                   110.084
6.01.01                   95.001
6.01.02                   95.002
6.01.03                   95.999
6.02.01                   95.015
6.02.02                   95.016
6.02.03                   95.017
6.02.04                   95.018
6.02.05                   95.019
6.02.06                   95.020
6.02.07                   95.021
6.02.08                   95.022
6.03.01                   95.035
6.03.02                   95.036
6.03.03                   95.037
6.03.04                   95.038
6.03.05                   95.039
6.03.06                   95.040
6.03.07                   95.041
6.03.08                   95.042
6.03.09                   95.043
6.03.10                   95.044
6.03.11                   95.045
6.03.12                   95.046
6.03.13                   95.047
6.03.14                   95.048
6.03.15                   95.049
6.04.01                   95.060
6.04.02                   95.061
6.04.03                   95.062
6.04.04                   95.063
6.04.05                   95.064
6.04.06                   95.065
6.04.07                   95.066
6.04.08                   95.067
6.04.09                   95.068
6.04.10                   95.069
6.04.11                   95.070
6.04.12                   95.071
6.04.13                   95.072
6.04.14                   95.073
6.04.15                   95.074
7.01.01                   30.01
7.01.02                   30.02
7.01.03                   30.03
7.01.04                   30.04
7.01.05                   30.05
7.01.06                   30.06
7.01.07                   30.07
7.01.08                   30.08
7.01.09                   30.09
7.01.10                   30.10
7.02.01                   31.01
7.02.02                   31.02
7.02.03                   31.03
7.03.01                   31.15
7.03.02                   31.16
7.03.03                   31.17
7.03.04                   31.18
7.03.05                   31.19
7.04.01                   32.01;
                          32.02
7.04.02                   32.15
7.04.03                   32.16
7.04.04                   32.17
7.04.05                   32.18
7.04.06                   32.19
7.04.07                   32.20
7.04.08                   32.21
7.04.09                   32.22
7.04.10                   32.23
7.04.11                   32.24
7.04.12                   32.25
7.04.13                   32.26
7.05.01                   33.01
7.05.02                   33.02
7.06.01                   34.01
7.06.02                   34.02
7.06.03                   34.03
7.06.04                   34.04
7.06.05                   34.05
7.06.06                   34.06
7.06.07                   34.07
7.06.08                   34.08
7.06.09                   34.09
7.06.10                   34.10
7.06.11                   34.11
7.07.01                   35.01
7.08.01                   32.27
7.08.02                   32.27
7.08.03                   32.27
7.08.04                   32.27
9.01.01                   96.001
9.01.02                   96.002;
                          96.003
9.01.03                   96.999
9.02.01                   96.015
9.02.02                   96.016
9.02.03                   96.017
9.02.04                   96.018
9.02.05                   96.019
9.03.01                   96.030
9.03.02                   96.031
9.03.03                   96.032
9.03.04                   96.033
9.03.05                   96.034
9.03.06                   96.035
9.03.07                   96.036
9.03.08                   96.037
9.03.09                   96.038
9.03.10                   96.039
9.03.11                   96.040
9.03.12                   96.041
9.03.13                   96.042
9.03.14                   96.043
9.04.01                   96.055
9.04.02                   96.056
9.04.03                   96.057
9.04.04                   96.058
9.04.05                   96.999
9.04.06                   96.059
9.04.07                   96.060
9.04.08                   96.061
9.04.09                   96.062
9.04.10                   96.063
9.04.11                   96.064
9.04.12                   96.065
9.04.13                   96.066;
                          96.999
9.04.14                   96.067
9.04.15                   96.068
9.04.16                   96.069
9.04.17                   96.070
9.04.18                   96.071
9.04.19                   96.072
Chapter 10.02             TSO Table I
Chapter 10.03             TSO Table I
Chapter 10.04             TSO Table I
Chapter 10.05             TSO Table I
11.01.01                  50.001
11.01.02                  50.002
11.01.03                  50.999
11.02.01                  50.003
11.03.01                  50.015
11.03.02                  50.016
11.03.03                  50.017
11.03.04                  50.018
11.03.05                  50.019
11.03.06                  50.020
11.03.07                  50.021
11.03.08                  50.022
11.03.09                  50.023
11.04.01                  50.035
11.04.02                  50.036
11.04.03                  50.037
11.04.04                  50.038
11.04.05                  50.039
11.04.06                  50.040
11.04.07                  50.041
11.04.08                  50.042
11.04.09                  50.043
11.04.10                  50.044
11.04.11                  50.045
11.04.12                  50.046
11.04.13                  50.047
11.04.14                  50.048
11.05.01                  50.105
11.05.02                  50.106
11.05.03                  50.107
11.05.04                  50.108
11.05.05                  50.109
11.05.06                  50.110
11.05.07                  50.111
11.05.08                  50.112
11.05.09                  50.113
11.05.10                  50.114
11.05.11                  50.115
11.05.12                  50.116
11.05.13                  50.117
11.05.14                  50.118
11.05.15                  50.119
11.05.16                  50.120
11.05.17                  50.121
11.05.18                  50.122
11.05.19                  50.123
11.05.20                  50.124
11.05.21                  50.125
11.05.22                  50.126
11.05.23                  50.127
11.05.24                  50.128
11.05.25                  50.129
11.05.26                  50.130
11.05.27                  50.131
11.05.28                  50.132
11.05.29                  50.133
11.05.30                  50.134
11.05.31                  50.135
11.05.32                  50.136
11.05.33                  50.137;
                          50.999
11.05.34                  50.138
11.05.35                  50.139
11.06.01                  50.080
11.06.02                  50.081
11.06.03                  50.082
11.06.04                  50.083
11.06.05                  50.084
11.06.06                  50.085
11.06.07                  50.086
11.06.08                  50.087
11.06.09                  50.088
11.06.10                  50.089
11.06.11                  50.090
11.06.12                  50.091
11.06.13                  50.092
11.06.14                  50.093
11.06.15                  50.999
11.07.01                  50.060
11.07.02                  50.061
11.07.03                  50.062
11.07.04                  50.063
11.07.05                  50.064
11.07.06                  50.065
11.07.07                  50.066
11.07.08                  50.067
11.08.01                  91.01
11.08.02                  91.02
11.08.03                  91.99
11.08.04                  91.03
11.08.05                  91.04
11.08.06                  91.05
11.08.07                  91.06
11.08.08                  91.07
11.08.09                  91.08
11.08.10                  91.09
11.08.11                  91.10
11.08.12                  91.11
11.08.13                  91.12
11.08.14                  91.13
11.08.15                  91.14
11.08.16                  91.15
11.08.17                  91.16
11.08.18                  91.17
11.08.19                  91.18
11.08.20                  91.19
11.08.21                  91.20
12.01.01                  94.001
12.01.02                  94.002
12.01.03                  94.999
12.02.01                  94.015
12.02.02                  94.016
12.02.03                  94.017
12.02.04                  94.018
12.02.05                  94.019
12.02.06                  94.020
12.02.07                  94.021
12.02.08                  94.022
12.02.09                  94.023
12.02.10                  94.024
12.03.01                  94.035
12.03.02                  94.036
12.04.01                  94.050
12.04.02                  94.051
12.04.03                  94.052
12.04.04                  94.053
12.04.05                  94.999
12.05.01                  94.065
12.05.02                  94.066
12.05.03                  94.067
12.05.04                  94.068
12.06.01                  94.080
12.06.02                  94.081
12.06.03                  94.082
12.06.04                  94.083
12.06.05                  94.084
12.07.01                  94.095
12.07.02                  94.096
12.07.03                  94.097
12.07.04                  94.098
12.07.05                  94.099
12.07.06                  94.100
12.07.07                  94.101
12.07.08                  94.102
12.08.01                  94.115
12.08.02                  94.116
12.08.03                  94.117
12.08.04                  94.118
12.08.05                  94.119
12.08.06                  94.120
12.08.07                  94.121
12.08.08                  94.122
12.08.09                  94.123
12.09.01                  94.135
12.09.02                  94.136
12.09.03                  94.137
12.10.01                  94.150
12.10.02                  94.151
12.10.03                  94.152
12.10.04                  94.153
12.10.05                  94.154
12.10.06                  94.155
12.10.07                  94.156
12.10.08                  94.157
12.10.09                  94.158
12.10.10                  94.159
12.10.11                  94.160
12.10.12                  94.161
12.10.13                  94.162
12.10.14                  94.163
12.10.15                  94.164
13.01.01                  130.001
13.01.02                  130.002
13.01.03                  130.999
13.02.01                  130.015
13.02.02                  130.016
13.02.03                  130.017
13.02.04                  130.018
13.02.05                  130.019
13.02.06                  130.020
13.02.07                  130.021
13.02.08                  130.022
13.02.09                  130.023
13.02.10                  130.024
13.02.11                  130.025
13.02.12                  130.026
13.02.13                  130.027
13.03.01                  130.040
13.03.02                  130.041
13.03.03                  130.042
13.03.04                  130.043
13.04.01                  130.090
13.04.02                  130.091
13.04.03                  130.092
13.04.04                  130.093
13.04.05                  130.094
13.05.01                  130.075
13.05.02                  130.076
13.06.01                  130.055
13.06.02                  130.056
13.06.03                  130.057
13.06.04                  130.058
13.06.05                  130.059
13.06.06                  130.060
13.06.07                  130.061
13.06.08                  130.062
14.01.01                  90.001
14.01.02                  90.002
14.01.03                  90.999
14.02.01                  90.025
14.02.02                  90.026
14.02.03                  90.027
14.02.04                  90.028
14.02.05                  90.029
14.02.06                  90.030
14.02.07                  90.031
14.02.08                  90.032
14.02.09                  90.033
14.02.10                  90.034
14.03.01                  90.045
14.03.02                  90.046
14.03.03                  90.047
14.03.04                  90.048
14.03.05                  90.049
14.03.06                  90.050
14.04.01                  90.065
14.04.02                  90.066
14.04.03                  90.067
14.04.04                  90.068
14.04.05                  90.069
14.05.01                  90.080
14.05.02                  90.081
14.05.03                  90.082
14.05.04                  90.083
14.05.05                  90.084
14.05.06                  90.085
14.05.07                  90.086
14.06.01                  90.003
14.06.02                  90.004
14.06.03                  90.005
14.06.04                  90.006
14.06.05                  90.007
14.06.06                  90.008
14.06.07                  90.009
Chapter 14.07             90.010
15.01.03                  151.999
15.02.01                  151.020
15.02.02                  151.021
15.02.03                  151.022
15.02.04                  151.023
15.02.05                  151.024
15.02.06                  151.025
15.03.01                  151.040
15.03.02                  151.041
15.03.03                  151.042
15.03.04                  151.043
15.03.05                  151.044
15.03.06                  151.045
15.03.07                  151.046
15.03.08                  151.047
15.03.09                  151.048
15.04.01                  151.001
15.04.02                  151.002
15.04.03                  151.003
15.04.04                  151.004
15.04.05                  151.005
15.04.06                  151.006
15.05.01                  151.060
15.05.02                  151.061
15.05.03                  151.062
15.05.04                  151.063
15.05.05                  151.064
15.05.06                  151.065
15.05.07                  151.066
15.05.08                  151.067
15.05.09                  151.068
15.05.10                  151.069
15.05.11                  151.070
15.05.12                  151.071
15.06.01                  151.999
15.06.02                  151.007
15.06.03                  151.007
15.06.06                  151.007
15.06.04                  151.007
15.07.01                  151.085
15.07.02                  151.086
15.07.03                  151.087
15.07.04                  151.088
15.07.05                  151.999
15.07.06                  151.089
15.07.07                  151.090
15.07.08                  151.091
15.07.09                  151.092
16.01.01                  70.01
16.01.02                  70.02
16.01.03                  70.99
16.02.01                  71.001
16.02.02                  71.002
16.02.03                  71.003
16.02.04                  71.004
16.02.05                  71.005
16.02.06                  71.006
16.02.07                  71.007
16.02.08                  71.008
16.02.09                  71.009
16.02.10                  71.010
16.02.11                  71.011
16.02.12                  71.012
16.02.13                  71.013
16.02.14                  71.014
16.02.15                  71.015
16.02.16                  71.016
16.02.17                  71.017
16.02.18                  71.018
16.02.19                  71.019
16.02.20                  71.020
16.02.21                  71.020
16.02.22                  71.021
16.02.23                  71.022
16.02.24                  71.023
16.02.25                  71.024
16.02.26                  71.025
16.03.01                  71.040
16.03.02                  71.041
16.03.03                  71.042
16.03.04                  71.043
16.03.05                  71.044
16.03.06                  71.045
16.03.07                  71.046
16.03.08                  71.047
16.04.01                  71.060
16.04.02                  71.061
16.04.03                  71.062
16.04.04                  71.063
16.04.05                  71.064
16.05.01                  73.01
16.05.02                  73.02
16.05.03                  72.01
16.05.04                  72.02
16.05.05                  72.03
16.05.06                  72.04
16.05.07                  72.05
16.05.08                  72.06
16.05.10                  72.07
16.05.11                  72.07
16.05.09                  72.07
16.05.12                  72.08
16.05.13                  72.09
16.05.15                  72.10
16.05.16                  72.11
16.05.17                  72.12
16.05.14                  72.99
16.06.01                  73.03
16.06.02                  73.04
16.06.03                  73.05
16.06.04                  73.06
16.06.05                  73.07
16.06.06                  73.08
16.06.08                  73.09
16.07.01                  71.075
16.07.02                  71.076
16.07.03                  71.077
16.08.01                  71.090
16.08.02                  71.091
16.08.03                  71.092
16.08.04                  71.093
16.08.05                  71.094
16.08.06                  71.095
16.08.07                  71.096
16.09.01                  74.01
16.09.02                  74.02
16.09.03                  74.03
16.09.04                  74.04
16.10.01                  74.15
16.10.02                  74.16
16.10.03                  74.17
16.10.04                  74.18
16.10.05                  74.19
16.10.06                  74.20
16.10.07                  74.21
16.10.08                  74.99
17.01.01                  51.01
17.02.01                  51.15
17.02.02                  51.16
17.02.03                  51.17
Title 18, Art. I, 1       156.001
Title 18, Art. I, 2       156.002
Title 18, Art. I, 3       156.003
Title 18, Art. II         156.004
Title 18, Art. III, 1     156.015
Title 18, Art. III, 2     156.016
Title 18, Art. III, 3     156.017
Title 18, Art. III, 4     156.018
18.05.01                  156.030—
                          156.037
18.05.02                  156.050—
                          156.057
18.05.03                  156.070—
                          156.077
18.05.04                  156.090—
                          156.097
18.05.05                  156.110—
                          156.117
18.05.06                  156.130—
                          156.138
18.05.07                  156.150—
                          156.156
18.05.08                  156.170—
                          156.176
                          156.190—
18.05.09                  156.197;
                          156.999
18.05.10                  156.210—
                          156.217
18.05.11                  156.230—
                          156.237
18.05.12                  156.250—
                          156.257
18.05.13                  156.270—
                          156.276
18.05.14                  156.290—
                          156.292
18.05.15                  156.305
18.05.16                  156.320—
                          156.326
18.05.17                  156.340—
                          156.349
18.05.19.01               156.360
18.05.19.02               156.361
18.05.19.03               156.362
18.05.19.04               156.999
18.05.19.05               156.363
18.05.19.06               156.364
18.05.19.07               156.365
18.05.19.08               156.366
18.05.19.09               156.367
18.05.19.10               156.368
18.05.19.11               156.369
18.05.19.12               156.370
18.5.15.01                156.410
18.5.15.02                156.411
18.5.15.03                156.412
18.5.15.04                156.413
18.5.15.05                156.414
18.5.15.06                156.415
18.5.15.07                156.416
Title 18, Art. V, 1       156.385
Title 18, Art. V, 2       156.386
Title 18, Art. V, 3       156.387
Title 18, Art. V, 4       156.388
Title 18, Art. V, 5       156.389
Title 18, Art. V, 6       156.390
Title 18, Art. V, 7       156.391
Title 18, Art. V, 8       156.392
Title 18, Art. V, 9       156.393
Title 18, Art. V, 10      156.394
Title 18, Art. V, 11      156.395
Title 18, Art. V, 12      156.396
Title 18, Art. V, 13      156.397
Title 18, Art. VI         156.430—
                          156.439
Title 18, Art. IX, 1      156.450
Title 18, Art. IX, 2      156.451
Title 18, Art. IX, 3      156.452
Title 18, Art. IX, 4      156.453
Title 18, Art. IX, 5      156.454
Title 18, Art. IX, 6      156.455
Title 18, Art. IX, 7      156.456
Title 18, Art. IX, 8      156.457
Title 18, Art. IX, 9      156.458
Title 18, Art. IX, 10     156.459
Title 18, Art. IX, 11     156.460;
                          156.999
Title 18, Art. IX, 12     156.461
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-1 156.475
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-2 156.476
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-3 156.477
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-4 156.478
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-5 156.479
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-6 156.480
Title 18, Art. XI, 11-1-7 156.481
Title 18, Art. VII, 1     156.495
Title 18, Art. VII, 2     156.496
Title 18, Art. VII, 3     156.497
Title 18, Art. VII, 4     156.498
Title 18, Art. VII, 5     156.499
Title 18, Art. VII, 6     156.500
Title 18, Art. VII, 7     156.501
Title 18, Art. VII, 8     156.999
Title 18, Art. VII, 10    156.502
Title 18, Art. IX, 13     156.999
19.01.01                  154.001
19.01.02                  154.002
19.01.03                  154.999
19.02.01                  154.015
19.02.02                  154.016
19.02.03                  154.017
19.03.01                  154.030
19.03.02                  154.031
19.03.03                  154.032
19.03.04                  154.033
19.03.05                  154.034
19.03.06                  154.035
19.03.07                  154.036
19.03.08                  154.037
19.04.01                  154.050
19.04.02                  154.051
19.04.03                  154.052
19.04.04                  154.053
19.04.05                  154.054
19.04.06                  154.055
19.04.07                  154.056
19.04.08                  154.057
19.04.09                  154.058
19.04.10                  154.059
19.04.11                  154.060
19.04.12                  154.061
19.04.13                  154.062
19.05.01                  154.075
19.05.02                  154.076
19.05.03                  154.077
19.05.04                  154.078
19.05.05                  154.079
19.05.06                  154.080
19.05.07                  154.081
19.05.08                  154.082
19.05.09                  154.083
19.05.10                  154.084
19.05.11                  154.085
19.06.01                  154.100
19.06.02                  154.101
19.06.03                  154.102
20.01.01                  34.25
20.01.03                  34.99
20.02.01                  34.26
20.02.02                  34.27
20.02.03                  34.28
20.02.04                  34.29
20.02.05                  34.30
20.02.06                  34.31
20.03.01                  34.32
20.03.02                  34.32
20.03.03                  34.32
20.03.04                  34.32
22.01.01                  32.28
22.02.01                  32.28
22.02.02                  32.28
22.02.03                  32.28
22.02.04                  32.28
22.02.05                  32.28
22.03.01                  32.29
22.03.02                  32.29
22.03.03                  32.29
22.03.04                  32.29
22.03.05                  32.29
22.03.06                  32.29
22.03.07                  32.29
23.01.01                  111.01
23.01.02                  111.02
23.01.03                  111.03
23.01.04                  111.04
23.01.05                  111.05
23.01.06                  111.06
23.01.07                  111.07
23.01.08                  111.08;
                          111.99
23.01.09                  111.09
23.01.10                  111.10
23.01.11                  111.11
23.01.12                  111.12
23.01.13                  111.13
23.01.14                  111.14
23.01.15                  111.15
23.01.16                  111.16
23.01.17                  111.17
23.01.18                  111.18
23.01.19                  111.30
23.01.20                  111.31
23.01.21                  111.32
23.01.22                  111.33
23.01.23                  111.34
23.01.24                  111.35;
                          111.99
23.01.25                  111.36
23.01.26                  111.37
23.01.27                  111.38
23.01.28                  111.39
23.01.29                  111.40
23.01.30                  111.41
23.01.31                  111.42
23.01.32                  111.43
24.01                     34.45
24.02                     34.46
24.03                     34.47
24.04                     34.48
24.05                     34.49
24.06                     34.50
25.01.01                  112.01
25.01.02                  112.02
25.01.03                  112.99
25.02.01                  112.15
25.02.02                  112.16
25.02.03                  112.17
25.02.04                  112.18
25.02.05                  112.19
25.02.06                  112.20
25.02.07                  112.21
25.02.08                  112.22
25.02.09                  112.23
25.02.10                  112.24
25.02.11                  112.25
25.02.12                  112.26
25.02.13                  112.27
25.02.14                  112.28
25.02.15                  112.29
26.01.01                  36.01
26.01.02                  36.99
26.02.01                  36.15
26.02.02                  36.16
26.02.03                  36.17
26.02.04                  36.18
26.02.05                  36.19
26.02.06                  36.20
26.03.01                  36.35
26.03.02                  36.36
26.03.03                  36.37
26.03.04                  36.38
26.03.05                  36.39
26.03.06                  36.40
26.03.07                  36.41
26.03.08                  36.42
26.03.09                  36.43
26.03.10                  36.44
27.01.01                  150.170
Title 28, 1               151.105
Title 28, 2               151.106
Title 28, 3               151.107
Title 28, 4               151.108;
                          151.999
Title 28, 5               151.109
Title 28, 6               151.110
29.01.01                  32.30
29.01.03                  32.99
29.02.01                  32.30
29.02.02                  32.30
29.02.03                  32.30
29.02.04                  32.30
29.02.05                  32.30
29.02.06                  32.30
30.01.01                  152.001
30.01.02                  152.002
30.01.03                  152.003
30.01.04                  152.004
30.01.05                  152.005
30.01.06                  152.999
30.02.01                  152.020
30.02.02                  152.021
30.02.03                  152.022
30.02.04                  152.023
30.02.05                  152.024
30.02.06                  152.025
30.02.07                  152.026
30.02.08                  152.027
30.02.09                  152.028
30.02.10                  152.029
30.02.11                  152.030
30.02.12                  152.031
30.02.13                  152.032
30.02.14                  152.033
30.02.15                  152.034
30.02.16                  152.035
30.03.01                  152.050
30.03.02                  152.051
30.03.03                  152.052
30.03.04                  152.053
30.03.05                  152.054
30.04.01                  152.065
30.04.02                  152.066
30.04.03                  152.067
30.04.04                  152.068
30.04.05                  152.069
30.04.06                  152.070
30.04.07                  152.071
30.04.08                  152.072
30.04.09                  152.073
30.04.10                  152.074
30.04.11                  152.075
30.04.12                  152.076
30.04.13                  152.077
30.05.01                  152.006
31.01.01                  113.01
31.01.02                  113.02
31.01.04                  113.99
31.02.01                  113.15
31.02.02                  113.16
31.02.03                  113.17
31.03.01                  113.30
31.03.02                  113.31
31.03.03                  113.32
31.03.04                  113.33
31.03.05                  113.34
31.03.06                  113.35
31.03.07                  113.99
32.01.02                  92.001
32.01.03                  92.999
32.01.04                  92.002
32.02.01                  92.030
32.02.02                  92.031
32.02.03                  92.032
32.02.04                  92.033
32.02.05                  92.034
32.02.06                  92.035
32.02.07                  92.036
32.02.08                  92.037
32.02.09                  92.038
32.02.10                  92.039
32.02.11                  92.040
32.02.12                  92.041
32.02.13                  92.042
32.02.14                  92.055
32.02.15                  92.056
32.02.16                  92.057
32.02.17                  92.057
32.02.18                  92.057
32.02.19                  92.015
32.02.20                  92.016
32.02.21                  92.017
32.02.22                  92.043
32.03.01                  92.070
32.03.02                  92.071
32.03.03                  92.072
32.03.04                  92.073
32.03.05                  92.074
32.03.06                  92.075
32.03.07                  92.076
32.03.08                  92.077
32.03.09                  92.078
32.03.10                  92.079
32.04.01                  92.080
32.04.02                  92.080
32.04.03                  92.080
32.05.01                  93.01
32.05.02                  93.02
32.05.03                  93.03
32.05.04                  93.04
32.05.05                  93.05
32.05.06                  93.06
32.05.07                  93.07
32.05.08                  93.08
32.05.09                  93.09
32.05.10                  93.99
32.06.01                  92.095
32.06.02                  92.096
32.06.03                  92.097
32.06.04                  92.098
32.06.05                  92.099
32.06.06                  92.100
32.06.07                  92.101
32.06.08                  92.102
32.06.09                  92.103
32.06.10                  92.104
32.06.11                  92.105
32.06.12                  92.106
32.06.13                  92.107
32.06.14                  92.108
32.06.15                  92.109
32.06.16                  92.110
32.06.17                  92.999
33.01.01                  153.001
33.01.02                  153.002
33.01.03                  153.999
33.02.01                  153.015
33.02.02                  153.016
33.03.01                  153.030
33.03.02                  153.031
33.03.03                  153.032
33.03.04                  153.033
33.03.05                  153.034
33.03.06                  153.035
33.03.07                  153.036
33.03.08                  153.037
33.04.01                  153.050
33.04.02                  153.051
33.04.03                  153.052
33.04.04                  153.053
33.04.05                  153.054
33.04.06                  153.055
33.04.07                  153.056
33.04.08                  153.057
33.04.09                  153.058
33.04.10                  153.059
33.04.11                  153.060
33.04.12                  153.061
33.05.01                  153.075
33.05.02                  153.076
33.06.01                  153.090
33.06.02                  153.091
33.06.03                  153.092
33.06.04                  153.093
33.06.05                  153.094
33.06.06                  153.095
33.06.07                  153.096
33.06.08                  153.077
33.06.09                  153.078
33.07.01                  153.110
33.07.02                  153.111
33.07.03                  153.112
33.07.04                  153.113
33.08.01                  153.125
33.08.02                  153.126
33.08.03                  153.127
33.08.04                  153.128
33.08.05                  153.129
33.08.06                  153.130
33.08.07                  153.131
Chapter 33.09             153.003
34.01.01                  155.01
34.01.02                  155.02
34.01.03                  155.03
34.01.04                  155.04
34.01.05                  155.05
34.01.06                  155.06
34.01.07                  155.07
34.01.08                  155.08
34.01.09                  155.09
34.01.10                  155.10
34.02.01                  155.25
34.02.02                  155.26
34.02.03                  155.27
34.02.04                  155.28
34.02.05                  155.29
34.03.01                  155.40
34.03.02                  155.41
34.03.03                  155.42
34.03.04                  155.43
34.03.05                  155.44
35.01.01                  52.001
35.01.02                  52.002
35.01.03                  52.003
35.02.01                  52.004
35.03.01                  52.020
35.03.02                  52.021
35.04.01                  52.035
35.04.02                  52.036
35.04.03                  52.037
35.04.04                  52.038
35.04.05                  52.039
35.04.06                  52.040
35.04.07                  52.041
35.04.08                  52.042
35.05.01                  52.055
35.05.02                  52.056
35.05.03                  52.057
35.05.04                  52.058
35.06.01                  52.005
35.07.01                  52.006
35.08.01                  52.070
35.08.02                  52.071
35.09.01                  52.007
35.10.01                  52.008
35.11.01                  52.999
36.01.01                  37.01
36.01.02                  37.02
36.01.03                  37.99
36.02.01                  37.15
36.02.02                  37.16
36.03.01                  37.30
36.03.02                  37.31
36.03.03                  37.32
36.03.04                  37.33
36.03.05                  37.34
36.03.06                  37.35
36.03.07                  37.36
36.03.08                  37.37
36.03.09                  37.38
36.03.10                  37.39
36.03.11                  37.40
36.03.12                  37.41
36.03.13                  37.42
36.03.14                  37.43
36.04.01                  37.55
36.04.02                  37.56
36.04.03                  37.57
36.04.04                  37.58
36.04.05                  37.59
36.04.06                  37.60
36.04.07                  37.61
37.01.01                  114.01
37.01.02                  114.02
37.01.03                  114.99
37.02.01                  114.15
37.02.02                  114.16
37.02.03                  114.17
37.02.04                  114.18
37.02.05                  114.19
37.02.06                  114.20
37.02.07                  114.21
37.02.08                  114.22
37.02.09                  114.23
37.02.10                  114.24
37.02.11                  114.25
37.02.12                  114.26
37.02.13                  114.27
37.02.14                  114.28
37.02.15                  114.29
37.02.16                  114.30
37.04.01                  114.45
37.04.02                  114.46
37.04.03                  114.47
37.04.04                  114.48
37.04.05                  114.49
37.04.06                  114.50
37.04.07                  114.51
37.04.08                  114.52
37.04.09                  114.53
37.04.10                  114.54
37.04.11                  114.55
37.04.12                  114.56
37.04.13                  114.57
37.04.14                  114.99
38.01.01                  115.01
38.01.02                  115.99
38.02.01                  115.15
38.02.02                  115.16
38.02.03                  115.17
38.02.04                  115.35
38.02.05                  115.36
38.02.06                  115.18
38.02.07                  115.19
38.02.08                  115.20
38.03.01                  115.37
38.03.02                  115.37
38.04.01                  115.38
38.04.02                  115.39
38.04.03                  115.40
38.04.04                  115.41
38.04.05                  115.42
38.04.06                  115.43
38.05.01                  115.21
38.05.02                  115.22
38.05.03                  115.23
39-1-1                    116.01
39-1-2                    116.02
39-1-3                    116.03
39-1-4                    116.04
39-1-5                    116.05
39-1-6                    116.06
39-1-7                    116.07
39-1-8                    116.08
39-1-9                    116.09
39-1-10                   116.10
39-1-12                   116.11
39-1-13                   116.12
39-1-14                   116.13
39-1-15                   116.14
39-1-16                   116.15
39-1-17                   116.16
39-1-18                   116.99
                          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        -           TSO Table I
-        -           TSO Table I
-        -           TSO Table I
2024-03  - -         30.10
1997-06  5-12-1997   156.500
                     156.450—
1999-07  4-30-1999   156.461;
                     156.999
                     151.105—
2000-04  5-26-2000   151.110;
                     151.999
2001-29  2-1-2002    30.06
                     151.001;
2003-12  11-28-2003  156.497;
                     156.501
2004-09  5-14-2004   50.060—
                     50.067
                     94.001;
                     94.002;
                     94.015—
                     94.024;
                     94.035;
                     94.036;
                     94.050—
2004-11  7-24-2004   94.053;
                     94.065—
                     94.068;
                     94.080—
                     94.084;
                     94.095—
                     94.102;
                     94.999
                     90.001—
                     90.009;
                     90.025—
                     90.034;
                     90.045—
2005-4   4-1-2005    90.050;
                     90.065—
                     90.069;
                     90.080—
                     90.086;
                     90.999
                     92.001;
                     92.002;
                     92.015—
                     92.017;
2005-05  4-22-2005   92.030—
                     92.043;
                     92.055—
                     92.057;
                     92.070—
                     92.080
                     151.001—
                     151.007;
                     151.020—
                     151.025;
                     151.040—
2005-09  4-29-2005   151.048;
                     151.060—
                     151.071;
                     151.085—
                     151.092;
                     151.999
2005-10  5-20-2005   156.389
                     34.25—
2005-16  11-11-2005  34.32;
                     34.99
                     154.001;
                     154.002;
                     154.015—
                     154.017;
                     154.030—
                     154.037;
2005-14  12-16-2005  154.050—
                     154.062;
                     154.075—
                     154.085;
                     154.100—
                     154.102;
                     154.999
                     112.01;
                     112.02;
2006-03  3-25-2006   112.15—
                     112.29;
                     112.99
                     130.001;
                     130.002;
                     130.015—
                     130.027;
                     130.040—
                     130.043;
2006-06  5-20-2006   130.055—
                     130.062;
                     130.075;
                     130.076;
                     130.090—
                     130.094;
                     130.999
                     70.01;
                     70.02;
                     70.99;
                     71.001—
                     71.025;
                     71.040—
                     71.047;
                     71.060—
                     71.064;
                     71.075—
                     71.077;
2006-07  5-20-2006   71.090—
                     71.096;
                     72.01—
                     72.12;
                     72.99;
                     73.01—
                     73.09;
                     74.01—
                     74.04;
                     74.15—
                     74.21;
                     74.99
                     51.01;
2006-10  5-27-2006   51.15—
                     51.17
2006-12  5-27-2006   32.28;
                     32.29
2006-14  8-5-2006    156.015
2006-15  8-5-2006    156.340—
                     156.349
                     96.001—
                     96.003;
                     96.015—
                     96.019;
2006-18  9-2-2006    96.030—
                     96.043;
                     96.055—
                     96.072;
                     96.999
2007-07  3-31-2007   130.022
2007-08  3-31-2007   130.092
2007-10  3-31-2007   151.001
2007-09  4-21-2007   130.093
                     153.001—
                     153.003;
                     153.015;
                     153.016;
                     153.030—
                     153.037;
                     153.050—
                     153.061;
2007-17  8-4-2007    153.075—
                     153.078;
                     153.090—
                     153.096;
                     153.110—
                     153.113;
                     153.125—
                     153.131;
                     153.999
2007-19  8-18-2007   130.024
2007-23  8-31-2007   153.032
2007-24  8-31-2007   153.126
2007-25  8-31-2007   73.09
2007-29  9-21-2007   71.025
2007-30  9-21-2007   34.45—
                     34.50
2007-31  9-21-2007   150.170
2007-32  9-21-2007   32.30
2007-37  11-2-2007   156.137
                     72.01—
                     72.12;
2008-03  3-22-2008   72.99;
                     73.01;
                     73.02
2008-05  6-7-2008    154.002
2008-20  10-18-2008  94.084
2008-21  10-18-2008  94.002
                     155.01—
                     155.10;
2009-10  4-6-2009    155.25—
                     155.29;
                     155.40—
                     155.44
2009-13  8-26-2009   156.037
2010-15  1-19-2010   35.01
                     37.01;
                     37.02;
                     37.15;
                     37.16;
2010-01  7-1-2010    37.30—
                     37.43;
                     37.55—
                     37.61;
                     37.99
                     34.45;
2010-03  7-21-2010   34.49;
                     34.50
                     52.001—
                     52.008;
                     52.020;
                     52.021;
                     52.035—
2010-06  7-21-2010   52.042;
                     52.055—
                     52.058;
                     52.070;
                     52.071;
                     52.999
2010-07  7-21-2010   130.026
2010-08  7-21-2010   71.060—
                     71.064
2010-09  8-18-2010   151.007
2010-13  12-15-2010  151.047;
                     151.048
2011-04  8-3-2011    130.015—
                     130.022
2011-06  8-24-2011   155.06
2011-08  12-27-2011  30.06
2012-03  4-4-2012    156.270—
                     156.276
                     154.016;
                     154.017;
                     154.030;
                     154.032—
                     154.036;
                     154.050;
                     154.051;
2012-04  5-2-2012    154.057—
                     154.059;
                     154.062;
                     154.075;
                     154.078—
                     154.080;
                     154.084;
                     154.085
                     112.01;
                     112.02;
2012-06  5-2-2012    112.15—
                     112.29;
                     112.99
2012-10  7-4-2012    92.072
                     74.15—
2012-11  7-18-2012   74.21;
                     74.99
                     91.01—
2012-12  8-1-2012    91.20;
                     91.99
2012-14  8-21-2012   156.385
                     31.15—
                     31.19;
                     32.01;
                     32.02;
                     32.15—
2012-16  12-5-2012   32.27;
                     33.01;
                     33.02;
                     34.01—
                     34.11;
                     35.01
                     50.003;
                     50.015—
                     50.023;
                     50.035—
                     50.048;
2012-19  1-2-2013    50.060—
                     50.067;
                     50.080—
                     50.093;
                     50.139;
                     50.999
                     96.001—
                     96.003;
                     96.015—
                     96.019;
2012-20  1-2-2013    96.030—
                     96.043;
                     96.055—
                     96.072;
                     96.999
                     50.021—
2013-05  4-2-2013    50.023;
                     50.035—
                     50.041
2013-08  7-18-2013   114.01
2013-09  7-30-2013   50.135
                     115.01;
                     115.15—
2013-12  9-3-2013    115.23;
                     115.35—
                     115.43;
                     115.99
2013-11  9-4-2013    155.02;
                     155.25
                     156.004;
2013-13  10-16-2013  156.270—
                     156.276;
                     156.498
                     50.023;
2013-16  11-20-2013  50.046—
                     50.048;
                     50.135
2013-17  11-20-2013  130.016—
                     130.027
                     151.047;
2013-18  11-20-2013  151.048;
                     151.066
                     112.21;
2013-19  11-20-2013  112.24;
                     112.25
                     156.004;
                     156.016;
2013-20  12-4-2013   156.389;
                     156.497;
                     156.500
                     94.152—
                     94.154;
2013-22  12-18-2013  94.156;
                     94.159—
                     94.161;
                     94.163
2013-24  1-1-2014    90.002;
                     90.068
                     37.02;
                     37.34;
2014-01  2-19-2014   37.37—
                     37.43;
                     37.55;
                     37.60
                     96.002;
                     96.003;
2014-02  3-5-2014    96.039;
                     96.063—
                     96.067;
                     96.999
                     94.115—
                     94.123;
2014-03  3-5-2014    94.135—
                     94.137;
                     94.150—
                     94.164
2014-04  3-19-2014   114.01
2014-06  4-16-2014   130.025
2014-07  6-4-2014    35.01
2014-08  7-2-2014    94.002
2014-10  8-6-2014    92.001;
                     92.080
                     51.01;
2014-12  8-20-2014   51.15—
                     51.17
2014-17  1-14-2015   51.01;
                     51.16
                     156.090—
2015-01  2-4-2015    156.097;
                     156.110—
                     156.117
2019-01  2-5-2015    96.072
2015-03  4-1-2015    72.05;
                     72.06
2015-11  11-18-2015  92.999
2015-12  11-18-2015  96.056
2015-13  12-2-2015   110.027
2015-14  12-2-2015   130.094
2015-15  1-27-2016   50.135
2016-01  6-1-2016    110.056
2016-02  6-1-2016    156.211;
                     156.394
                     50.037;
                     50.041;
2016-05  7-11-2016   50.080—
                     50.093;
                     50.139;
                     50.999
2016-06  8-17-2016   92.017;
                     92.999
                     150.001—
                     150.010;
                     150.025—
                     150.032;
                     150.045—
                     150.058;
                     150.070—
                     150.074;
2016-10  12-28-2016  150.085—
                     150.090;
                     150.105—
                     150.116;
                     150.130—
                     150.133;
                     150.145—
                     150.157;
                     150.999
                     90.001;
                     90.003—
                     90.010;
                     90.025—
                     90.034;
2016-12  1-25-2017   90.045—
                     90.050;
                     90.065;
                     90.080;
                     90.081;
                     90.083;
                     90.086
                     156.004;
                     156.030—
                     156.034;
                     156.054;
                     156.090;
2016-13  1-25-2017   156.092;
                     156.112;
                     156.132;
                     156.152;
                     156.172;
                     156.496
                     113.01;
                     113.02;
                     113.15—
2016-14  1-25-2017   113.17;
                     113.30—
                     113.35;
                     113.99
                     93.01—
2017-01  4-6-2017    93.09;
                     93.99
                     152.001—
                     152.006;
                     152.020—
                     152.035;
2017-02  5-17-2017   152.050—
                     152.054;
                     152.065—
                     152.077;
                     152.999
                     36.01;
                     36.15—
2017-03  5-31-2017   36.20;
                     36.35—
                     36.44;
                     36.99
2017-04  5-31-2017   150.055—
                     150.058
                     113.02;
                     113.17;
2017-05  5-31-2017   113.30—
                     113.35;
                     113.99
                     96.002;
                     96.003;
                     96.016;
                     96.030;
                     96.033;
2017-10  12-20-2017  96.034;
                     96.036;
                     96.068;
                     96.071;
                     96.072;
                     96.999
2018-02  3-21-2018   156.250—
                     156.257
2018-04  5-15-2018   154.079
2018-05  5-15-2018   34.28
                     113.01;
                     113.02;
                     113.15—
2018-06  7-5-2018    113.17;
                     113.30—
                     113.35;
                     113.99
2018-07  7-17-2018   50.021
2018-10  7-30-2018   50.046
                     95.001;
                     95.002;
                     95.015—
                     95.022;
2018-08  10-1-2018   95.035—
                     95.049;
                     95.060—
                     95.074;
                     95.999
                     156.190—
2018-13  10-27-2018  156.197;
                     156.999
2018-14  12-28-2018  151.041
2019-02  2-5-2019    150.025
2019-03  3-5-2019    156.410—
                     156.416
                     92.001;
                     92.015;
2019-04  3-5-2019    92.035;
                     92.040—
                     92.042;
                     92.078
                     96.002;
2019-06  4-29-2019   96.003;
                     96.066;
                     96.999
2091-06  4-29-2019   96.072
2019-05  7-2-2019    32.27
                     95.015—
                     95.022;
                     95.035;
2019-09  10-15-2019  95.038;
                     95.041—
                     95.043;
                     95.049;
                     95.060
                     110.002;
                     110.015;
                     110.028;
                     110.031;
                     110.033;
                     110.034;
                     110.036;
                     110.040;
2019-08  11-5-2019   110.041;
                     110.055;
                     110.057;
                     110.058;
                     110.060;
                     110.063;
                     110.078;
                     110.084;
                     110.999
                     152.020;
                     152.024—
                     152.026;
                     152.033;
2019-11  11-19-2019  152.034;
                     152.052;
                     152.053;
                     152.067—
                     152.069;
                     152.073
                     50.021;
2019-13  12-31-2019  50.046;
                     50.135
2019-14  12-31-2019  156.230;
                     156.231
2021-02  6-21-2021   116.17
                     36.15;
2021-01  7-5-2021    36.19;
                     36.20;
                     36.39
2021-03  8-3-2021    150.025
2021-04  8-16-2021   92.073;
                     92.074
2021-07  10-5-2021   156.475—
                     156.481
                     116.01—
2021-06  10-18-2021  116.16;
                     116.99
                     156.496;
2021-09  12-14-2021  156.499;
                     156.500
                     91.01—
2021-10  12-14-2021  91.20;
                     91.99
2021-12  1-28-2022   30.06
2022-01  2-14-2022   151.060—
                     151.071
                     156.360—
2022-02  2-14-2022   156.370;
                     156.999
2022-04  3-7-2022    151.007
                     92.001;
                     92.002;
                     92.015—
                     92.017;
                     92.030—
                     92.043;
                     92.055—
2022-05  3-21-2022   92.057;
                     92.070—
                     92.080;
                     92.095—
                     92.110;
                     92.999;
                     93.01—
                     93.09;
                     93.99
                     71.016;
                     71.021;
                     71.040—
                     71.042;
2022-06  4-4-2022    71.046;
                     71.061;
                     71.062;
                     72.10;
                     72.99;
                     73.07
                     150.001—
                     150.010;
                     150.025—
                     150.058;
                     150.070—
                     150.074;
                     150.085—
2022-07  5-17-2022   150.090;
                     150.105—
                     150.116;
                     150.130—
                     150.133;
                     150.145—
                     150.157;
                     150.999
2022-08  8-15-2022   150.025
                     151.085—
2022-12  2-2-2023    151.092;
                     151.999
2023-1   3-8-2023    TSO Table I
                     30.07;
                     30.08;
                     32.27;
2023-03  5-2-2023    36.16;
                     90.026;
                     90.030;
                     90.032
2024-02  4-3-2024    114.02;
                     114.99
2024-04  7-19-2024   110.026
2024-07  10-3-2024   10.04;
                     10.99
2025-01  4-7-2025    95.045
                    
 
