CITY OF TEA, SOUTH DAKOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through 327, passed 10-6-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Severability
   
10.06   Reference to other sections
   
10.07   Reference to offices
   
10.08   Errors and omissions
   
10.09   Powers to enact, amend or repeal ordinances and resolutions; generally
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.13   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.14   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters
and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Tea Code of Ordinances”,
for which designation “code of ordinances” or “codified ordinances” may be
substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant
to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
      (1)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (2)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (3)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding or thing shall have
reference to a municipality concerned or affected.
Statutory reference:
   General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding and the like, see
SDCL § 9-1-1
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code or ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Tea, South Dakota.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which any act provided by this code or
other ordinance is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the last is a holiday and then it also is excluded.
Fractions of a day are to be disregarded in computations which include more
than one day, and involve no questions of priority.
   COUNTY. The County of Lincoln, South Dakota.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Tea City Council.
   LOT. Includes PARCEL or TRACT OF LAND.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. The City of Tea, South Dakota.
   ORDINANCE. A permanent legislative act within the limits of its powers of
the governing body of a municipality.
   OWNER. The grantee in the last deed of conveyance of any lot or parcel of
land recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county which the
municipality is located or the heirs or successors to the grantee.
   PUBLISH. Publication in an official newspaper of the municipality as
designated by the governing body, pursuant to SDCL § 9-12-6.
   RESOLUTION. Any determination, decision or direction of the governing body
of a municipality of a temporary or special character for the purpose of
initiating, effecting or carrying out its administrative duties and functions.
   SDCL. South Dakota Codified Laws.
   STATE. The State of South Dakota.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
Statutory reference:
   Related definitions, see SDCL §§ 9-1-1 and 9-19-1
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.06 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.09 POWERS TO ENACT, AMEND OR REPEAL ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; GENERALLY.
   Every municipality may enact, make, amend, revise or repeal all such
ordinances, resolutions and regulations as may be proper and necessary to carry
into effect the powers granted thereto.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoined and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.14 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Except in cases where a different or additional penalty is imposed by this
code of ordinances or by some existing provision of law, every violation of any
of the provisions of this code of ordinances shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $100 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 17.01)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Boundaries
   
11.02   Wards and voting precincts
§ 11.01 BOUNDARIES.
   The corporate limits of the city shall be declared to be such as have been
legally established and amended by law and ordinances of the city, as shown on
the official map on file in the office of the Finance Officer. Such map shall
be incorporated in this section by reference and adopted as the official map
showing the boundaries and limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-3-2 and 9-4-1
§ 11.02 WARDS AND VOTING PRECINCTS.
   (A)   The city shall be divided into three wards, which shall be combined
and consolidated into one election precinct, and shall be designated
respectively as Wards One, Two and Three. The wards shall be described by
stating the certain street or avenue designations or other landmarks that
divide and border the wards. Any reference to street or avenue below shall mean
an imaginary line running down the approximate middle of each street or avenue.
The wards of the city are as set forth below and on the map thereof on file in
the office of the Finance Officer. Any discrepancies shall be resolved by
reference to the map rather than the physical descriptions set forth herein.
   (B)   (1)   Ward One shall include the following areas:
         (a)   South of First Street;
         (b)   West of N. Main Avenue; and
         (c)   South of W. Brian Street.
      (2)   Ward Two shall include the following areas:
         (a)   North of W. Brian Street;
         (b)   West of N. Main Avenue; and
         (c)   North of Gateway Boulevard (271st Street/CR 106).
      (3)   Ward Three shall include the following areas:
         (a)   East of N. Main Avenue;
         (b)   North of E. 1st Street; and
         (c)   South of Gateway Boulevard (271st Street/CR 106).
(Prior Code, § 2.02) (Ord. 291, passed 1-3-2022)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Mayor; duties
   
30.02   President and Vice President of Council
   
30.03   Council composition and terms
   
30.04   Compensation
   
30.05   Supervision of departments
   
30.06   Meetings
§ 30.01 MAYOR; DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council, but only votes
in case of a tie. The Mayor may not break a tie on an ordinance or proposal to
expend or appropriate money, per SDCL § 9-8-10. The Mayor shall perform such
other duties as may be prescribed by laws and ordinances and ensure that such
laws and ordinances are faithfully executed and shall have the power to veto
any part or item of an ordinance or resolution appropriating money.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. 50, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-8-3
§ 30.02 PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   At the first regular meeting in May, or the first meeting of the month
following the annual election, the City Council shall elect from among its
members a President and Vice President, who shall hold their respective offices
for the municipal year. The President of the City Council, in the absence of
the Mayor, shall be presiding officer of the City Council, and during the
temporary disability or absence of the Mayor from the city, shall be Acting
Mayor and possess all of the powers of the Mayor. In the absence or disability
of the Mayor and President of the City Council, the Vice President shall
perform the duties of the Mayor and President of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. 50, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-8-7
§ 30.03 COUNCIL COMPOSITION AND TERMS.
   The City Council shall consist of the Mayor elected at large, who shall hold
office for three years, and six Aldermen, two elected from each ward, who shall
hold office for three years.
(Ord. 312, passed 12-4-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-8-1 and 9-8-4
§ 30.04 COMPENSATION.
   The Mayor and members of the City Council shall be allowed compensation, as
provided by resolution, which shall be paid in such installments as may be
determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. 50, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-14-28
§ 30.05 SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENTS.
   The Mayor, with approval of the City Council, may appoint each year members
of the Council to act in a supervisory capacity in each of the departments and
such Council members, so appointed, shall have supervision over the department
and shall, as requested by the Council, report as to the condition and matters
in said department.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. 50, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-8-9
§ 30.06 MEETINGS.
   Regular meeting of the City Council shall be held in the City Hall on the
first and third Mondays of each month at 6:00 p.m. Special meetings may be held
at the call of the Mayor to consider such matters as may be mentioned in the
call for the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. 315, passed 12-4-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-8-8 and 9-8-4
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
31.01   Officers; appointment
   
31.02   Employment policies
§ 31.01 OFFICERS; APPOINTMENT.
   At the first regular meeting of the month, following the annual election,
there shall be appointed a Finance Officer, Chief of Police, Street
Superintendent and Utilities Superintendent and such other officers, as may be
provided by ordinance, to hold office until the appointment and qualifications
of successors. All such appointments shall be made by the Mayor with approval
of the City Council. The City Council may, by resolution, enter into a contract
pursuant to SDCL Ch. 9-14 with an attorney to provide legal services to the
city as the City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 1.01) (Ord. 50, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-14-3
§ 31.02 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES.
   All policies regarding personnel regulations and benefits of the city shall
be included in a Personnel Policy Manual, which shall be filed with the Finance
Officer and available to all municipal employees.
(Prior Code, § 1.01) (Ord. 50, passed - -)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Park and Recreation Board
   
32.02   Planning Commission
§ 32.01 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a Park and
Recreation Board, pursuant to and as authorized by SDCL Ch. 9-38, within the
city for purposed of improving and the betterment of the community.
   (B)   Authority. The Park and Recreation Board, as hereinafter created,
shall control and supervise the public park of the municipality, including all
ball grounds, subject to the rules, regulations and responsibilities as may be
prescribed by the City Council.
   (C)   Qualifications. The Park and Recreation Board shall be comprised of up
to nine individuals of majority age.
   (D)   Terms. The members shall serve on the Park and Recreation Board for
three-year terms, to serve, currently compensated at $50 per meeting, per
resolution, and at the pleasure of the City Council. Board members should have
established terms of one to three years, with only one-third of the terms
expiring at the same time.
   (E)   Appointment. The members shall be selected and appointed during the
month of September of the year that the three-year terms are scheduled to
expire, except as further provided herein.
   (F)   Meetings. Board meetings shall be held at such times as the Park and
Recreation Board may determine to be necessary, but shall be no less and one
time annually. At least 50%, plus 1, of the appointed number of members shall
be necessary to conduct a meeting. In such event, any decisions that are made
shall require a unanimous vote.
   (G)   Officers. The Park and Recreation Board shall consist of a President,
who shall control all meetings of the Park and Recreation Board. The Park and
Recreation Board shall also contain a Secretary to take the minutes of the
meetings and receive mail correspondences and a Treasurer, who shall be
responsible for keeping of the books of the Park and Recreation Board.
   (H)   Rules and regulations. The Park and Recreation Board shall adopt rules
necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in the keeping with the provisions
of this section, subject to the review and approval of the City Council.
   (I)   Monthly accounting.
      (1)   Payment of bills. The city pays all bills; they do not go through
the Board.
      (2)   Financial reports. The Recreation Board shall show annual monthly
activities and financial reports to the City Council of its acts and all its
expenditures, showing the condition of all affairs under its control, no later
than February 1 of the following year. The City Council may require a report
from such Board at any time, and the records, books, papers and accounts of the
Board shall at all times be subject to inspection by the City Council.
   (J)   Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the Park and Recreation Board shall
run from January 1 through December 31.
   (K)   Removal. The City Council reserves the right to remove a member of the
Park and Recreation Board, prior to the expiration of the three-year term, and
appoint a new member who shall serve out the remaining term of the member that
was removed. In addition, the City Council shall fill any vacancies that may be
created who shall serve out the term in a similar manner.
(Ord. 175, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 186, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 195, passed 9-
15-2008)
§ 32.02 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission,
which shall be referred to as the “City Planning Commission”.
   (B)   Composition. The city’s Planning Commission shall consist of not less
than five members appointed by the City Council. The term of each appointed
member shall be for five years; except that, when the Planning Commission is
first appointed, three of the members shall be appointed for three years and
the balance of the members shall be appointed for five years. Thereafter,
appointments of each member shall be for terms of five years so that there will
be an overlapping of tenures.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The city’s Planning Commission may exercise all
such planning and zoning powers granted in SDCL Ch. 11-4 and 11-6, and acts
amendatory thereof, as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill and perform its
functions, promote municipal planning or carry out all the purposes of this
section.
   (D)   Comprehensive plan. It shall be a function and duty of the city’s
Planning Commission to make and adopt a comprehensive plan for the physical
development of the city. The plan may include, among other things, population
and economic projections, park and recreation plans, a major street plan, water
and sewer plans and a land use plan which shows the Planning Commission’s
recommendations for future physical development.
   (E)   Zoning and subdivision regulations. In exercising the duties granted
to it by this section, the city’s Planning Commission shall, by ordinance,
adopt regulations governing land uses, building or setback lines and the
subdivision or platting of land within the city in accordance with SDCL Ch. 11-
4 and 11-6.
(Prior Code, § 14.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 11-6-2, 11-6-14
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Annual budget; introduction and adoption
Funds
   
33.15   Elevated Tank Revenue Fund
Taxation
   
33.30   Entertainment tax
   
33.31   Sales and service tax; use tax
 
   
33.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 ANNUAL BUDGET; INTRODUCTION AND ADOPTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to SDCL § 9-21-34, the annual municipal budget ordinance
shall be submitted to the City Council for first reading no later than the
first regular meeting in November.
   (B)   The second reading of the annual municipal budget ordinance shall be
held at least five days after the first reading.
   (C)   Pursuant to SDCL § 9-21-34.1, on or before October 1, after notice and
hearing on the requested levies, the Municipal Finance Officer shall certify
the tax levies to the County Auditor in the county that the municipality is
situated in the following form:
 
 
For general purpose:         $                          
 
For interest and dept service fund:   $                         
 
 
   (D)   The annual municipal budget ordinance shall be published prior to
December 31 following adoption.
(Ord. 319, passed 8-5-2024)
FUNDS
§ 33.15 ELEVATED TANK RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   Creation of special fund. There is created a special fund designated
the “Elevated Tank Revenue Fund”.
   (B)   Surcharge for bond issue. There shall be charged a monthly surcharge
for the services provided by the improvement financed by the Elevated Tank
Revenue Bonds, Series RD 1997. The surcharge shall be segregated from other
revenues of the utility and shall be used for the payment of the revenue bond;
provided that, such surcharge shall create net income, remaining from time to
time after first paying all reasonable and current expenses of maintenance,
repairs, replacements and operation, sufficient to fund interest, reserve and
debt service fund annual requirements.
   (C)   Rates and collection.
      (1)   The rate herein specific will be collected as a surcharge for the
utility improvement.
      (2)   This surcharge shall remain in effect until such time as the
revenue bond is discharged.
      (3)   The initial surcharge and any amendments thereto shall be set by
resolution. The surcharge shall be collected monthly at the same time as other
charges of the utility. All users, current and future, shall be charged the
surcharge for it has been found that all users benefit from the improvement.
      (4)   The surcharge is found to be equitable for the services provided by
the improvement.
   (D)   Yearly review. The amount of the surcharge shall be reviewed
periodically and may be modified in order to provide such funds as are set
forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 13.05)
TAXATION
§ 33.30 ENTERTAINMENT TAX.
   (A)   The city finds that construction of park facilities and operation of a
system of parks is directly related to the civil affairs of the city. The park
facilities and park system shall be the city’s athletic, civic and cultural
center to be used for music, athletic, cultural, commercial and other spectator
events, as well as promotion of the city and promotion of civic affairs of the
community. The city finds that the parks and its facilities are the civic
center, auditorium and athletic facility of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the rate of tax established by Ord. 50 and Ord. 67,
from and after 1-1-1997, the rate of tax upon sales of leases or rentals of
hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations within the city for
period of less than 28 consecutive days; sales of alcoholic beverages, as
defined in SDCL § 35-1-1; sales of establishments where the public is invited
to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared food for immediate consumption;
ticket sales or admissions to places of amusement, athletic or cultural events
is 3%. This tax applies to the gross receipts of all persons engaged in
business within the jurisdiction of the municipality who are subject to the
state’s Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL Ch. 10-45, and acts
amendatory thereto. Any revenues received under this section in excess of 2%
may be used only for the purposes of land acquisition, architectural fees,
construction costs and payment for parks and park facilities, including
maintenance, staffing, and operations of such facilities and the promotion and
advertising of the city, its facilities, attractions and activities.
   (C)   Such tax imposed in the section is levied pursuant to authorization
granted by SDCL Ch. 10-52A and acts amendatory thereof and shall be collected
by the state’s Department of Revenue in accordance with the same rules and
regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules
and regulations as the state’s Commissioner of Revenue shall lawfully
prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 13.04) (Ord. 150, passed 8-18-2003)
§ 33.31 SALES AND SERVICE TAX; USE TAX.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide additional needed
revenue for the municipality by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax
pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by SDCL § 10-52-1, entitled
“Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law”, and acts amendatory thereto.
   (B)   Effective date and enactment of tax. From and after 1-1-2006, there is
hereby imposed as a municipal retail occupational sales and service tax upon
the privilege of engaging in business a tax measured by 2% on the gross
receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the
municipality, who are subject to the state’s Retail Occupational Sales and
Service Tax, SDCL Ch. 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto.
   (C)   Use tax. In addition there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the
privilege of use, storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the
municipality of tangible personal or services purchased from and after 1-1-
2006, at the same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all
transactions or use, storage and consumption which are subject to the state’s
Use Tax Act, SDCL Ch. 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto.
   (D)   Collection. Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by
SDCL Ch. 10-52 and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the
state’s Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rule
and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional
rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue and Regulation of the state
shall lawfully prescribe.
   (E)   Interpretation. It is declared to be the intention of this section and
the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in
the same manner as all sections of the state’s Retail Occupational Sales and
Service Act, SDCL Ch. 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and the state’s Use
Tax Act, SDCL Ch. 10-46, and acts amendatory hereto, and that this shall be
considered a similar tax exempt for the same rate thereof to that tax.
(Ord. 167, passed 10-17-2005) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed
by §
33.31 of this chapter and the rules and regulations relating to the
ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $200 or
imprisoned in the municipal jail for 30 days or both such fine and
imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL Ch.
10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL Ch. 10-46, and acts amendatory
thereto are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the
Department of Revenue and Regulation.
(Ord. 167, passed 10-17-2005)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER AND SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Utility service application required
   
50.02   Utility service not available to debtors
   
50.03   Termination of service
   
50.04   Customer disputes; termination
   
50.05   Termination procedures and provisions
   
50.06   Service taps; extensions
   
50.07   Hookup fees
   
50.08   Extensions of lines
   
50.09   Private lines
   
50.10   Property owner responsibility
   
50.11   City liability
   
50.12   Right of entry
   
50.13   Equipment; damage, trespass
   
50.14   Razing permit
   
50.15   Unlawful use
   
50.16   Violation; notice
Utility Excavations
   
50.30   Permits required
   
50.31   Excavation requirements
   
50.32   Guarding excavations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 UTILITY SERVICE APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city, including
water or sewer service, shall make application for the same to the City
Council. Such application shall contain the applicant’s name, address and the
uses for which such service is desired. A separate application shall be made
for each premises to be served. The applicant shall abide by the rules and
regulations established by the City relative to utility service in effect at
the time of such application and as they may be revised from time to time in
addition to conditions and agreements as the Council or the Water and Sewer
Committee shall deem advisable.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.02 UTILITY SERVICE NOT AVAILABLE TO DEBTORS.
   The city may decline, fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person
who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except ad valorem taxes and
special assessments.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.03 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect any
municipal utility service for the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law;
      (2)   Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility
services;
      (3)   Non-payment of bills;
      (4)   Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect
pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise;
      (5)   Tampering with any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or
regulating the supply of utility service;
      (6)   Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor;
and
      (7)   Vacancy of premises.
   (B)   The city shall give the municipal utility service customer at least
ten days’ notice before termination of municipal utility service. At any time
before the date of termination, a customer may dispute the correctness of all
or a part of the amount shown on the utility bill or the determination that a
violation of this chapter has occurred giving rise to termination hereunder. A
customer shall not be entitled to dispute the correctness of all or a part of
the amount shown on the municipal utility bill if all or a part of the amount
shown were the subject of a previous dispute under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.04 CUSTOMER DISPUTES; TERMINATION.
   (A)   (1)   The procedure for customer disputes shall be as follows.
         (a)   Before the date of termination, the customer shall notify the
city’s Finance Officer orally or in writing that the customer disputes all or a
part of the amount shown on the municipal utility bill or the determination
that a violation of this chapter has occurred giving rights to a termination
stating as completely as possible the basis for the dispute.
         (b)   If the Finance Officer determines that the present dispute is
untimely or invalid, pursuant to §
50.03 of this chapter, the Finance Officer shall notify the customer and
proceed as if the customer had notified the municipal utility of the dispute.
         (c)   If the Finance Officer determines that the present dispute is
not untimely or invalid, pursuant to §
50.03 of this chapter, within three days after the receipt of the customer’s
notice, the Finance Officer shall arrange an informal meeting between the
customer and the Finance Officer.
         (d)   Based upon the municipal utility’s records, the customers
allegations and all other relevant materials available to the official, the
Finance Officer shall resolve the dispute, attempting to do so in a manner
satisfactory to both the municipal utility and the customer.
         (e)   Within five days after the meeting, the Finance Officer shall
mail to the customer a copy of the Finance Officer’s decision resolving the
dispute.
         (f)   Within five days of receipt of the notice, the customer may
request, in writing, a formal hearing before the City Council.
         (g)   The formal hearing shall be held within ten days of the receipt
of the request.
         (h)   At the hearing, the City Council and the customer shall be
entitled to present all evidence that is, in the Council’s view, relevant and
material to the dispute, be represented by counsel and examine and cross-
examine witnesses. A tape-recorded record of the hearing shall be maintained.
         (i)   Based upon the record established at the hearing, the Council
shall, within five days of the completion of the hearing, issue its written
decision formally resolving the dispute, which decision shall be final and
binding upon the municipal utility and the customer.
      (2)   Utilization of this dispute procedure shall not relieve a customer
of his or her obligation to timely and completely pay all other undisputed
municipal utility charges and the undisputed portions of any amounts subject to
the present dispute. Failure to so pay shall subject the customer to
termination.
   (B)   Until the date of the Finance Officer’s or the City Council’s
decision, whichever is later, the municipal utility shall not terminate the
utility service of the customer and shall not issue a notice of termination
solely for nonpayment of the disputed amounts. If it is determined that the
customer must pay some or all of the disputed amounts, the utility shall
promptly mail to or personally serve upon the customer a notice of termination
containing the following:
      (1)   Amount to be paid or violation under this chapter;
      (2)   Date of notice of termination;
      (3)   Date of termination which shall be at least five days after notice;
and
      (4)   Notice that unless the municipal utility receives complete payment
of the amount shown, if any, prior to the date of termination, municipal
utility service shall be terminated.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.05 TERMINATION PROCEDURES AND PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
50.04(B) of this chapter with respect to disputes, all terminations of
municipal utility services for violations of §
50.03 of this chapter shall follow these procedures.
      (1)   If by the payment date shown on the municipal utility bill,
complete payment has not been received by the municipal utility, or another
violation of §
50.03 of this chapter has occurred, the municipal utility shall mail to, or
personally serve upon, the customer a notice of termination at least three days
after the payment date containing:
         (a)   The amount to be paid or a statement of violation of §
50.03 of this chapter;
         (b)   The date of the notice of termination;
         (c)   The date of termination which shall be at least 15 days from the
notice of termination; and
         (d)   Notice that unless the municipal utility receives complete
payment of the amount shown, if any, service shall be terminated, or notice
that service shall be terminated for another violation of §
50.03 of this chapter.
      (2)   If prior to the date of termination when the termination is for
non-payment:
         (a)   The municipal utility has not received complete payment of the
amount shown on the notice of termination;
         (b)   The customer has not notified the municipal utility that he or
she disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount shown on the notice
of termination; or
         (c)   If, prior to the date of termination for other violation of §
50.03 of this chapter, the customer has not notified the municipal utility that
he or she disputes the violation, then the municipal utility shall terminate
municipal utility service provided to the customer on the date of termination.
   (B)   (1)   The municipal utility shall terminate service hereunder only
during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday, except no
termination shall be permitted on a legal holiday.
      (2)   Municipal utility service shall be continued for a single 30-day
period upon receipt of a physician’s certificate or notice from a public health
or social service official that disconnection of municipal utility service will
aggravate an existing medical emergency of the customer or another permanent
resident of the customer’s premises.
      (3)   At his or her discretion, the city’s Finance Officer may agree to
the partial payment of at least one-third of the balance of the municipal
utility bill and the customer’s entering into a written agreement to pay the
balance within 60 days. Failure to make payments as agreed shall also be
grounds for termination under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.06 SERVICE TAPS; EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Tapping of any water or sewer main for the purpose of making
connection shall be done only by personnel authorized by the city and approved
authorized city. Distribution mains shall be provided at the discretion of the
City Council, in streets, avenues or alleys abutting the property to be served.
Extension of distribution or collection mains shall be only as specified by the
Council in its discretion.
   (B)   Any property owner may petition for a new hookup or connection to any
city water and sewer line. The City Council, in its discretion, may allow such
connection or hookup; provided that, the petitioning property owner pays the
cost for said hookup or connection from the point it joins the city
distribution or collection main for the total frontage to the petitioning
property owner’s lot line.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.07 HOOKUP FEES.
   An initial hookup fee shall be paid by all applicants for each water or
sewer service connection. Such fee shall be set by the City Council by
resolution and paid before the building permit is issued. The applicant shall
also pay all costs, including piping, fixtures, digging and appurtenances
necessary to produce the connections, as well as the costs of a qualified
plumber making the installation. Payments to the city for water and sewer
hookups shall be paid prior to the turning of such service. Persons shall give
notice of desire to tap any main at least 24 hours before the tap is to be
made, except in an emergency. All new connections for water and sewer service
shall be inspected and approved by an authorized representative of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.08 EXTENSIONS OF LINES.
   (A)   The city may serve water or sewer customers outside the municipal
corporate limits solely at the discretion of the City Council.
   (B)   Said water and sewer lines shall be constructed and maintained by the
customer, with all parties connecting onto such lines being regulated and
charged connection fees and other fees as set forth and regulated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.09 PRIVATE LINES.
   (A)   Private water or sewer mains shall not be installed in the city unless
authorized by the City Council.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the phrase PRIVATE WATER AND SEWER
MAINS shall be construed to include any rural water pipelines, pipes or
waterlines.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.10 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Persons served by city water and sewer shall keep all piping,
fixtures, stop valves, heaters and other apparatus for the use of water or
sewer (including meters) in good repair and protected from freezing.
   (B)   (1)   The property owner shall be responsible for and pay the charges
for replacement of any corroded or damaged piping, fixtures, stop valves,
heaters or other apparatus for the use of water or sewer, and for any charges
for the repair or replacement of water meters, occasioned by the negligence of
the property owner or user, or the freezing, overheating or other external
damage to any water meters.
      (2)   The property owner and/or water user shall place and maintain a
brass stop inside the basement of any building where water is to be used at the
lowest point practicable on the service pipe entering the building and as close
as practicable to the wall through which the pipe enters, and easily accessible
so that the water may be turned on or off by the user or occupant.
      (3)   Service connection repairs to the curb stop shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
      (4)   The property owner shall be responsible for any repairs and
maintenance to the sewer service from the city sewer main to the house.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) (Ord. 142, passed 8-20-2001)
§ 50.11 CITY LIABILITY.
   The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any customer
of any water and sewer service furnished by the city due to back flow of the
sewage system, failure of water supply, information of service or any cause
outside the direct control of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any person authorized by the city shall have free access at any time to all
premises supplied with any water and sewer service by the city for the purpose
of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.13 EQUIPMENT; DAMAGE, TRESPASS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open
any water hydrant or tamper with any water and sewer service furnished by the
city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any
equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any such service.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.14 RAZING PERMIT.
   No person shall raze or remove any building or structure which is connected
to a water or sewer main or disconnect any building or structure from such main
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Water and Sewer
Committee.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.15 UNLAWFUL USE.
   No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect,
turn on, turn off or disconnect any water and sewer service offered by the
city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such service.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.16 VIOLATION; NOTICE.
   The city may, in its discretion, notify any person violating any provision
of this chapter with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time for the correction thereof, but such notice shall
not be necessary for the prosecution of any violators hereof. Any person,
whether receiving such notice or not, violation any provision of this chapter
shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage, occasioned the
city by reason of such violation. All provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to applicable state and federal law.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL Ch. 9-47, 9-48
UTILITY EXCAVATIONS
§ 50.30 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   For the purposes of water and sewer connections and/or extensions, no person
shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or under any street, parking
area, sidewalk, alley or public ground, or remove any earth, soil, paving,
gravel or material therefrom without having first obtained a permit therefor as
hereinafter provided. Applications for such permit shall be made to the City
Council, and accompanied by a deposit in such sum as deemed necessary to ensure
the replacement and refilling of any such excavation or to cover any damages
which may be caused to any street or for replacement of bituminous surfacing.
Any unused portion of said permit shall be refunded to the applicant upon
recommendation and approval of the City Council. The City Council may waive
this provision as it deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.31 EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All excavations required for the installation of utilities shall be
performed in accordance with the currently approved “Engineering Design
Standards for Public Improvements for the City of Tea”.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 50.32 GUARDING EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person receiving a permit to make excavations in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground shall, during the progress and continuance of
the work, erect and maintain around the same both day and night suitable
guards, fences, flares and signals so as to prevent injury to persons, animals
or vehicles on account of such excavations. No open trench shall be left open
for any more time than considered absolutely necessary or reasonable.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
Water
   
51.01   Water meters
   
51.02   Water lines
   
51.03   Rates
   
51.04   Reserved
   
51.05   Voluntary discontinuance of service
   
51.06   Interruption of service
   
51.07   Restricting use
   
51.08   Joint water users liable
   
51.09   Use assumed
   
51.10   Rain sensors
Sewers Generally
   
51.25   Sanitary sewer required
   
51.26   Existing sewer connections
   
51.27   Disconnection
   
51.28   Sewer pipe requirements
   
51.29   Certain acts prohibited
   
51.30   Private disposal system
   
51.31   Sewer trunk area
Sewer Use
   
51.45   Definitions
   
51.46   Use of public sewers required
   
51.47   Private wastewater disposal
   
51.48   Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Water and sewer use, see SDCL Ch. 9-47
WATER
§ 51.01 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Generally. Water meters shall be installed in all new homes and
existing homes and businesses or as otherwise authorized by the City Council.
Installation shall be done in accordance with the currently approved
“Engineering Design Standards for Public Improvements for the City of Tea”.
   (B)   Inspection of meters. Any person authorized by the City Council to
read water meters or make inspections shall be allowed free access at all
reasonable hours to any building or premises where water is used. If such
persons are not allowed such access, the city, in its discretion, may estimate
the water use, shut off the water, make additional charges or take other action
not inconsistent with the law.
   (C)   Testing meters.
      (1)   The owner of property may have his or her meter tested by
depositing with the Finance Officer the sum set by the City Council by
resolution.
      (2)   It is provided that should the meter register 105% or over, this
sum will be returned to the property owner, and settlement made on the basis of
over registration of meter; but should the meter be found to register 104.99%
or less, the sum deposited will not be returned.
      (3)   In case any meter fails to register for any cause, the amount
charged for water during such period shall be estimated by the City Council,
such estimate to be based on the average amount register during a like period.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.02 WATER LINES.
   (A)   How laid. Waterlines shall be installed in conformance with the
currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for Public Improvements for
the City of Tea”.
   (B)   Water line requirements. Waterlines shall be of the material called
for in the currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for Public
Improvements” and referenced manuals therein.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.03 RATES.
   (A)   All meters shall be read and following said reading the city shall
bill the property owner for water service, and amounts due from property owners
for water used shall be due and payable on or before the twenty-fifth day of
the month following the month of the billing.
   (B)   (1)   Failure of property owners to comply with the time of payment of
water bills shall subject them to be shut off from water service in accordance
with §
50.05(B) of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Rates for water service shall be set as the City Council, in its
discretion, shall from time to time declare by resolution.
   (C)   The property owner shall be primarily responsible for the payment of
all charges arising out of the use of water at his or her premises, or any
other charges provided for in this chapter and assessed by the City Council.
Such charges shall constitute a perpetual lien and continuing lien upon such
property until paid in full, and no water shall be furnished to any property
against which any charge hereunder remains unpaid.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.04 RESERVED.
§ 51.05 VOLUNTARY DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   Persons wishing to shall give a five-day notice thereof to the Finance
Officer. Failure to do so shall render them liable for the payment of all bills
until such notice has been given.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.06 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The users of any water service furnished by the city are hereby
notified that the supply of such utility may be temporarily shut off at any
time.
   (B)   Notice shall be given, if feasible, of the contemplated shutoff, but
accidents may render this impossible; hence, the city hereby warns those
dependent upon the utility service for any purpose of this hazard.
   (C)   Immediately upon finding the supply shut off, it becomes the duty of
the occupant of the premises to take prompt precautions to prevent damages.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.07 RESTRICTING USE.
   (A)   Watering yards. The day and time for sprinkling, watering or
irrigating of yards and grass by any method shall be regulated or prohibited as
follows.
      (1)   Municipal water users are prohibited from watering lawns during the
hours of 12:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
      (2)   (a)   Municipal water users having even-numbered addresses may
water lawns on even numbered calendar dates.
         (b)   Municipal water users having odd-numbered addresses may water
lawns on odd- numbered calendar dates.
         (c)   This watering restriction is permanently in effect.
      (3)   During periods of extended dry weather, severe drought conditions
or other human-made or natural disaster conditions, the Mayor, at the
recommendation of the Public Works Director or city administration, may enact
additional restrictions necessary to protect the local water supply.
      (4)   Each stage of lawn watering restrictions will stay in effect until
such time it is deemed safe by the manager to remove and change the status of
any restrictions.
   (B)   Restriction on residential, business and industrial water users.
      (1)   All businesses and industries and parties to contracts with the
city using city water shall be restricted to the use of a percentage of their
prior usage of water as determined by resolution of the city.
      (2)   The provisions of division (A)(2) above shall not apply to those
businesses and industries declared by resolution of the city to be necessary
for the public health, safety and welfare.
      (3)   Business and industries processing animal, vegetable and mineral
matter for food purposes shall be regulated in the use of water as follows. The
Mayor, when so ordered by resolution of the city, shall hold a public hearing,
after one week’s public notice, to determine, by resolution, the amount of
water to be used, based on the amount needed during normal years in the food-
processing business.
(Prior Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 306, passed 4-17-2023) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 JOINT WATER USERS LIABLE.
   In case two or more users are supplied with water from the same service
pipe, if any of the parties fail to pay the water charge when due, or to comply
with any rule of the city, the city reserves the right to cut off the water
from the whole service until such charge is paid, or the rules strictly
complied with, and it is expressly stipulated that no claim for damage or
otherwise may be made against said city by any user whose water charge has been
paid, or who has complied with the rules of said city, because of such turn-
off, it being expressly stipulated that the necessity for such turn-off shall
be deemed to be the joint act of all served through such service.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.09 USE ASSUMED.
   All premises connected to any water service of the city shall be assumed to
be using such service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor as
long as such premises shall remain connected to the water service of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.02)
§ 51.10 RAIN SENSORS.
   (A)   Rain sensors required. Rain sensors shall be installed on automatic
irrigation systems installed after the effective date of the ordinance that
received water supplied by the city.
   (B)   Rain sensor installation and setting.
      (1)   All rain sensors shall automatically shut off the irrigation system
after one-fourth inch rainfall has occurred.
      (2)   All rain sensors shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions in a location providing full exposure to rainfall to assure
accurate operation.
      (3)   The sensors shall be maintained in good working condition.
      (4)   No person shall, with the intent of circumventing the purpose of
this section, adjust either the rain sensor or irrigation system so that the
sensor cannot override and turn off the irrigation system after one-fourth inch
of rain has fallen.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-24-2007) Penalty, see §
51.99
SEWERS GENERALLY
§ 51.25 SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED.
   (A)   A separate and independent sanitary shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Multiple hookups in all cases shall be as prescribed by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 11.04)
§ 51.26 EXISTING SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Utilities and Street
Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.04)
§ 51.27 DISCONNECTION.
   When a disconnection from the sanitary sewer is made, the sewer service
shall be closed to the satisfaction of the Utilities and Street Superintendent.
Closure shall be at the curb line on residential property and at the property
line on commercial property.
(Prior Code, § 11.04)
§ 51.28 SEWER PIPE REQUIREMENTS.
   All sanitary sewer shall be of the material approved by the installed in
conformity with the currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for Public
Improvements for the City of Tea” and referenced manuals therein.
(Prior Code, § 11.04)
§ 51.29 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The disposal by any and all persons of garbage, petroleum products and
other foreign debris into the sanitary sewer system of the city shall also be
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 11.04) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.30 PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   No connection from any private sewage disposal system shall be made
with any public sanitary sewer under jurisdiction of the city.
   (B)   No person shall make, or cause to be made any direct or indirect
connection with the storm sewer system of the city, but any and all drainage
thereto shall be accomplished by natural run-off to said system, whether
through the city street system or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 11.04) (Ord. 95, passed - -) Penalty, see §
51.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL Ch. 9-48
§ 51.31 SEWER TRUNK AREA.
   (A)   Trunk areas defined. There is hereby created Trunk Area One Trunk.
Area One shall consist of that marked area indicated on the attached Exhibit A
to Ord. 126 made a part hereof and described as Section 25, the northeast
quarter of Section 26, the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
Section 23 and the south half of the south half of Section 24, Township 100
Range 51 West, of the 5th Principal Meridian, and the southwest half of the
southwest quarter; except that, area used for the interstate highway of Section
19, the northwest quarter of Section 30; except that, area used for the
interstate highway, Township 100, Range 50 West, of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Lincoln County, South Dakota. No area in Trunk Area One shall be eligible to be
served by the city services until such time as it is annexed within the city or
such time as may be negotiated with the city.
   (B)   Amount to be paid. The city, through issuance of a borrower bond, has
caused the construction of a trunk sewer line and lift station designated the
Highway 111 Sanitary Sewer Project. The city hereby finds that the amount to be
apportioned shall be as follows:
      (1)   Lift station: $61,660;
      (2)   Line: $126,649.63;
      (3)   Apportioned amount: $188,309.63; and
      (4)   City apportionment: $0.
   (C)   Hookup fees. Those properties located in Trunk Area One shall pay the
hookup fees at a rate of $154.10 per acre of land to be included in the service
area.
   (D)   Collected fees. All hookup fees shall be collected at the time the
final plat is approved by the city, the property annexed in the city or at the
time of hookup, whichever is earliest. All hookup fees shall be placed into
Sales Tax Fund of the city to reimburse the city for the costs of the
construction of the trunk sewer line and lift station.
(Prior Code, § 11.06)
SEWER USE
§ 51.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter and §§
51.25 through
51.31 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together
with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
   STORM DRAIN. (Sometimes termed STORM SEWER.) A drain or sewer for conveying
water, ground water, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Wastewater Facilities, and/or of
wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control of the city, or
his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface
of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater” and referred to as non- filterable
residue.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institution, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or WATER POLLUTION
CONTROL PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 11.05)
§ 51.46 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other
polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater for any properties within the
city limits.
   (D)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
city, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, within 30
days after date of official notice to do so; provided that, said public sewer
is within 300 feet of the property line.
(Prior Code, § 11.05) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.47 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
51.46(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Superintendent.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notice the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Public Health of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less then 43,560 square feet. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
51.46(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
within 60 days in compliance with this subchapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned
of sludge and filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 11.05) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.48 SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner(s) or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city.
      (3)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee shall be set by city resolution.
   (C)   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary
sewers including building sewers and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. “Manual of Practice
No. 9” shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by
the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. “Manual of Practice No.
9”. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and verified
by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his or her representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the works shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Prior Code, § 11.05) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §
51.07 of this chapter shall carry a fine of $200.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
51.10 of this chapter will be fined not less than $150 for each offense.
Sprinkler systems running during a rain event with over one-fourth inch
rainfall within a 24-hour period shall be subject to additional fines.
(Ord. 183, passed 9-24-2007; Ord. 306, passed 4-17-2023)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Police to direct traffic
   
70.03   Obedience to police
   
70.04   Authorized emergency vehicles; exemptions
   
70.05   Workers, equipment; application
   
70.06   Traffic-control devices; authority; installation; interference
   
70.07   Load limits
Accidents
   
70.20   Immediate notice of accident
   
70.21   When driver unable to report
   
70.22   Duty to give information; render aid
   
70.23   Personal injury
   
70.24   Property damage
   
70.25   Unattended vehicle, property
   
70.26   Striking fixtures or other property; duty
   
70.27   Striking animal; duty
   
70.28   Filing accident reports
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of any fire department, police
vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal department or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police or the City Council.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the extension
of curb and property lines at intersections, or any other portion of a roadway
clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the extension of the lateral curb
lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or
highways which join one another at an angle whether or not such street or
highway crosses the other.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is self-propelled.
   OPERATOR. Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   PARKING. The standing of a vehicle whether attended or unattended, upon a
roadway or street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs and signals.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or trades.
(Prior Code, § 8.01)
§ 70.02 POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Police Department to enforce the
provision of this traffic code.
   (B)   Officers are hereby authorized to investigate accidents and to carry
out all duties specifically covered by this traffic code and to direct all
traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signals in
conformance with the provisions of this traffic code.
   (C)   Provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers may direct traffic, as
conditions may require.
(Prior Code, § 8.01)
Statutory reference:
   Administration of traffic laws, see SDCL Ch. 32-14
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-29-19
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer, or refuse to submit to
any lawful inspection or fail to comply with the provisions or requirements of
any warning ticket issued by the police under this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 8.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code regulating the movement, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while
the operator of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the
necessary performance of public duties.
   (B)   This exemption shall not, however, exempt the operator of any such
vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
§ 70.05 WORKERS, EQUIPMENT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code shall not apply to persons, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
a street, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or
from such work.
   (B)   Provided, however, such persons and vehicles shall not
indiscriminately block traffic, but shall allow reasonable room on the traveled
portion of the street for other vehicles to pass.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
§ 70.06 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; AUTHORITY; INSTALLATION; INTERFERENCE.
   (A)   Authority to install traffic-control devices. The City Council shall
place and maintain traffic- control signs, signals and devices when and as
required under the traffic code of the city to make effective the provisions of
said code, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices
as may be necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic code of the city or
under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
   (B)   Obedience to traffic-control devices. The operator of any vehicle
shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable
thereto placed or held in accordance with the provisions of this traffic code
unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
traffic code.
   (C)   Interference with official traffic-control devices; unauthorized
signs, signals or markings.
      (1)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, twist, deface, injure, knock down, remove or interfere with the
effective operation of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign
or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part
thereof.
      (2)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
      (3)   This division (C) shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
      (4)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or device shall be declared a
public nuisance and the Chief of Police shall be empowered to cause it to be
removed without notice.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-14-5
§ 70.07 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Trucks may operate on any city street or highway as long as the gross
vehicle weight does not exceed 30,000 pounds and/or 18,000 pound per axle, and/
or 550 pounds per inch tire width.
   (B)   Trucks whose gross vehicle weight is more than 30,000 pounds but does
not exceed 80,000 pounds and/or 18,000 pounds per axle, and/or 550 pounds per
inch tire width may operate only on designated truck routes as defined in the
city’s ordinances.
   (C)   Trucks with a gross vehicle weight of more than 80,000 pounds shall
not operate within the city limits without prior obtaining a permit from city.
   (D)   The form, detail and cost of the overweight permit shall be set
periodically by the City Council by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) (Ord. 139, passed 5-15-2000) Penalty, see §
70.99
ACCIDENTS
§ 70.20 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF ACCIDENT.
   The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person, or resulting in any property damage, shall immediately, by
the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the Police
Department.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-34-3
§ 70.21 WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   (A)   An accident report shall not be required from any person, who is
physically incapable of making such report during this period of such
incapacity.
   (B)   Whenever the operator of a vehicle is physically incapable of making
such report or is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an
accident and there is another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of doing so, such occupant in the vehicle at the time of
accident shall cause to be given the notice not given by the operator.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
§ 70.22 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION; RENDER AID.
   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by
any person shall give his or her name, address and the license number of the
vehicle he or she is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit
his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license to the person struck or the driver
or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is
apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by
the injured person.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 PERSONAL INJURY.
   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such
accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall then forthwith return to
and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or she
has fulfilled the requirements of §
70.22 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-34-7
§ 70.24 PROPERTY DAMAGE.
   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident, resulting only in
damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately
stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as
possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the
scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
70.22 of this chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 UNATTENDED VEHICLE, PROPERTY.
   The operator of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle or other
property which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there
either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and
address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle
or shall attach securely in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle struck a
written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of
the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
Such driver shall without unnecessary delay notify the Police Department of
such accident.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-34-4
§ 70.26 STRIKING FIXTURES OR OTHER PROPERTY; DUTY.
   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his or her name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and shall upon request
and if available exhibit his or her operator’s license and shall make report of
such accident when and as required in §
70.25 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.27 STRIKING ANIMAL; DUTY.
   The operator of any vehicle which collides with any dog or domestic animal
causing injury thereto shall stop and attempt to ascertain the owner of such
animal and shall notify the Police Department of such accident.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.28 FILING ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports. Accident reports referred to the Police Chief shall be filed
alphabetically by location. Copies of such reports may be provided to any
person, and the city may charge a reasonable fee for each copy so furnished,
set from time to time, by the Chief of Police, but not exceeding the amount
under SDCL § 32-34-13 for copies furnished by the Secretary of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 8.06)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violations of §
70.07 of this chapter shall carry with it a fine of $200 and/or 30 days in jail
or both.
   (C)   Any person failing to stop or comply with said requirements of §
70.24 of this chapter under such circumstances shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) (Ord. 139, passed 5-15-2000)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
71.02   Riding on outside of vehicles
Operation of Vehicles
   
71.15   Driver’s license required
   
71.16   Age of operator
   
71.17   Driving on right side of street
   
71.18   Vehicles on sidewalks prohibited
   
71.19   Emergency vehicles; operation of vehicles on approach
   
71.20   Backing around corners or into intersection prohibited
   
71.21   Reckless, careless and exhibition driving
   
71.22   Right-of-way at intersection
   
71.23   U-turns at intersection
   
71.24   Left turns at right-of-way
   
71.25   Turning around in mid-block prohibited
   
71.26   Required condition of vehicles
   
71.27   Stop signs; action required
   
71.28   Yield signs; action required
   
71.29   Traffic signs and signals; obedience
   
71.30   Stop required before entering from alley, building or private road
   
71.31   Pedestrian right-of-way
Speed Limits
   
71.45   General restriction
   
71.46   Speed zones
Statutory reference:
   Age of operator, see SDCL § 32-12-12
   License required, see SDCL § 32-12-22
   Vehicle conditions, see SDCL § 32-14-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any toy vehicles shall cling to or attach himself or herself or such
vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any street.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designated or intended for the use of passengers.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to persons riding within truck bodies
in space intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 71.15 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate upon any of the
streets or highways within the city any motor vehicle without first having
secured and having in his or her possession a valid license to do so.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-12-22
§ 71.16 AGE OF OPERATOR.
   No person under the age of 16 years shall operate a motor vehicle upon the
streets of the city unless such person is accompanied by the owner of the motor
vehicle being operated or is the holder of a restricted driving permit issued
by the state.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-12-12
§ 71.17 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET.
   Upon all streets the operator of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the
right half of the street and shall drive a slow-moving vehicle as closely as
possible to the right-hand edge or curb of a street unless it is impractical to
travel on such side of the street, and except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle subject to the limitations applicable to overtaking and passing
set forth in this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 36-26-1
§ 71.18 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except
at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-26-2-1-1
§ 71.19 EMERGENCY VEHICLES; OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH.
   (A)   Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles
giving audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, the operator of every
other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as
possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street, clear of
any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than
one on official business, to follow (closer than 500 feet) any fire apparatus,
or to park any vehicle within the block where such fire apparatus has stopped
to answer a fire alarm.
      (2)   It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive
over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department without the consent of
authorized personnel.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Authorized emergency vehicles; exemptions, see §
70.04
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 32-31-6, 32-31-7
§ 71.20 BACKING AROUND CORNERS OR INTO INTERSECTION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back such vehicle
around a corner at an intersection or into an intersection of public streets.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-30-20
§ 71.21 RECKLESS, CARELESS AND EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   (A)   Reckless driving. Any person who drives any vehicle upon a street,
avenue or alley carelessly and heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety
of others, or without due caution, and at a speed or in a manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, shall be guilty of
reckless driving.
   (B)   Careless driving. Any person who drives any vehicle carelessly and
without due caution, at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger any person or
property, not amounting to reckless driving, as defined in division (A) above,
shall be guilty of careless driving.
   (C)   Exhibition driving. Any person who drives any vehicle within the
limits of the city in such a manner that creates or causes unnecessary engine
noise, tire squeal, skid or slide upon acceleration or stopping; or that
simulates a temporary race, or that causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn
abruptly or away, shall be guilty of exhibition driving.
   (D)   Careless driving, reckless driving and exhibition driving prohibited.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as constitutes
careless driving, reckless driving or exhibition driving.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-24-1
§ 71.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTION.
   The right-of-way rule as between vehicles at intersections is hereby
declared as:
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has fully entered the intersection;
   (B)   When two vehicles approach an intersection at approximately the same
time, the operator of the vehicle at the left shall yield the right-of-way to
the vehicle on the right; and
   (C)   The operator of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall
forfeit any right-of-way which he or she may otherwise have hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 8.02)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-26-12
§ 71.23 U-TURNS AT INTERSECTION.
   At any intersection where warned by a traffic-control sign displaying the
words “No U-Turn”, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to turn
such vehicle at the intersection in a half circle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.24 LEFT TURNS AT RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The operator of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said operator, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required, may make such left turn and the operators of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.25 TURNING AROUND IN MID-BLOCK PROHIBITED.
   The operator of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to park in the
opposite direction or so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except at an
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.26 REQUIRED CONDITION OF VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle having a loud or offensive muffler shall be considered illegal.
Any vehicle not equipped with adequate brakes shall be prohibited from
operating in the city. Any motor vehicle operated within the city shall be
equipped with lights and a horn as required by state law. License plates shall
be clearly displayed on each end of vehicle and shall be kept clean and
legible.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.27 STOP SIGNS; ACTION REQUIRED.
   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every operator of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated
by a stop sign shall come to a full stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the operator shall yield the right-of-way
to any vehicle which has entered or is approaching the intersection from
another highway and shall not proceed into the intersection until certain that
such intersecting roadway is free from oncoming traffic which may affect safe
passage.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.28 YIELD SIGNS; ACTION REQUIRED.
   The operator of a vehicle approaching a sign authorized by the City Council
bearing the word “Yield” or “Yield Right-of-Way” shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop
if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally
crossing the roadway on which such operator is driving, and to any vehicle in
the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard. Said operator having so yielded may proceed and the
operators of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the
vehicle so proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.29 TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS; OBEDIENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any
official traffic sign or signal upon the street placed by the City Council,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.30 STOP REQUIRED BEFORE ENTERING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING OR PRIVATE ROAD.
   The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or
driveway within a business or residence district shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway or, in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where said operator has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.31 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked
crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of
traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic-control signals.
Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass
such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 8.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-31-1
SPEED LIMITS
§ 71.45 GENERAL RESTRICTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on a street or
highway at a speed great than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing or at a speed in excess of those fixed by this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) (Ord. 156, passed 3-1-2004) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.46 SPEED ZONES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise posted, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a
speed in excess of 20 mph within the corporate limits of the city. The city
shall cause signs to be posted informing drivers of the speed limit as set
forth in this section.
   (B)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 mph
while passing through a school zone, or while traveling upon any street on or
across which children are passing going to and from school during school days
when such children are present.
(Prior Code, § 8.03) (Ord. 156, passed 3-1-2004) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
   
72.01   Obstruction of traffic
   
72.02   Parking in streets
   
72.03   Towing vehicles; abandoned vehicles; record
   
72.04   Parking prohibited/restricted in certain places
   
72.05   No-parking areas
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC.
   No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street under the
jurisdiction of the city in such a manner as to form an unreasonable
obstruction to traffic. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle which
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer shall be authorized to
provide for the removal of such vehicle by towing, if necessary, at the owner’s
expense, with no liability to the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 PARKING IN STREETS.
   In the event of snow, creating the necessity for the blading and/or removal
of snow, it shall be unlawful to leave any vehicle parked on a city street for
more than six hours following such snowfall or snow alert, as determined by the
Police Department, so as to not interfere with the Street Department’s snow
blading and/or removal operations. All major streets, church areas and school
zones shall be designated emergency snow routes, and it shall be unlawful to
park vehicles on such emergency snow routes during the time that snow blading
and/or removal operations are in progress.
(Prior Code, § 8.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 TOWING VEHICLES; ABANDONED VEHICLES; RECORD.
   (A)   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty
shall be authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car or vehicle illegally parked, parked in any
place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks
the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any
emergency vehicle, or in any way in violation with the provisions of this
traffic code. Cars towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a place
designated by the Police Department and shall be restored to the owner or
operator of such car upon payment of a fee of $25, plus towing charges, within
24 hours after the time such car was removed, plus $5 for each additional 24
hours or fraction thereof.
   (B)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on any street in the city shall be subject to action and penalties as
provided for in this traffic code. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other
vehicles or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a
street, in view of the general public, anywhere in the city shall be
prohibited, except on property of the owner of such abandoned vehicle. A motor
vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property
may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the Chief of Police after
a waiting period of five days or more has expired. The provisions of this
division (B) may be waived for commercial or business enterprises insofar as
off-street parking is concerned.
   (C)   When a vehicle is removed from either public or private property as
authorized by order of the Chief of Police, the owner of the vehicle shall be
responsible for all towing costs in addition to the fees provided in division
(A) above. In addition, the city shall not be liable for any damages to
property or persons incurred as a result of such towing or storage.
   (D)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away,
the Police Department of the city shall keep and maintain a record of the
vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade
name, manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to,
reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
(Prior Code, § 8.04)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-30-12.1
§ 72.04 PARKING PROHIBITED/RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   At any time, it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stop, stand
or park in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control device:
      (1)   In any intersection;
      (2)   In a crosswalk;
      (3)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (4)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
      (5)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance of a fire department
station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station
within 100 feet of such entrance;
      (6)   On any sidewalk; and/or
      (7)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to
the curb, except on one-way streets. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale or to park any
vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled,
unless authorized by the Chief of Police. It shall be unlawful to park any
motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the
property.
(Prior Code, § 8.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 NO-PARKING AREAS.
   The Chief of Police or any other person authorized by the City Council shall
cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited,
indicating such limitations or prohibitions; except that, yellow curb painting
may be used to indicate “No Parking” in certain street areas.
(Prior Code, § 8.04)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-31-1
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Bicycle and animal riders
   
73.02   Snowmobiles
§ 73.01 BICYCLE AND ANIMAL RIDERS.
   Any person riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person
driving any animal shall be subject to the provisions of this traffic code
applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions of this
traffic code with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except those
provisions which, by their nature, can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 8.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-14-1
§ 73.02 SNOWMOBILES.
   Any person operating a snowmobile in the city shall observe all applicable
regulations of this traffic code pertaining to motor vehicles. In addition,
night driving shall be prohibited unless entering or leaving the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 8.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 32-20A-9
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Truck routes.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall drive or operate any truck upon any street in
the city with or without load, other than those designated as truck routes.
         (b)   A truck shall be any vehicle with a gross weight of 26,000
pounds or greater or any vehicle defined in §
70.07 of this code of ordinances. This definition shall include, but not be
limited to, truck tractors, commercial buses, motorized homes, house trailers
when being moved, semi-trailers and trailers.
      (2)   The following streets shall be designated as truck routes by the
placing of appropriate signs along such routes:
 
First Street (County Highway 106)
All of Poplar north of First Street
All of Main north of Third Street
300 feet of James north of First Street
All of Mary south of First Street
Third Street from Mary Avenue to Main Avenue
Main Avenue from First Street to Third Street
 
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for truck traffic to travel upon streets other
than those designated as truck routes, and to park trucks on street areas where
such action would be harmful to such areas, including hard surface streets in
residential areas, or where otherwise determined on those streets with asphalt
mat surfacing. Temporary parking to allow loading and unloading of trucks shall
be permitted.
   (B)   Exceptions to use of truck routes. The provisions of this traffic code
shall not apply to emergency vehicles of the Police Department, Fire Department
or Health Department, nor to any public utility vehicles where actually engaged
in the performance of emergency duties necessary to be performed by said public
departments or public utilities, nor to any vehicle owned by or performing work
for the United States of America, the state or the city.
(Prior Code, § 8.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-31-2
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   ABANDONED, WRECKED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
      
92.   ABANDONED PROPERTY
      
93.   PARKS, RECREATION AND LEISURE
      
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Running at large prohibited
   
90.03   Impoundment
   
90.04   Abused animals; disposition
   
90.05   Rabies; compulsory vaccination
   
90.06   Observation for rabies; owner responsibility
   
90.07   Vicious animals
   
90.08   Pit bulls; control
   
90.09   Animals disturbing the peace
   
90.10   Cruelty to animals
   
90.11   Poisoning animals
   
90.12   Stray, abandoned or unkept animals
   
90.13   Number of pets limited
   
90.14   Livestock and poultry
   
90.15   Communicable diseases; feces
Licensing; Tags and Fees
   
90.30   License required
   
90.31   Rabies vaccination required
   
90.32   Fees
   
90.33   Tags; issuance; duplicates
   
90.34   Fee schedule
   
90.35   Fee exemptions
   
90.36   Kennel licensing
Dog Park
   
90.50   Authorized off-leash exercise facility
   
90.51   Rules governing use
   
90.52   Other rules and regulations
   
90.53   Dogs at large
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person designated by the Chief of Police to work
with law enforcement officials in the enforcement of this chapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A building and facilities therein approved by the Chief of
Police and the health authority for the impounding of animals.
   ANTI-ESCAPE. Any housing, fencing or device which a guard dog cannot go
over, under, through or around.
   APPARENT ATTITUDE OF ATTACK. Threatening and overtly aggressive actions of
an animal that places a reasonable person in imminent fear of bodily injury,
including, but not limited to, snarling, growling, elevated or exaggerated
noise, combined with an attack ready body position when the animal is
approached.
   AT LARGE.
      (1)   An animal when off or away from the premises and not under the
control of the owner, possessor, keeper, agent, servant or a member of his or
her immediate family by a leash.
      (2)   An animal when on the premises of the owner, possessor, keeper,
agent or servant if not attended by a competent person unless the animal is
chained, restrained, enclosed or confined in a manner preventing it from
leaving the premises.
   KENNEL. Any premises or portion thereon where dogs, cats or other household
pets are raised, trained, boarded, harbored or kept for remuneration or are
kept for the purpose of sale. Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals and animal
shelters are specifically excluded.
   LEASH. A cord, thong or chain, not to exceed six feet in length, by which an
animal is controlled by the person accompanying it. RETRACTABLE LEASHES are not
permitted, except for small breed animals weighing 25 pounds or less.
   OWNER. Any person harboring or keeping an animal and who is the head of the
household of the residence or the owner or manager in charge of the
establishment or premises at which an animal remains or returns to.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.02 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   Except on property designated by the city as an animal off-leash area, it
shall be unlawful for any person to have any animal which is owned, kept,
harbored or allowed to be habitually in or upon the premises occupied by him or
her or under his, her or their control to be at large and to go in or upon the
private premises of others or upon any public property.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The City Council shall be authorized to enter into a contract with
some person, association or Humane Society to establish, operate and maintain
an animal shelter for the city. Such contract shall provide for the enforcement
of this chapter, for the impounding, destroying and disposal of animals, for a
schedule of fees to be charged for services rendered, and for a monthly amount
to be paid by the city. The city may, in lieu of the provisions of this
section, maintain its own impoundment area or quarters, under the supervision
of the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay the actual
cost of impoundment, plus the following fees:
         (a)   First impoundment shall be $25;
         (b)   Second impoundment within a 12-month period shall be $50; and
         (c)   Any subsequent impoundment within a 12-month period shall be
$100.
      (2)   Upon impounding, the owner of such animal may, at any time within
three working days after the same shall have been impounded, reclaim the animal
by paying the expense of keeping such animal in addition to the fee prescribed
by this section. If any animal so impounded shall not be reclaimed within three
working days and reasonable efforts to locate the owner have failed, the city
is authorized to release the animal into the care of the pound master to do
what he, she or they deem necessary.
   (C)   Notice shall be served upon the existing owner by the pound master, if
such identity is known, informing the owner of the intent to dispose of the
animal.
   (D)   The owner shall have three business days after notice to the city of
his or her objection to disposal, of intent to maintain ownership and intent to
pay in full all impoundment and treatment costs. In addition, the owner shall
pay all costs up to the date of notice of intent, including any fines and pays
in advance weekly any costs of impoundment and treatment. If owner fails to
comply with this section, the pound master has the right to do what he, she or
they deem necessary.
   (E)   No person shall hinder, delay or obstruct any law enforcement officer
or other authorized official when engaged in capturing, securing or impounding
any animal.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.04 ABUSED ANIMALS; DISPOSITION.
   In cases where an animal or animals have been seized by the animal control
officer based upon cruelty, neglect or abandonment, such animal may be adopted
to another owner or humanely euthanized thereby extinguishing all property
rights of the existing owner following the procedures as hereinafter provided:
upon seizure of the animal or animals, the animal control officer shall serve
notice upon the existing owner, if the identity of said existing owner is
known, informing, said existing owner of the animal control officer’s intent to
have said animal disposed of.
   (A)   Time limit for owner. The existing owner shall have three business
days to:
      (1)   Declare in writing and deliver to the animal shelter keeping said
animal or animals:
         (a)   Notice of said existing owner’s intent to maintain ownership of
the animal or animals and to object to the adoption or euthanasia thereof; and
         (b)   Notice that said existing owner shall pay where due all
impoundment, board and veterinary costs until such time as the animal or
animals shall be released to said existing owner or be adopted or euthanized.
      (2)   Pay all impoundment, board and veterinary costs up to the date of
the owner’s declaration of intent to maintain his or her ownership of said
animal or animals to the animal control shelter.
   (B)   Intent to maintain ownership. Upon all notification of said existing
owner’s intent to maintain ownership of the animal or animals and the objection
to the adoption or euthanasia thereof, said existing owner shall continue said
payments to the animal control shelter for impoundment, board and veterinary
costs on a weekly basis until such time as the animal or animals shall be
released to said existing owner or be adopted or euthanized.
   (C)   Failure to notify. If the existing owner of the animal or animals
fails to declare hereinbefore stated intent or fails to make any payment in a
timely manner, or if the identity of said existing owner is unknown or
notification to said existing owner cannot be made, ownership of the animal or
animals will revert to the animal shelter.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.05 RABIES; COMPULSORY VACCINATION.
   (A)   Every dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies, held as a
domestic pet in the city, six months of age or older, shall be vaccinated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Vaccination against rabies shall be
given at such intervals that guarantee immunity and the minimum time period
between vaccinations shall be determined by the available vaccine and based
upon the recommendations and approval of the State Veterinarian.
   (B)   Any owner acquiring a dog, cat or other animal by purchase, gift,
birth or otherwise shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies within one
month following acquisition or when the animal reaches the age of six months.
   (C)   Any animal impounded shall not be released to any person until such
animal has been vaccinated against rabies; provided, however, no animal so
impounded shall be vaccinated if the owner can present a certificate of a
current vaccination.
   (D)   All veterinarians or other qualified persons designated to vaccinate
animals against rabies shall provide the owner at the time of vaccination with
a certificate or metallic tag showing the date of the vaccination. Whenever
metallic tags are so given for vaccination, such metallic tags shall be worn by
all animals on a collar, harness or chain when off the premises of the owner.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 OBSERVATION FOR RABIES; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   When any person owning or harboring a dog, cat or other animal has
been notified that the animal has bitten or attacked any person, the owner
shall within 24 hours place the animal under the care and observation of the
animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian for a period of not less than
ten days.
   (B)   At the end of the ten-day observation period, the animal shall be
examined by a licensed veterinarian and, if cleared by the veterinarian, may be
reclaimed by the owner upon paying the expenses incident thereto.
   (C)   Any animal impounded or placed for observation, showing active signs
of rabies, suspected of having rabies, or known to have been exposed to rabies,
shall be confined under competent observation for such time as may be deemed
necessary to determine a diagnosis.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal infected with
rabies or any animal known to have been bitten by an animal known to have been
infected with rabies.
   (E)   Any person who shall suspect that any animal in the city is infected
with rabies shall report the animal to the animal control officer, the city or
other health authority, describing the animal and giving the name and address
of the owner if known.
   (F)   Whenever the animal control officer, a law enforcement officer or
other authorized official shall have determined that there is danger of the
existence or spread of rabies in the city, such facts shall be made known to
the City Council in writing. The City Council, upon receipt of said facts, may
by proclamation, in the interest of public safety and general welfare of the
citizenry, order all animals muzzled when off the premises of the owner. Forty-
eight hours after the proclamation is issued, all animals found off the
premises of the owner unmuzzled shall be seized and impounded or may be
immediately destroyed if all reasonable efforts to seize said animals fail. All
animals seized and impounded shall be held for observation as hereinbefore
provided for, not less than ten days, and if cleared by a licensed
veterinarian, may be claimed by the owner upon paying the expenses incidental
thereto. Any animal not claimed may be disposed of as hereinbefore provided.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Licensing.
      (1)   Dangerous dog requirements. All owners of dangerous animals are
required to:
         (a)   Annually renew a dangerous animal license, which must have been
obtained prior to enactment of this chapter;
         (b)   Prove that the animal has been spaded or neutered and has been
vaccinated against rabies;
         (c)   Keep the animal confined or securely leashed and muzzled;
         (d)   Maintain a $500,000 in liability insurance with the city to be
named as additional insured; and
         (e)   Any additional requirements as may be set by resolution of the
City Council.
      (2)   Dangerous animal license. All dangerous animals must have a
dangerous animal license in addition to the regular license. An application for
such license may be obtained from City Hall. The license fee for the dangerous
animal license shall be set by the City Council annually. The initially fee
shall be $100.
   (B)   Vicious animals.
      (1)   An animal may be declared to be vicious by the animal control
officer, a law enforcement officer or other authorized official, under the
following guidelines:
         (a)   An animal which, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches
in an apparent attitude of attack or bites, inflicts injury, assaults or
otherwise attacks a person or other animal upon the streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds or places;
         (b)   An animal which, on private property, in a vicious or terrifying
manner, approaches in an apparent attitude of attack, or bites, or inflicts
injury, or otherwise attacks a mailman, meter reader, serviceperson,
journeyman, delivery person or other employed person, or any person or animal
who is on private property by reason of permission of the owner or occupant of
such property or who is on private property by reason of a course of dealing
with the owner of such private property; or
         (c)   No animal may be declared vicious if the injury or damage is
sustained to any person or animal who is committing a willful trespass or other
tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or who was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
      (2)   When the animal is declared to be vicious, the city shall notify
the owner of such declaration in writing. Said notice shall be served either in
person or by mailing such notice by certified mail.
      (3)   Any mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally found in a
domestic setting, and because of its size or other characteristic would
constitute danger to human life or property is automatically deemed vicious.
      (4)   The owner of an animal that has been deemed vicious shall comply
with the following.
         (a)   Register the animal as vicious with the city and present proof
of rabies vaccination within five days of receiving the notice and presenting
proof of rabies vaccination on or before March 1 of each and every year
thereafter.
         (b)   Whenever the animal is outdoors and attended, the animal shall
be muzzled, on a leash no longer than six feet and under the control of a
person over 16 years of age.
         (c)   When the animal will be outdoors and unattended, the animal must
be locked in an escape-proof kennel approved by the city. Minimum standards
shall include the following.
            1.   Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of
more than two inches.
            2.   Any gates within such pen or structure shall be lockable and
of such design to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the animal.
            3.   The required pen or structure shall have secure sides and a
secure top. If the pen or structure has no permanent bottom secured to the
sides, the sides shall be imbedded into the ground or concrete.
            4.   The pen or structure may be required to have double exterior
walls to prevent the insertion of fingers, hands or other objects.
         (d)   A universal sign denoting a vicious animal shall be displayed on
the kennel or enclosure and on a place visible from the sidewalk or road
adjacent to the property where the animal is kept.
      (5)   The vicious animal shall be impounded by animal control at the
owner’s expense until all provisions of division (B)(4) above are complied
with. If the conditions in division (B)(4) above are not complied within ten
days after receiving notice, the animal shall be euthanized in a humane manner
and proof of euthanasia filed with the city.
      (6)   If a vicious animal has been running at large, or bites a person or
bites another animal, the animal control officer, a law enforcement officer or
other authorized official shall seize the animal by using such means as are
necessary and summon the owner to appear in court to show cause why this animal
shall not be destroyed. If the animal cannot be captured, it may be destroyed.
      (7)   This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks,
performing animal exhibitions or circuses.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 PIT BULLS; CONTROLS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, PIT BULLS are defined as American Pit
Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier and American Staffordshire Terrier.
   (B)   An owner of a pit bull shall ensure that the pit bull is at all time
equipped with a muzzle and secured by a leash in accordance with the following
rules.
      (1)   The pit bull shall be fitted with a collar or harness that is
properly fitted to and placed on the dog.
      (2)   The movement of the pit bull shall be controlled by a person by
means of a leash attached to the collar or harness on the pit bull.
      (3)   Leash is not more than six feet in length and is attached to the
collar or harness. A retractable leash is not permitted.
      (4)   The collar or harness, the lease and the attachment between the
leash and the collar or harness are all strong enough to prevent the pit bull
from breaking any of them.
      (5)   The mouth of the pit bull is covered by a muzzle that is humane and
that is strong enough and well-fitted enough to prevent the pit bull from
biting, without interfering with the breathing, panting or vision of the pit
bull or with the pit bull’s ability to drink. This does not apply to
transporting pit bulls to the veterinarian clinic.
   (C)   Division (B) above does not apply when a pit bull is within enclosed
property occupied by the owner of the pit bull.
   (D)   When a pit bull is within enclosed property occupied by a person who
consents to the pit bull being off leash or off muzzle, division (B) above does
not apply to the extent of that consent.
   (E)   For the purposes of divisions (C) and (D) above, a pit bull is within
enclosed property when the property is enclosed in a way that can be relied on
to prevent the pit bull from breaking out of the property.
   (F)   An owner of a pit bull shall have at lease $500,000 in liability
insurance. Proof of insurance must be filed with the city annually and the city
must be named as additional insured.
   (G)   An owner of a pit bull shall post in the front yard, or front yard and
side yard if a corner lot a “Beware of Pit Bull” sign. The sign shall be a
minimum of eight and one-half inches by 11 inches.
   (H)   All pit bulls shall be spayed or neutered by the age of six months.
The owner shall provide proof to the city within 30 days.
   (I)   The above divisions (A) through (H) do not apply if the majority of
the animal is proven to be non-pit bull or wolf DNA. The burden of proof falls
on the owner of the animal with the city reimbursing the owner for the cost of
the test if the test confirms that the majority of DNA is not pit bull or wolf.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   The owner or custodian of an animal shall not allow such animal to
create a disturbance by making a loud noise at any time of the day or night.
   (B)   Upon complaint, such owner will be notified by the Police Department
and said owner shall abate such nuisance. If convicted upon failure to abate
such nuisance, said owner will be guilty of further violations, for each day
that such condition is allowed to exist or goes uncorrected.
   (C)   Any officer may remove and impound any animal which is disturbing the
peace when the owner of the animal can not be located. A notice advising the
owner of the impoundment shall be left at the premises.
   (D)   Any person having custody or control of any female dog or cat in heat
shall be required to keep such dog or cat confined in a building, secure
enclosure, veterinary hospital or boarding kennel so that it cannot attract or
come into contact with another animal on pubic or private property, except for
controlled breeding purposes.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall maltreat or abuse or neglect any animal or fowl. Any animal
control officer, law enforcement officer or authorized official finding an
animal or fowl mistreated as described in this section shall have the power to
lawfully enter the premises where the animal is kept and demand to examine such
animal and to take possession of such animal when, in his or her opinion, the
animal requires humane treatment.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 POISONING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously administer
or cause to be administered, poison of any sort whatsoever to any animal, the
property of another, with the intent to injure or destroy such animal, or to
willfully or maliciously place any poison or poisoned food where such is
accessible to any such animal.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-29-11
§ 90.12 STRAY, ABANDONED OR UNKEPT ANIMALS.
   No person shall harbor or keep any stray animals or abandon any animal
within the city. Animals known to be strays shall be immediately reported to
the animal control officer, a law enforcement officer or authorized official.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-29-12
§ 90.13 NUMBER OF PETS LIMITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have or to keep more than four
companion animals of any one type and a total of six pets maximum over the age
of six months, except birds and fish, on any lot within a residential zoned
district or premises in the city, unless such person residing on or in the lot
or premises has a valid kennel license issued by the city as per §
90.36 of this chapter.
   (B)   The pound master, veterinarian offices and retail pet stores are
exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY.
   No person shall keep or maintain any building or enclosure where livestock
is kept, unless the same be at all times kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. No person shall place, keep or maintain any live hogs, cattle, sheep
or horses within a residential zoned district within city. AG zoned properties
within the city do not apply.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-29-12
§ 90.15 COMMUNICABLE DISEASES; FECES.
   (A)   No person shall create or maintain any condition or operation any
equipment or keep any animal, fowl, pet or insect under his or her jurisdiction
in such a way that such condition or operation causes or is likely to cause
transmission of diseases from animals or insects to humans.
   (B)   No owner, keeper, caretaker or attendant of an animal shall allow an
animal to defecate on public or private property other than his or her own.
   (C)   Anyone walking an animal on public or private property other than his
or her own must carry with him or her visible means of cleaning up any fecal
matter left by the animal, or be subject to fines. Animals used in parades or
involved in law enforcement are exempt from this section.
(Ord. 32, passed - -; Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
LICENSING; TAGS AND FEES
§ 90.30 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to keep, maintain or have in his, her or their custody
or control within the city any dog or cat, shall on or before December 31 every
two years make an application to an authorized agent of the city for a license
to keep such dog or cat. Such application shall be in writing, stating the
name, sex, color and other distinguishing characteristics (e.g., such as guard
dog) of such dog or cat and the name of the owner or caretaker thereof, which
application shall be made on a printed form furnished by an authorized agent
and shall be filed with an authorized agent.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No dog or cat license tag shall be issued to any owner or caretaker of
any dog or cat who does not present to an authorized agent at the time of
making application for such license, a certificate of vaccination against
rabies by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within
any state.
   (B)   The certificate must show the date of such vaccination and shall state
the period of time for which the dog or cat is effectively immunized, which
period of immunization shall be for two years from the date of issuance of the
license tag.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.32 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Before any license may be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter, the applicant shall pay to an authorized agent a fee for each dog
or cat to be licensed.
      (2)   The annual fee as shown in §
90.34 of this chapter for such license shall be determined from time to time by
resolution of the City Council which shall be on file in City Hall.
   (B)   If the license fee shall be collected by a veterinarian so authorized
by the city, the veterinarian may charge an additional fee in the amount
established by resolution of the city for his, her or their services in issuing
such license.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.33 TAGS; ISSUANCE; DUPLICATES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of an authorized agent of the city, at the time
of issuance of the license provided in this division (A), to furnish and
deliver to such applicant a tag for each dog or cat for which such license is
issued, upon which tag shall be stamped or engraved the registered number of
the dog or cat and the year for which such license is issued.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat to place
a collar or harness around the neck of each dog or cat, on which collar shall
be securely fastened the tag furnished by an authorized agent of the city under
the provisions of this section.
   (C)   In the event of the loss of any tag issued under the provisions of
this section, an authorized agent of the city is authorized to issue a
duplicate tag for a fee of $1 when application has been made stating the
original tag has been lost and payment of the actual cost of the duplicate tag
has been made.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.34 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The two-year fee for an original and renewal dog or cat license shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Neutered/spayed dog: $10;
      (2)   Neutered/spayed cat: $10;
      (3)   Unneutered/unspayed dog: $50; and
      (4)   Unneutered/unspayed cat: $25.
   (B)   The most current fee schedule specifically addresses dog and cat
licenses. Documentation from a veterinarian or other sufficient medical proof
must be provided when licensing a neutered or spayed dog and/or cat. The City
Council may, in special instances, after a hearing, exempt the license fee in
individual cases.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.35 FEE EXEMPTIONS.
   The licensing provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to dogs and cats
in the custody of a veterinarian, or animal shelter or animal rescuer, or whose
owners are non-residents temporarily within the city for a period not exceeding
30 days. Also, when a blind person, physically disabled or hearing impaired
person requests that no fee be charged to license his or her guide dog, or
service dog, no fee shall be charged, upon submission of medical documentation
attesting to said disability and/or service animal certification from a bona
fide and recognized authority.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.36 KENNEL LICENSING.
   (A)   The city, upon receipt of an application showing the owner’s name and
address, the name, breed, age, color and sex of each animal kenneled by the
owner, a certificate signed by a qualified veterinarian that each animal has
been vaccinated and payment of the appropriate license fee, as established by
the City Council, shall issue a kennel license to the owners. All animals
housed in a licensed kennel shall be exempt from the other licensing provision
of this chapter.
   (B)   A kennel shall require a conditional use permit for GB - General
Business Commercial Zone - Districts of the city. Kennels are to be located no
closer than 1,000 feet from a residential district.
   (C)   Kennels should be located in areas where the noise generated by such
use would not be a nuisance or detrimental to adjacent properties. Generally, a
fence separating the kennel operation from adjacent property owners shall be
required.
   (D)   The annual kennel license shall be set by resolution by the City
Council. The initial fee shall be $100 until said fee is changed by resolution.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOG PARK
§ 90.50 AUTHORIZED OFF-LEASH DOG EXERCISE FACILITY.
   (A)   Establishment of facility. The city shall allow one or more authorized
off-leash dog exercise facilities within the city which meet the requirements
of this chapter. Each authorized off-leash dog exercise facility shall be
referred to hereinafter as a “dog park”.
   (B)   Characteristics of a dog park. Each dog park established under this
subchapter shall meet the following criteria.
      (1)   The dog park shall be located within a public park in the city.
      (2)   The dog park shall be appropriately and securely fenced and
equipped with at least one self-closing gate.
      (3)   The rules and regulation for the use of the dog park shall be
posted on a sign at each entrance to the dog park.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.51 RULES GOVERNING USE.
   The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of each dog park
established under this chapter.
   (A)   The dog park shall be for use of dogs only and no other types of
animals or pets shall be allowed to use the dog park.
   (B)   The owner or other competent responsible person authorized by the
owner at all times accompany each dog inside the fenced area of the dog park
and shall be responsible for the supervision of such dog at all times while it
is in the dog park.
   (C)   The dog park shall be open for use during the regular city public park
hours.
   (D)   A person shall not be required to obtain a special permit to use the
dog park.
   (E)   No person shall be authorized to bring any dog into such dog park
unless the owner has a valid, current city license and rabies vaccination for
the dog and then only if the license and rabies tags are attached to and kept
on a substantial collar on the dog at all times.
   (F)   All other provisions of the municipal code shall apply to the use of
each such dog park and to the presence and conduct of the dogs in each such dog
park, including, but not limited to, the provisions requiring a clean up of
animal droppings and prohibiting a dog from attacking persons or animals.
   (G)   No dog which is dangerous or vicious, as defined in §
90.07 of this chapter, shall be allowed to use any such dog park at any time.
   (H)   Pit bulls, as defined in §
90.08 of this chapter, shall be allowed to use the dog park, a muzzle must be
used at all times.
   (I)   No person shall bring more than two dogs into the dog park at any
time.
   (J)   A person using the dog park shall at all times carry a leash for each
dog which is under his or her supervision.
   (K)   The following are prohibited in any dog park established under this
chapter:
      (1)   Dogs in heat;
      (2)   Dogs under four months of age;
      (3)   Food, bones or rawhide; and
      (4)   Prong or spike dog collars.
   (L)   No children under six years of age are allowed in any dog park.
Children from six years of age to 16 years of age must be under supervision of
an adult competent responsible person at all times while in the dog park.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.52 OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city or its representative is hereby authorized to adopt and enforce,
from time to time, such other rules and regulations governing the use of each
dog park as may deem appropriate; provided that, such rules and regulations
shall first be approved by the City Council and, therefore, be posted at each
entrance to each dog park.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.53 DOGS AT LARGE.
   A person who brings a dog into a dog park and complies in all respects with
the provisions of this subchapter, including any rules and regulations
established under this chapter, shall not be deemed to have permitted or
allowed the dog to be at large within the city within the meaning of §§
90.01 and
90.02 of this chapter.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The fine for an animal running at large, per §
90.02 of this chapter, is $50. It shall be $300 for each addition offense for
the same animal within a 12-month period and taken to an animal shelter. The
fines shall not include the cost of housing the animals, which costs shall be
paid to the entity housing the animals. Allowing an animal to run at large, as
defined in §
90.02 of this chapter, shall also constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor.
   (C)   Penalties for violation of §
90.08 of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   First offense: warning (15-day grace period to comply with § 90.08
(F) of this chapter);
      (2)   Second offense: $100, plus expenses; and
      (3)   Third offense: removal of animal, plus expenses.
   (D)   Penalties for violation of §
90.09 of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   First offense: warning;
      (2)   Second offense: $100, plus expenses; and
      (3)   Third offense: removal of animal, plus expenses.
   (E)   If such animal, per §
90.15(B) of this chapter, does defecate upon public or private property, the
owner, keeper, caretaker or attendant must immediately and thoroughly clean the
fecal matter from such property, or be subject to a $50 fine.
   (F)   The fine for an unlicensed animal, per §§
90.30 through
90.33 of this chapter, is $50. It shall be $100 for a second offense and third
offense within a 12-month period, the animal is taken to an animal shelter.
   (G)   Anyone violating the provisions of §§
90.50 through
90.53 of this chapter shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 199, passed 8-17-2009)
CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED, WRECKED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Nuisance; storing, parking or leaving
   
91.03   Exceptions
   
91.04   Removal
   
91.05   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles
   
91.06   Duty of private property owners
   
91.07   Notice to remove
   
91.08   Responsibility for removal
   
91.09   Notice procedure; contents
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, as defined hereby, which is left unattended
or stored on any public property, as defined hereby, in the same or
substantially same place within the city for a longer period than 24 hours.
   CITY. The City of Tea.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any vehicle, as defined hereby, which is not in
operating condition due to damage, removal or inoperability of one or more
tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for the
operation of the vehicle, or which does not have lawfully affixed thereto a
valid state license plate or which constitutes an immediate health, safety,
fire or traffic hazard.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, alley or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicity maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly-owned
property or facility.
   REMOVAL AGENCY. Any public body, private or non-profit organization
authorized by the city to remove and salvage abandoned or inoperable vehicles.
   VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is designed to travel along the ground or in the
water and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, pull trailers, go-carts, golf
carts, boats, campers and trailers.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.02 NUISANCE; STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING.
   (A)   The presence of an abandoned, discarded, wrecked, burned, dismantled,
inoperable, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private
or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance, which may be abated as
such in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful to keep or place any of the above-described vehicles or
vehicle parts:
      (1)   Upon public streets or property except on an emergency basis; or
      (2)   Upon the private property of any person owning, in charge of or in
control of any real property within the city, whether as an owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise for longer than five working days unless it is
within a carport, fully enclosed building or structure. A tarpaulin, tent or a
similar temporary structure shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   In no event shall an inoperable vehicle that constitutes an imminent
health, safety or fire hazard be kept or located on any premises.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   An inoperable vehicle kept on private property without being shielded
from public view if licensed and kept on a private driveway. In the event this
inoperable vehicle is in a state of externally visible disrepair or
disassembly, it shall not be kept on the private driveway longer than 14 days;
   (B)   Filling stations, automobile repair shops or any other motor vehicle
related businesses in compliance with applicable city ordinances may place
inoperable vehicles being repaired or offered for sale on the premises; and/or
   (C)   Junkyards operated and maintained in compliance with applicable city
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.04 REMOVAL.
   Whenever the Police Department finds an abandoned or inoperable vehicle on
public property within the city, it is authorized to place written notice on
the vehicle that it will be removed to a garage or place of safety unless the
owner remove the vehicle from public property within 24 hours of the giving of
the notice. After the expiration of the 24-hour period, the vehicle may be
removed by a removal agency to a garage or place of safety. Nothing in this
section precludes the Police Department from immediately removing a vehicle
that constitutes an imminent health, safety or fire hazard.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.05 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   The removal agency shall have the rights and obligations conferred upon it
by SDCL Ch. 32-36 in regard to titling or disposition of such unclaimed
vehicle; except that, if not otherwise provided by state law, it shall have a
possessory lien upon any vehicle removed under provisions of this chapter for
the costs of reasonable charges in taking custody of and storing such vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.06 DUTY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.
   No person owning, in charge of or in control of any real property within the
city whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
abandoned or inoperable vehicle of any kind to remain on such property longer
than five working days.
(Prior Code, § 4.04) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   A notice in writing shall be served by the city upon any person having an
abandoned or inoperable vehicle on his, her or their property requesting the
removal of such motor vehicle in the time specified in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   Upon proper notice, the owner of the abandoned or inoperable vehicle and the
owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either
or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.09 NOTICE PROCEDURE; CONTENTS.
   (A)   The city shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the
private property where it is located. It shall constitute sufficient notice
when a copy of same is sent by registered or certified mail to the owner or
occupant of the private property at his or her last known address.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the request for removal within five working
days after the mailing of such notice and the notice shall advise that failure
to comply with notice to remove shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class II misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $100. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Prior Code, § 4.04)
CHAPTER 92: ABANDONED PROPERTY
Section
   
92.01   Definition
   
92.02   Notice of intent to claim property
   
92.03   Reimbursement of expenses by city
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned, Wrecked and Inoperative Vehicles, see Ch. 91
   Abandoned property, see §
94.01
§ 92.01 DEFINITION.
   Any personal property, except for motor vehicles as described in Ch. 91 of
this code of ordinances, shall be deemed ABANDONED if it has been located for a
period of at least 48 hours on a street, sidewalk or other public place as the
term “public place” is defined.
(Prior Code, § 9.06)
§ 92.02 NOTICE OF INTENT TO CLAIM PROPERTY.
   At such time as the City Council shall deem advisable, it shall cause to be
published one time in the official newspaper of the city a notice describing
all such abandoned property which has been taken into the possession of the
city and further stating that, if such property is not claimed and proof of
ownership established by the owner thereof no later than 30 days following the
date of such publication, such abandoned property shall be deemed to be the
property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.06)
§ 92.03 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES BY CITY.
   Any owner so claiming said abandoned property may have possession thereof
upon payment to the city of all charges incurred by the city in connection with
the storage of such property and the publication of such advertisement in the
official newspaper, all such charges to be a lien against such property until
paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 9.06)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS, RECREATION AND LEISURE
Section
   
93.01   Entering park lake prohibited
   
93.02   Prohibited use of park or parkway
   
93.03   Picking, cutting or defacing prohibited
   
93.04   Hunting, trapping and fishing prohibited
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Amusements, see Ch. 112
   Dog park, see §§
90.50 through
90.53
   Prohibited Behavior, see Ch. 130
§ 93.01 ENTERING PARK LAKE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall go on foot, swim in or otherwise enter in or upon the park
lake or water area.
(Prior Code, Ch. 10) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 PROHIBITED USE OF PARK OR PARKWAY.
   No person shall use a park or parkway in a manner and location where any
prohibitory sign is posted.
(Prior Code, Ch. 10) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 PICKING, CUTTING OR DEFACING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall pick or cut any wild or cultivated flowers, or cut, break,
dig or in any way deface any tree, shrub or plant within the limits of any
park, parkway or park water area.
(Prior Code, Ch. 10) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 HUNTING, TRAPPING, FISHING PROHIBITED.
   No person may hunt, trap or fish in any park, except if allowed by the city
and where a sign allowing the activity is posted and such activity is in
accordance with the state’s game, fish and parks regulations.
(Prior Code, Ch. 10) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   The fine for violation of this chapter shall be $50.
(Prior Code, Ch. 10)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Abandoned property
   
94.02   Snow and ice removal from sidewalks
Special Assessments for Nuisance Abatement
   
94.15   Costs certified
   
94.16   Assessment roll prepared
   
94.17   Notice of hearing
   
94.18   Public hearing
   
94.19   Special assessment collection
Public Nuisances
   
94.30   Public nuisances prohibited
   
94.31   Definition
   
94.32   Specific public nuisances
   
94.33   Notice to abate
   
94.34   Emergency action without notice
   
94.35   Abatement
   
94.36   Costs assessed
Noxious Weeds, Grasses and Vegetation
   
94.50   Occupant, owner duty
   
94.51   Definitions
   
94.52   Prohibited conditions
   
94.53   Notice to abate
   
94.54   Emergency action without notice
   
94.55   Abatement
   
94.56   Costs assessed
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Keeping of articles abandoned or left on private or public property.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to take possession of
any article or property abandoned, left or placed on any public or private
property and, if the same is believed to have any value, to keep it and attempt
to locate the owner thereof and to retain any such article heretofore so taken
up by it.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to maintain a place
for the keeping of any such article until the same shall be claimed for
otherwise disposed of and the city shall have a lien thereon for the reasonable
expenses incurred in the storage of such article.
      (3)   The city may retain possession of any article or property until any
and all liens against it are discharged.
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed property. If any abandoned article or
property has been or is kept for 30 days or more without being claimed, the
same may be disposed of by the Police Department by one of the following
methods.
      (1)   If of no value or slight value, it may be destroyed.
      (2)   If of slight value, but of use to the city, it may be turned over
to the proper department and used until claimed. Any lien incurred by the city
against the property shall be regarded as a sufficient offset to the value of
such use.
      (3)   If of more than slight value, it may be sold by the Police
Department ten days after notice of such sale as been published in the city’s
legal newspaper and the city may be a bidder at such sale. If, on any such
sale, an amount is bid in excess of the charges or lien of the city, such
excess shall be deposited in the city’s General Fund.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.02 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Prohibited. The failure of any owner, lessee, occupant or person
having charge of any parcel of real estate to remove snow and ice from any
sidewalk located on or adjacent to such parcel of real estate, in which case
the Chief of Police, without notice may have such ice and snow removed
therefrom.
   (B)   Costs assessed.
      (1)   The costs and fees shall be as established by resolution of the
City Council.
      (2)   A bill for the costs incurred thereby shall be presented by the
Chief of Police to the owner personally by leaving the same at his or her
residence or place of business or, if he or she is a non-resident, by mailing
the same to his or her last known address by prepaid first class mail or, if
the name of such owner or his or her place or residence cannot be determined or
ascertained after due diligence, by posting the same in a conspicuous place on
his or her premises and, if he or she shall fail to pay the same within 30 days
thereafter, the Chief of Police shall cause an account to be kept against each
lot for the cost of doing such work and the same shall be certified to the
Finance Officer on or before September 1 of each year for assessment against
said property in the manner provided by §§
94.15 through
94.19 of this chapter.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT
§ 94.15 COSTS CERTIFIED.
   The Chief of Police, or any person designated by the Mayor or City Council,
shall certify to the Finance Officer the costs kept against each lot of the
cost of the nuisance abatement, by September 15.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.16 ASSESSMENT ROLL PREPARED.
   The Finance Officer shall prepare an estimate of the assessment against each
lot for the nuisance abatement for the preceding year, including therein the
expense of levying the special assessment against each lot. The estimate shall
be submitted to the to the governing board on or before November 1.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.17 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   The Finance Officer shall cause to be published in the official
newspaper a notice of the time and place when the governing board will meet for
the purpose of approving the estimate, which notice shall be published one, not
less than one week before the hearing.
   (B)   In addition to the publication of the notice of hearing, the Finance
Officer shall mail a copy of the notice by first class mail, addressed to the
owner of any property to be assessed for the improvements at his or her address
as shown by the records of the Register of Deeds. The mailings shall be at
least one week prior to the date set for the hearing.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.18 PUBLIC HEARING.
   Upon the day for the hearing, the governing board shall meet and, if it
shall find the estimate correct, it shall approve the estimate by resolution
or, if not correct, it shall correct or modify the estimate and approve it as
modified or corrected and file the assessment roll with the Finance Officer.
The owner of any lot or parcel of land against which a special assessment is to
be so levied, or its occupant or person in charge, shall have the right to
appear before the governing board at such meeting to protest such assessment
and to give reasons why such assessment should not be levied.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.19 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT COLLECTION.
   From the date of the approval and filing of the assessment roll, the Finance
Officer shall, thereupon, certify said roll, showing the description of the
property and the owner thereof to the County Auditor, who shall, thereupon, add
such assessment to the general assessment together with the regular assessment
to the County Treasurer to be collected as municipal taxes for general purposes
under plan one, the same assessment roll shall be and become a special lien
against the various pieces of property described in it.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 94.30 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall create, commit, maintain or permit to be created, committed
or maintained any public nuisance, as defined herein within the city.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.31 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the word NUISANCE is hereby defined as
any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering
or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission,
control or thing either:
   (A)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
   (B)   Offends decency;
   (C)   Is offensive to the senses;
   (D)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream,
ditch or drainage;
   (E)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
   (F)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.32 SPECIFIC PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The following, but not limited to, specific acts, conditions and things when
committed in the city, each and all of them, hereby declared to constitute a
public nuisances:
   (A)   Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to
accumulate upon any public or private property, any household waste water,
sewage, garbage, refuse, rubbish, fecal, excrement, decaying fruit, vegetables,
fish, meat, bones, any fowl, putrid or obnoxious liquid substance, putrescible
and non-putrescible animal or vegetable wastes or solid wastes, or any other
waste material which constitutes or tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare;
   (B)   The accumulation of manure, garbage or anything whatsoever which are
breeding areas or flies, mosquitoes, rodents;
   (C)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and
other vermin;
   (D)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within 24 hours after
its death;
   (E)   Any excavation, trench or open basement in which stagnant water is
permitted to collect or which may jeopardize the life, limb or safety of the
general public;
   (F)   Throwing or letting fall on or permitting to remain on any street,
alley or public ground any manure, garbage, rubbish, filth, fuel, wood, soil,
earth, mud, clay, rock or any combination thereof while engaged in handling or
removing any such substance;
   (G)   Burning, causing or permitting to be burned upon any private or public
property any dirt, filth, manure, garbage, sweepings, leaves, ashes, paper,
rubbish or material of any kind, except as otherwise permitted by the City
Council. This provision shall not apply to the burning of wood in outdoor
fireplaces or wood burners;
   (H)   Fallen tree limbs, diseased or dead trees and dead tree limbs shall be
declared dangerous and a nuisance; and/or
   (I)   Maintain, or causing or permitting the same, any building or premises
which is determined to be dangerous or dilapidated. Any building or structure
which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall
be deemed to be a dangerous or dilapidated building, if such conditions or
defects thereby annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others, or if such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life,
health, property, value of property or safety of the public or its occupants
are jeopardized:
      (1)   Whenever any building or structure is:
         (a)   Vacant and unoccupied for the purpose for which it was erected;
         (b)   The building is unfit for occupancy as it fails to meet minimum
housing standards; and
         (c)   The building has remained substantially in such condition for a
period in excess of six months.
      (2)   Whenever any building or structure through lack of maintenance or
attention and by virtue of its physical appearance and presence thereby
depresses the market value of surrounding properties.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009) Penalty, see §
94.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-29-13, 9-32-10, 9-33-1, 34A-7-9
§ 94.33 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Whenever the Police Chief or any person designated by the Mayor or
City Council, who shall be charged with the administration or enforcement of
this subchapter, shall find a public nuisance exists within the city, he, she
or they shall give written or verbal notice to the person creating, permitting
or maintaining such nuisance. Written notice and order to abate the nuisance
within a reasonable time as provided shall:
      (1)   Include a description of the property where the violation is
occurring, sufficient for identification;
      (2)   Include a statement of the violation(s);
      (3)   Include an order to correct the violation and bring the property
into compliance with the provisions of this code within a specified, reasonable
amount of time; and
      (4)   Be delivered either in person or by certified mail. If the notice
is returned showing that the letter was not delivered a copy thereof shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on or about the property where the violation is
occurring.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is served a written or verbal
notice to abate a nuisance under the provisions of this subchapter to fail to
do so within the time allowed in such notice.
   (C)   Whenever the owner, occupant or agent of any premises in or upon which
any nuisance may be found is unknown or cannot be found, the Police Chief or
any person designated by the Mayor or City Council, who shall be charged with
the administration or enforcement of this subchapter, may proceed to abate the
nuisance without notice. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be
collected from the person who may have created, caused or permitted such
nuisance to exist.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.34 EMERGENCY ACTION WITHOUT NOTICE.
   For any public nuisance that an authorized city official believes is an
immediate danger to any person(s), said official may take emergency action to
abate the nuisance immediately without the notice and order described in §
94.33 of this chapter.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.35 ABATEMENT.
   If the person or person so notified and ordered as set forth in §
94.33 of this chapter fails to correct the condition as required in the notice
and order within the time specified, the Police Chief, or any person designated
by the Mayor or City Council, who shall be charged with the administration or
enforcement of this subchapter shall cause the condition to be abated by
initiating whatever actions are necessary to correct the condition and prepare
a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. The city may contract
with others for such purpose. Any person abating a nuisance pursuant to this
section is hereby authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.36 COSTS ASSESSED.
   (A)   If the city abates a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, and the costs incurred by the city or its contractor are not paid
within 30 days after receipt of the statement thereof from the city, such costs
may be levied against the property benefitted or upon which the nuisance
existed as a special assessment.
   (B)   The levying of such special assessment shall not affect the liability
of the person to whom the order is directed for punishment for violations of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
NOXIOUS WEEDS, GRASSES AND VEGETATION
§ 94.50 OCCUPANT, OWNER DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant, person in charge or owner of any lot
or parcel of land in the city to keep such lot, to include any abutting city
right-of-way, commonly known as the “parkway”, free from noxious weeds, grasses
and vegetation; and to cut, spray or remove the nuisance as required by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   DISEASED VEGETATION AND TREES. Any tree, brush, wood or debris infected with
Dutch Elm disease or other infection or infections disease found thereon.
   GRASSES. Growth used as ground cover for the purpose of establishing a lawn
within city limits.
   WEEDS. All weeds or plants declared to be primary or secondary noxious weeds
by the state’s Weed and Pest Control Commission, including, but not limited to,
all species of rag weed, all species of cockle burrs, all species of
tumbleweeds, all species of thistles, dandelions, plantains, sweet clover, wild
morning glory, black mustard, pig weed and all other noxious or unhealthful
vegetation.
   UNDEVELOPED LOT. A lot with no utility services to or structures upon. This
does not apply to an UNDEVELOPED LOT which is owned by an adjacent or adjoining
landowner.
   UNSIGHTLY. Landscaping that is dead, characterized by uncontrolled growth or
lack of maintenance or is damaged.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.52 PROHIBITED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person or persons, owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot
or premises shall permit the follow:
      (1)   Weeds or grasses growing upon any lot or parcel of land in the city
which have gone or are about to go to seed;
      (2)   Weeds and grasses taller than six inches on developed lots;
      (3)   All weeds and grasses taller than 12 inches on undeveloped lots;
and
      (4)   Any grasses, weeds, shrubs, bushes or diseased vegetation and trees
which are unsightly, grown into a state that constitutes a fire hazard and/or
are likely to harbor rats, insects, pests or vermin.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to vegetation which is not a primary or
secondary noxious weed and is being grown as a crop, livestock pasture, native
prairie display garden, wildflower display garden or other nature area
designated by the city.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.53 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or any person designated by the Mayor or City
Council, shall be charged with the administration or enforcement of this
subchapter and has the authority to require compliance on all property.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or any person designated by the Mayor or City
Council, may, at the beginning of or during the growing season, by public
notice to each occupant, person in charge or owner of any lot, require all
conditions declared in §
94.52 of this chapter be cut or removed within five days after publication and
at all times subsequent thereto during the growing season.
   (C)   The notice need not be given personally but may be given generally by
publication in the official newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks,
and shall be deemed sufficient to allow those actions authorized by §
94.55 of this chapter. An individual notice may be provided by personal
delivery to the occupant, owner or person in charge of any lot or premises; or
by sending notice certified to the address of the property owner as indicated
on the official books of the County Treasurer.
   (D)   The notice shall provide that all conditions determined to be a
nuisance declared by §
94.52 of this chapter, left uncorrected may be cut, sprayed or removed by the
city, and the cost thereof assessed against that property, to include the cost
of levying such special assessment.
   (E)   Whenever the owner, occupant or agent of any premises in or upon which
any nuisance may be found is unknown or cannot be found, the Police Chief or
any person designated by the Mayor or City Council who shall be charged with
the administration or enforcement of this subchapter, may proceed to abate the
nuisance without notice. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be
collected from the person who may have created, caused or permitted such
nuisance to exist.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.54 EMERGENCY ACTION WITHOUT NOTICE.
   Any public nuisance that an authorized city official believes is an
immediate danger to any person(s), said official may take emergency action to
abate the nuisance immediately without the notice and order described in §
94.53 of this chapter.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.55 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the person or person so notified and ordered as set forth in §
94.53 of this chapter fails to correct the condition as required in the notice
and order within the time specified, the city shall cause such conditions to be
abated by initiating whatever actions are necessary to correct the condition
and to prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. The city
may contract with others for such purpose.
   (B)   Any person abating a nuisance pursuant to this section is hereby
authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.56 COSTS ASSESSED.
   If the city abates a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter,
and the costs are not paid within 30 days after receipt of the statement
thereof from the city, such costs may be levied against the property benefitted
or upon which the nuisance existed as a special assessment. The costs and fees
to the landowner shall be as established by resolution of the City Council. The
levying of such special assessment shall not affect the liability of the person
to who the order is directed for punishment for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who creates, commits, maintains or fails to abate a public
nuisance, as required under §§
94.30 through
94.36 of this chapter, may be subject to a maximum penalty of 30 days in jail
or a $200 fine or both. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the city may
also use the remedies of civil action and abatement as set forth in SDCL §§ 21-
10-5 through 21-10-9.
   (C)   Any person who creates, commits, maintains or fails to abate a noxious
weed, grasses or vegetation nuisance, as required under the provisions of §§
94.50 through
94.56 of this chapter, may be subject to a maximum penalty of 30 days in jail
or up to $200 fine or both. A separate offense may be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the City
may also use the remedies of civil action and abatement as set forth in SDCL §§
21-10-5 through 21-10-9.
(Ord. 198, passed 5-18-2009)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   GARBAGE HAULERS
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   SOLICITATIONS
      
114.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
115.   MOVING BUILDINGS
      
116.   CABLE SERVICES
      
117.   MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   License; unlawful without
   
110.02   License application
   
110.03   License expiration
   
110.04   License suspension or revocation
   
110.05   License issuance
   
110.06   License records
   
110.07   Exceptions
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 LICENSE; UNLAWFUL WITHOUT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to engage
in any activity for which a license is required without first having obtained a
license, as hereinafter provided. The City Council may at any time expand the
general provisions of this business regulations title by requiring any person,
persons, firm or corporation engaging in any trade, business or occupation
within the city which is not specified by this title to obtain a license, as
deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person, persons, firm or corporation wishing to obtain a license,
as herein provided, shall make written application to the City Council, stating
the name of the applicant, address, purpose of the activity, the length of time
for which said license is wanted, and the particular place at which said
license is to be used.
   (B)   Fees for all licenses shall be fixed by the City Council, where not
specified in this title, and all license fees shall be paid in full at the time
of application in such manner as approved by said Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.01)
§ 110.03 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   Any annual licenses granted under the provisions of this title shall expire
on December 31 next following the granting thereof, except as otherwise
provided, and shall not be granted for any sum less than the annual rate, and
there shall be no rebate made on the termination of said calling, vocation or
kind of business for which said license was issued.
(Prior Code, § 5.01)
§ 110.04 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The City Council shall have the authority at any time to suspend or revoke
any license granted under the provision of this title whenever said Council
shall be satisfied upon written complaint that any such calling, vocation or
kind of business for which said license has been issued, has been made or
conducted in an improper or illegal manner and, in case of such revocation, the
City Council may refund to the holder of such license such proportionate amount
of money paid therefor as said Council shall deem just.
(Prior Code, § 5.01)
§ 110.05 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   Except as otherwise provided, all licenses shall be issued by the Finance
Officer after issuance of the license has been approved by the City Council and
the applicant shall have complied with all requirements for issuance of such
license. Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall be signed by the Finance
Officer and shall have affixed thereto the official seal of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5.01)
§ 110.06 LICENSE RECORDS.
   The Finance Officer shall keep a record of all licenses issued by the city
stating when and to whom issued, for what purpose and for what length of time,
the amount of money paid for said license and the place where such activity is
to be carried on.
(Prior Code, § 5.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-34-1
§ 110.07 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this title shall extend to any sale of livestock or farm
products, or any secondhand furniture or household goods by or for any person
or persons who shall have actually used the same in the city, or to any sale of
goods, wares or merchandise by public officers in the pursuance of legal
process, or to goods, wares or merchandise sold by, non-profit enterprises;
except that, such non-profit enterprises shall be required to obtain a special
permit for said sales. The Municipal Finance Officer shall issue special
permits, without the payment of any license fees or other charges therefor, to
any enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when charitable educational,
literary, scientific or religious purpose. An applicant for a special permit
shall submit an application therefor to the Municipal Finance Officer and shall
furnish such additional information and shall make such affidavits as the
Municipal Finance Officer shall require. A person or organization operating
under a special permit shall operate his or her non-profit enterprise in
compliance with this title and other applicable rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-34-1
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this business regulations
title shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by fine of not less than $25,
nor more than $100, or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both such fine
and imprisonment for each day of operation in violation of this title. Each day
in violation of this title shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
CHAPTER 111: GARBAGE HAULERS
Section
Garbage and Recycling Collection
   
111.01   Garbage service required
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   License application
   
111.04   Application approval by governing body required before licensure or
renewal
   
111.05   License transfer
   
111.06   Performance standards
   
111.07   Obligation to remove
   
111.08   License revocation
Dumpsters; Portable Storage Units
   
111.20   Purpose
   
111.21   Definitions
   
111.22   Permit required
   
111.23   Permit duration
   
111.24   General restrictions and requirements
   
111.25   General placement
   
111.26   Emergency removal
   
111.27   Use restrictions
   
111.28   Duty to remove
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GARBAGE AND RECYCLING COLLECTION
§ 111.01 GARBAGE SERVICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every city residence is required to have garbage service provided by a
city-licensed garbage hauler.
   (B)   The occupant, owner or manager of every dwelling, house, dwelling
structure or apartment shall remove or have removed all garbage from the
premises at least once each week and deposited in a permitted solid waste
facility.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a commercial garbage hauler to use the
streets or roads within the city for the collection, removal or disposal of any
solid waste, without first having obtained a commercial garbage hauler license
from the city.
   (B)   The city may approve no more than two commercial garbage hauler
licenses for the first 1,500 of population or fraction thereof and not to
exceed one license for each additional 1,500 of population or fraction thereof.
For the purpose of this section, population is equal to 90% of the population
estimates published by the United States Census Bureau for each even-numbered
year, except for the decennial year. For a decennial year, population is equal
to the amount determined by the decennial federal census.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The form for application for a commercial garbage hauler license and
renewal thereof, as required by the provisions of this subchapter, shall be
available from the Municipal Finance Officer. Upon completion of the
application, the applicant shall return it to the Municipal Finance Officer for
review.
   (B)   For an application to be considered complete, the applicant must
submit the following:
      (1)   Proof of certification by the Sioux Falls Health Department that
the applicant will be allowed to deposit solid waste collected from the city in
the Sioux Falls Sanitary Landfill;
      (2)   Certificate of insurance coverage, as described in §
111.06(G) of this chapter;
      (3)   Proposed rate structure, as described in §
111.06(I) of this chapter;
      (4)   Payment of an application fee set by resolution of the City
Council; and
      (5)   A written description of the recycling program offered by the
hauler to its customers.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.04 APPLICATION APPROVAL GOVERNING BODY REQUIRED BEFORE LICENSURE OR
RENEWAL.
   Before any commercial garbage hauler license shall be issued, renewed or
transferred under the provisions of this subchapter, the governing board must
approve the application for license as described in §
111.03 of this chapter. The City Council may require the applicant to furnish
additional information, prior to approval of an application. Upon approval of
the application, the Municipal Finance Officer shall issue a commercial garbage
hauler license to the applicant. Once issued, licenses shall be conditional
upon the license holder complying with §
111.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.05 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   A holder of a currently valid commercial garbage hauler license, in
conjunction with a party wishing to receive such a license, may apply for
transfer of such a license in the same manner of application described in §
111.03 of this chapter. In such cases, the payment of the applicable fee shall
be the responsibility of the party to receive the transferred license. For an
application for a transfer to be considered complete, the signatures of an
authorized representative from each party must be present on the application
form. If, at the time of application for transfer, there are more licenses
issued than available pursuant to §§
111.20 through
111.28 of this chapter, the city reserves the right to not grant a transfer of
an existing license. This also applies to the merger or acquisitions of
currently licensed or unlicensed garbage haulers.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.06 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   For any commercial garbage hauler license to be effective, the holder of
such license shall comply with the following performance standards.
   (A)   Random load inspections. No holder of a commercial garbage hauler
license shall violate any rule or policy established by the City of Sioux Falls
for the Sioux Falls Sanitary Landfill. All vehicles transporting solid waste to
the Sioux Falls Sanitary Landfill and licensed under this subchapter shall be
subject to random load inspections performed by the Sioux Falls Health
Department. License holders should be aware that the Sioux Falls Health
Department will forward reports of landfill rule violations to the city.
   (B)   Minimum design requirements for equipment. All solid waste collection
or transportation equipment operated by license holders are required to meet
the following standards.
      (1)   Vehicles shall be water-tight.
      (2)   Vehicles shall be covered, with no openings which would allow the
contents to escape.
      (3)   Vehicle boxes shall be of all metal construction, and shall have
metal doors which shall be in a closed position whenever the vehicle is in
motion.
      (4)   Containers must be attached or bolted to the frame when in
transport.
      (5)   All vehicles and containers must be manufactured or designed for
hauling sold waste.
      (6)   Vehicles and containers shall be thoroughly washed as directed by
the City Council or the Sioux Falls Health Department, as may be necessary to
keep vehicles and containers in proper sanitary conditions.
      (7)   Vehicles shall be loaded so that solid waste does not spill out,
fall out, blow out or otherwise leave the vehicle or container while it is
collecting or transporting solid waste.
      (8)   Each vehicle having a permit under this subchapter shall
permanently display the licensed commercial garbage hauler’s name in easily-
legible letters at least three inches high or identifying logo.
      (9)   Each vehicle shall comply with §
70.07 of this code of ordinances, pertaining to truck load limits.
Additionally, trucks will operate with tag axles down at all times.
   (C)   Frequency of collection. Each holder of a commercial garbage hauler
license shall collect solid waste from its customers at least once per week. In
cases where a customer of a license holder produces a type or quantity of solid
waste which requires more frequent collection to protect public health,
sanitation or safety, the City Council may direct the license holder to collect
solid waste from that particular customer on a more frequent basis.
   (D)   Hours of collection. Each holder of a commercial garbage hauler
license shall not begin collection of garbage before 7:00 a.m.
   (E)   Recycling programs required. Each holder of a commercial garbage
hauler license shall provide a program for collection of recyclable materials.
Each such program shall include collections of recyclable materials from
customers a minimum of one time per month. Each hauler shall provide to the
city, as part of the hauler’s annual application for a commercial garbage
hauler license, a written description of the hauler’s recycling program.
   (F)   Containers provided. Each holder of a commercial garbage hauler
license shall provide suitable, rigid, water-tight containers in which the
occupants shall cause to be deposited all garbage, animal waste, rubbish and
recyclable materials, except yard waste, accumulating upon the premises.
Containers shall be provided with tightly-fitting covers, which shall not be
removed, except when necessary. Residential recycling containers shall
accommodate single-stream recycling. The garbage and recycling containers shall
be kept in an inconspicuous place beside or behind the structure which is
reasonable accessible to the licensed commercial garbage hauler. Containers
shall display the licensed commercial garbage hauler’s name in easily legible
letters at least three inches height or identifying logo.
   (G)   Insurance required. A certificate of insurance which lists the city as
named insured must be provided along with the application for a commercial
garbage hauler license.
      (1)   Such insurance shall protect the applicant and the city against
loss from the following:
         (a)   Liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury
death resulting there from, suffered or alleged to have been suffered by any
person or persons whatever resulting directly or indirectly from any act,
activity, errors or omissions of the licensee, any person acting for the
licensee or any person under the control or direction of the licensee; and
         (b)   Liability imposed by law for damages to property resulting
directly or indirectly from any act, activity, errors or omissions of the
licensee, any person acting for the licensee or any person under the control or
direction of the licensee.
      (2)   The certificate of insurance must show that the applicant has
secured liability insurance with the following minimum coverage:
         (a)   One million dollars per person bodily injury;
         (b)   Three million dollars per occurrence; and
         (c)   Three hundred thousand dollars per property damage.
   (H)   Duty of license holder. License holders shall comply with all the
ordinances of the city.
   (I)   Rate structure. Each applicant for a commercial garbage hauler license
shall provide, as an attachment to the application, a schedule of rates which
the applicant is proposing to charge its customers. The rate structure shall
demonstrate that the applicant’s proposed rates are volume based. For the
purpose of this section, volume based refers to garbage collection rate
structures which provide for user fees which increase as the volume of waste
collected increases. Volume based rates encourage source reduction, re-use and
recycling. If applicable, charges shall be categorized as to residential,
commercial and any other special charges. If the application is approved, the
rate structure identified in the application shall remain in effect during the
term of the license. A license holder may change the rate structure during the
term of the license only upon approval by the governing board. The governing
board may approve a requested change only after a written request from the
license holder, and only if the request appears to maintain the principles of
volume based rates.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.07 OBLIGATION TO REMOVE.
   Garbage collectors shall be under no obligation to remove any garbage unless
the payments for the removal of such garbage, as provided by contract with the
customer, shall have been made.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.08 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Any license issued under the provision of this subchapter may be revoked by
the City Council for the violation by the licensee of any applicable provision
of state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
DUMPSTERS; PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
§ 111.20 PURPOSE.
   It shall be illegal for any person to place one or more dumpsters or
portable storage units in or upon any street or public grounds or upon private
property without first having obtained a permit. Unless specifically listed
herein, the provisions of §§
111.01 through
111.08 of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   DUMPSTER. A container designed to receive, transport and dump waste.
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT. A container designed or used for the storage of
personal property which is typically rented to owners or occupants of property
for their temporary use and which is delivered and/or removed by truck.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.22 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person seeking to place one or more dumpsters or portable
storage units in or upon a street or public grounds or upon private property
shall first apply to the Zoning Official or designated representative for a
permit. No permit shall be issued for placement of one or more dumpsters or
portable storage units on a street or public grounds unless placement on
private property is not reasonably feasible.
   (B)   The application fee for a permit allowing the temporary placement of
dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or public grounds or
upon private property shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The fee
for failing to obtain a permit prior for the placement of a dumpster or
portable storage shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The
application fee is waived for any permit allowing the temporary placement of
dumpsters or portable storage units upon private property.
   (C)   Every provider applying for a permit to place one or more dumpsters or
every applicant applying for a permit to place one or more portable storage
units in or upon any street or public grounds or upon private property shall
provide a bond in the amount of $1,000 to cover the cost to repair any damage
caused by the applicant’s use of the street or public grounds for such purpose.
No permit shall be issued until such bond has been provided to the city. If the
cost to repair any damage caused by the provider or applicant’s use of the
street or public grounds exceeds the value of such bond, such amount shall
become the debt of the applicant, immediately due and owing to the city.
   (D)   Application for a permit much be submitted to the Zoning Official or
designated representative at least three working days prior to the proposed
placement of one or more dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any
street or public grounds or upon private property.
   (E)   Each provider or applicant holder shall allow access to private
property by the Zoning Official, or designated representative, during
reasonable hours of the day to verify compliance with the applicable provisions
of this subchapter.
   (F)   By applying for a permit, each provider or applicant agrees to any and
all provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 PERMIT DURATION.
   (A)   Permits issued for placement on streets and/or public grounds shall be
limited in duration as follows:
      (1)   Dumpsters: 30 days; and
      (2)   Portable storage units: 14 days.
   (B)   Permits issued for placement on private property shall be limited in
duration to 45 days.
   (C)   The duration of permits may be extended for good cause shown at the
discretion of the Zoning Official or designated representative.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.24 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or public
grounds or upon private property shall be filled beyond the top of such
dumpster or portable storage facility.
   (B)   Dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or public
grounds or upon private property units shall be emptied as soon as practical,
or when full, and no mechanical hydraulic or electrical loader, compactor,
packer or conveyor in the residential districts may begin before 7:00 a.m.
   (C)   No dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or public
grounds or upon private property shall be filled by means of a chute, conveyor,
belt or other device, located in, above, on or across a street, or by dropping
or throwing items in, above, on or across a street, unless the permit
authorizing placement of such dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon
any street or public grounds or upon private property specifically authorizes
such methods.
   (D)   During such times that dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon
any street or public grounds or upon private property are not actively being
filled or emptied with materials, all dumpsters and portable storage units
shall be covered by tarpaulin or other secured material, as approved by Zoning
Officer or designated representative to prevent debris from blowing out of the
container.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.25 GENERAL PLACEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or
public grounds shall not be placed closer than 40 feet from any intersection.
The Zoning Officer or designated representative must approve the proposed
location of any dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or
public grounds.
      (2)   A placard or decal shall be affixed to each dumpster or portable
storage units in or upon any street or public grounds or upon private property
until such time as the dumpster or portable storage facility is removed. Such
placard or decal shall have one or more warning signs of a contrasting color to
identify that the container is dangerous, that children should be kept away,
that playing in, on or about the dumpster or portable storage facility is
prohibited.
      (3)   Dumpsters or portable storage units in or upon any street or public
grounds shall be visible at night from all angels of traffic flow. Means to
provide nighttime visibility include, but are not limited to, the use of
reflecting tape at least two inches in width, reflectors, cones or other
methods as approved by the Zoning Officer or designated representative.
      (4)   When required by the City Engineer, additional traffic-control
devices meeting the latest U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, “Manual on Uniform Traffic- Control Devices” (“MUTCD”) standard
shall be placed on the street to warn traffic of obstacles on the street.
   (B)   All required visibility devices and/or signage shall be provided by
the applicant owner, agent, contractor, employer or permit holder.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 EMERGENCY REMOVAL.
   In the event of an emergency, any dumpsters or portable storage units in or
upon any street or public grounds or upon private property may be removed by
the Zoning Officer, or designated representative, and/or police, fire or public
utility personnel. The city shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused
by such emergency removal.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.27 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No hazardous material or organic waste shall be placed in a dumpster
or portable storage facility.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to maintain the
dumpster or storage unit rodent, vermin and insect free.
   (C)   Any person who violates the restrictions set forth herein may be held
liable for such conduct, which liability is in addition to any other penalties
or sanctions that may be imposed.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.28 DUTY TO REMOVE.
   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant, owner, agent, contractor,
employer or permit holder to remove the dumpster or portable storage unit prior
to the expiration of the permit, or when ordered to by authorized city
personnel. The city or designee shall have the right to enter upon any street,
public grounds or upon private property or any lot or parcel of land for the
purpose of removing any dumpster or portable storage unit remaining after the
permit has expired. All costs of removal, including an administrative fee to
defray costs of enforcing this section, will be assessed to the applicant,
owner, agent, contractor, employer or permit holder, except those incurred for
emergency removal.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
110.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates the restrictions set forth in §§
111.01 through
111.08 of this chapter may be subject to an administrative fee established by
resolution of the City Council and removal costs incurred by the city and shall
be in addition to the required permit fees. Violations of §§
111.01 through
111.08 of this chapter shall also be subject to a fine in an amount set by
resolution and not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by state law or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both the fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person who violates the restrictions set forth in §§
111.20 through
111.28 of this chapter may be subject to an administrative fee established by
resolution of the City Council and removal costs incurred by the city and shall
be in addition to the required permit fees. Violations of §§
111.20 through
111.28 of this chapter shall also be subject to a fine in an amount set by
resolution and not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by state law or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 221, passed 7-7-2014)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Concerts and public dances
§ 112.01 CONCERTS AND PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   Public dances and concerts. All public dances and concerts require a
dance license. A public dance or concert is defined as any dance or concert
conducted outdoors. The dance or concert applicant shall be responsible and
liable for any damage or littering resulting from such activity and as such
shall assume all liabilities.
   (B)   License requirement.
      (1)   All public dances and concerts require a dance license. The
applicant shall deliver to the Finance Officer $50 for a dance or concert
license and an application which shall include:
         (a)   Pay to the Finance Officer a fee of a diagram of the proposed
public dance or conceit setting forth security, division or identification of
minors where alcohol is served as may be required by state law;
         (b)   Starting time, ending time not later than 1:00 a.m., and date;
         (c)   Persons responsible for the event;
         (d)   Whether the event is insured; and
         (e)   What type of security will be employed, if any.
      (2)   The Mayor or the City Council have the authority to approve an
application.
   (C)   Supervision. Public dances and concerts conducted hereunder may be
required by the City Council to retain one or more supervisors, who shall be
authorized to remove any person who is intoxicated or is conducting himself or
herself in an improper or disorderly manner. No public dance, concert or public
dance hall shall be conducted past the hour of 1:00 a.m.
   (D)   Community exception. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
apply to dances or concerts conducted, maintained or operated as a community
enterprise and without personal profit to any person, firm or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 5.02) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-34-15
CHAPTER 113: SOLICITATIONS
Section
Transient Merchants and Peddlers
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License/permit required
   
113.03   License/permit approval
   
113.04   Information required
   
113.05   Use of permit
   
113.06   Peddler required to leave premises
   
113.07   License revocation
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by
foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise, offering and exposing the same for
sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
   TEMPORARY BUSINESS. One established for temporary operation only. A business
operated more than six months in one place by the same person shall be deemed a
permanent business, but one commenced and discontinued within six months
thereafter shall prima facie be presumed a TEMPORARY BUSINESS and its operator
a transient merchant. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this subchapter merely by reason
by associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or by
conducting such transient business in connection with as a part of or in the
same of any local dealer, trader or merchant.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person, firm
or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a
resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within said city.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
Statutory reference:
   Related definitions, see SDCL § 9-34-7
§ 113.02 LICENSE/PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as
defined herein, shall pay to the city a license fee of $25 per day that said
transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall conduct said
business licensed under this subchapter. Said license fee shall be payable in
advance and the license issued under this subchapter shall be posted
conspicuously in the place of business named therein.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in the business of
peddler within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a
permit and license therefor, as provided herein. The fees required for such
peddlers for said licenses shall be $25 per day payable in advance; provided
that, no fees shall be required of one selling products actually produced by
the seller. Peddlers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of
any citizen.
(Prior Code, § 5.03) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-34-8
§ 113.03 LICENSE/PERMIT APPROVAL.
   Any person seeking to obtain a license under the provisions of this
subchapter shall pay to the Municipal Finance Officer the amount provided for
by this subchapter for such license, for which the Finance Officer shall
furnish the applicant a receipt designating kind of place and activity applied
for. Both the Municipal Finance Officer and Chief of Police shall endorse said
receipt.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
§ 113.04 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Applicants shall furnish the following information:
   (A)   Name of applicant(s);
   (B)   Permanent address of applicant(s);
   (C)   Whether he or she transacts business for himself, herself or someone
else;
   (D)   If for someone else, the name and address of the person, firm or
corporation he or she represents;
   (E)   Whether he or she sells and delivers the property directly to the
purchaser or takes orders for it by carrying samples or catalogs;
   (F)   Manner in which he or she intends to travel and a complete description
of the vehicle he or she intends to use in doing so;
   (G)   Copies of contracts and agreements he or she intends to make with the
customers;
   (H)   South Dakota sales tax license; and
   (I)   Any other information as the Municipal Finance Officer or Chief of
Police may require.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
§ 113.05 USE OF PERMIT.
   No more than one or two persons shall deal on the same permit as agents or
otherwise, nor shall such permit be assignable from the persons to whom it was
originally issued to any other person, firm or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 5.03) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.06 PEDDLER REQUIRED TO LEAVE PREMISES.
   No peddler shall remain upon the property of any customer or prospective
customer who has requested the peddler or solicitor to leave such property. Any
peddler, who does so, will have his, her or their license revoked without
refund.
(Prior Code, § 5.03) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.07 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked, after notice and hearing, for
any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
carrying on the business as a peddler, itinerant merchant, itinerant vendor or
transient merchant hereunder;
   (C)   Any violation of this subchapter;
   (D)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and/
or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed hereunder in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace
to the health, safety or general welfare of public.
(Prior Code, § 5.03)
CHAPTER 114: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
114.01   License required
   
114.02   Video lottery license required on premises
   
114.03   License application; fees
   
114.04   License restrictions
   
114.05   License application approval or disapproval
   
114.06   Hours of operation
   
114.07   Sanitation facilities
   
114.08   Open containers
   
114.09   Violations
§ 114.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, keep for sale, exchange, distill,
manufacture, produce, bottle, blend or otherwise concoct, within the city any
alcoholic beverage as defined by statute, without having a license therefor as
required by state laws now in effect, or as hereafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 6.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-29-7, 35-1-1, 35-1-4, 35-1-5 and Ch. 35-
2 and 35-3
§ 114.02 VIDEO LOTTERY LICENSE REQUIRED ON PREMISES.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed on any person who is licensed pursuant to SDCL
§ 35-4-2 and who is issued a video lottery establishment license pursuant to
SDCL § 42-7A-41 an annual additional license fee for the privilege of locating
video lottery machines on the licensed premises.
   (B)   The fee is established at $50 for each video lottery machine and shall
be paid at the same time and in the same manner as the fees paid in SDCL § 35-
4-2.
   (C)   All fees received under this chapter shall be deposited into the
General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.01) (Ord. 85, passed - -)
§ 114.03 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEES.
   In any instances in which applications may qualify, applications for
licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be submitted as
prescribed by state laws, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 6.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 35-4-2
§ 114.04 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   Applications for any alcoholic beverage license submitted to the city shall
be accompanied by the maximum fee for such license provided by state law,
unless such application fee has been modified previously by the city, and the
granting or rejection of any such application shall be as provided by state
law, as amended from time to time, and in accordance with any ordinances of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL Ch. 35-2, 35-3 and 35-4
§ 114.05 LICENSE APPLICATION APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.
   The City Council shall have discretion to approve or disapprove all such
applications depending on whether it deems the applicant a suitable person to
hold such license and whether it considers the proposed location suitable.
(Prior Code, § 6.01)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 35-2-1.2 and 35-2-6.2
§ 114.06 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   General. No licensee shall sell, serve or allow to be consumed on the
licensed premises any alcoholic beverages at any time or on any day not
permitted by SDCL Title 35.
   (B)   Sunday and Memorial Day sales permitted. Any licensed on-premises
retail sale liquor licensee or off-sale package liquor licensee may sell, serve
and allow to be consumed on the premises covered by the license, alcoholic
beverages on Sunday and Memorial Day during the hours as permitted by SDCL
Title 35.
(Prior Code, § 6.01) (Ord. 205, passed 11-1-2010) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.07 SANITATION FACILITIES.
   Every on-sale dealer, shall maintain upon his or her licensed premises,
toilets properly connected with the city water and sewer system with separate
facilities for men and women. In each such facility, there shall be maintained
running water and approved sanitary drying facilities. Every licensee shall
have such facilities equipped and maintained so as to comply with all federal,
state or local health regulations at all times.
(Prior Code, § 6.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 34-18-20
§ 114.08 OPEN CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful to drink any alcoholic beverage or to possess any
glass, can or other unsealed container which contains any alcoholic beverage,
in any public place, vacant building, automobile, street, alley, sidewalk or
place of amusement or business establishment not authorized to sell such
beverages unless authorized by the Common Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 35-1-5.3, 35-1-9.1
§ 114.09 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person, firm or licensee in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. For failure to correct any
offense when applicable, after conviction, each day of failure to do so shall
constitute an additional separate offense. Whenever any person shall, as clerk,
servant, agent or employee of any other person or establishment, violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall also be deemed as guilty as a
principal. Failure to comply with all existing requirements, including the
provisions in this chapter, shall provide cause for revocation of any licenses
granted under the provisions of the state laws, now in effect or as hereafter
amended.
(Prior Code, § 6.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 35-2-10
CHAPTER 115: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   Permit requirements
   
115.04   Limitations on buildings to be moved
   
115.05   Building permit prerequisite
   
115.06   Deposit and insurance requirements
   
115.07   Fees and deposits; disposition
   
115.08   Building moving operations
   
115.09   Permittee duties
   
115.10   Enforcing officers
   
115.11   Permittee liability for expenses
   
115.12   Original premises left unsafe
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy which, when loaded on any carrier of any kind, has a loaded
height exceeding 13 feet and a loaded width exceeding 12 feet.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The official designated by the City Council to enforce
this chapter.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Before engaging in the operation of moving buildings, every person shall
obtain a license therefor. Such persons shall pay a license fee as set by
resolution of the City Council. Upon payment of a license fee, the Building
Official shall issue such license as is covered by the fee.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. No licensee under this chapter shall move or prepare
for moving any building over, along or across any public highway, street, alley
or other public place in the city without first obtaining a permit from the
Building Official.
   (B)   Application for permit.
      (1)   A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application for
such permit with the Building Official upon forms provided by the Building
Official.
      (2)   The application shall set forth:
         (a)   A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving
street address, construction materials and dimensions;
         (b)   The public highways, streets, alleys or other public places
over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved;
         (c)   A description of the location and destination, including street
address, to which the building is proposed to be moved;
         (d)   The moving date and hours; and
         (e)   Any additional information that the city shall find necessary to
a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
   (C)   Fee. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set
by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Building permit prerequisite to issuance; time limit on permanent
installation.
      (1)   No permit for moving a building to a lot in the city shall be
granted by the Building Official if a building permit has not been issued for
such building on such lot.
      (2)   No building shall be moved to a lot in the city for the purpose of
storing such building on the lot. A building moved to a lot shall be
permanently installed on its new foundation within 60 calendar days of the date
moved onto the lot.
   (E)   Standards for issuance of permit. The city shall refuse to issue a
permit required by this chapter if:
      (1)   Any application requirements or any fee or deposit requirement has
not been complied with;
      (2)   The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering
persons and property in the city;
      (3)   The building in its new location would not comply with the Building
Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Zoning Ordinance or other ordinances in
effect at the time of the application in the governmental jurisdiction where
the building is to be located, all as amended. This division (E)(3) shall not
be construed to prohibit the moving of a building for which an applicant has
obtained a building permit which provides for construction or alterations to
the building which will bring it to code standards; and
      (4)   For any other reasons, persons or property in the city would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
   (F)   Issuance of permit. No permit shall be issued until 48 hours after the
time of filing of the completed application, and all fees, deposits and
certificates or certificates of insurance are completed. This time period shall
not commence running until filing of all information, fees, deposits and
certificates of insurance set forth in this chapter are on file with the city.
   (G)   Expiration of permit. Any permit granted under this chapter shall
expire if the move is not commenced on the moving date set forth in the
application.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.04 LIMITATIONS ON BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED.
   (A)   No building shall be prepared for a move or shall be moved upon or
through the streets of the city if the building exceeds 34 feet loaded width,
including overhang, or which exceeds 30 feet loaded height. Said size
limitations may be waived by the Building Official if, in the opinion of the
Building Official, the oversized building may be safely moved on the proposed
route without danger to property or public improvements.
   (B)   No building shall be moved upon or through the streets of the city to
a lot in the city if the value of such building before moving is less than 60%
of the value of a new building of the same type.
   (C)   No building shall be moved in or through the streets of the city to a
lot in the city if such building is in such deteriorated condition that, in the
opinion of the Building Official, it is unsafe and constitutes a safety hazard.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.05 BUILDING PERMIT PREREQUISITE.
   No person shall prepare any building for a move, nor move any building, to
any lot within the city unless said person shall have first obtained a building
permit for such building on such lot.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.06 DEPOSIT AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Deposit. Upon receipt of an application for a permit under §
115.03 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the applicant to procure from
all appropriate city departments or other governmental bodies and the utility
companies involved, an estimate of the expense that will be incurred in
removing, trimming, cutting or replacing any property on the route of the move,
including trees on public property above the height of 13 feet, by reason of
the moving of the building through the city, together with the cost of
materials necessary to be used in making such removals and replacements and
expenses of city personnel and the utility companies occasioned by the moving.
Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall deposit with the
city’s Finance Officer a sum of money equal to twice the amount of these
estimated city-related expenses. Such deposit shall be in cash or by certified
check, cashier’s check or such other form as the city’s Finance Officer may
require.
   (B)   Insurance. Any person filing an application for a permit under §
115.03 of this chapter shall file with the Building Official a liability
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state, protecting the applicant and the city and its officials,
providing for coverage as established by the Finance Department. The insurance
coverage may be a blanket insurance policy covering any building moving by the
applicant. Such insurance shall inure to the benefit of the city, and the city
shall be named insured herein for the use and benefit of any person intended to
be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to
public or private property and the payment for any damages or losses resulting
from any malfeasance, misfeasance, non-feasance or negligence on the part of
the mover in connection with any of the activities or conditions of the permit.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.07 FEES AND DEPOSITS; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Receipt of deposits and fees. The city’s Finance Officer shall receive
all fees and deposits required by this chapter.
   (B)   Return upon non-issuances. Upon refusal to issue or non-issuance of a
permit, the Building Official shall inform the city’s Finance Officer who,
after being so informed, shall return all deposits to the applicant. Permit
fees filed with the application shall not be returned.
   (C)   Return upon allowance for expense. After the building has been moved,
the Building Official shall prepare a written statement of all expenses
incurred in removing, trimming, cutting or replacing all public property and of
all material used in the making of the removal and the replacement together
with a statement of all damages and costs caused to or inflicted upon the city.
Upon receipt of the Building Official’s statement, the city’s Finance Officer
shall return to the applicant all deposits after deducting a sum sufficient to
pay for all of the costs, damages and expenses incurred by the city by reason
of the removal of the building. Permit fees filed with the application shall
not be returned.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.08 BUILDING MOVING OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Designation of route. In conjunction with the application for a permit
under §
115.03 of this chapter, the applicant shall develop and submit a list of
designated streets over which a building is proposed to be moved, which list
must be approved, in writing, by the Building Official, or designee, and Chief
of Police. In making their determinations, said officials shall act to assure
reasonable safety to persons and property in the city, including trees on
public property, and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public
streets.
   (B)   Time of moves. The time of all moves must be approved in advance by
the Building Official and recorded on the permit. Generally, all building moves
may not commence from private property and enter public property before 9:00
a.m. and must be completed and placed on the designated site off of public
property or streets by 4:00 p.m. of the same day; or may not commence before 7:
00 p.m. and must be completed by 6:00 a.m. the following day. The Building
Official may make exceptions, for good cause, as to the time of move.
   (C)   Nighttime moving; lighting requirements. Building moves during the
nighttime, including one hour or sooner before sunrise and one hour or later
before sunset, must be floodlighted such that the structure being moved is
illuminated sufficiently to permit ready visibility of the top and side
clearance of the structure and any obstruction that may be in the path of
travel. The Building Official shall approve all lighting in advance of any
move.
   (D)   Parking prohibited on streets. Parking shall be prohibited on streets
included in the routing for the moving of a building. At least 48 hours in
advance of the time of the moving, the permittee shall post signs provided by
the city, designating the area as a no-parking area. The Building Official
shall ensure that such signs are posted by the permittee in a timely manner.
Such signs shall be removed by the city after the move is completed. If any
vehicle is parked illegally in violation of the provisions of this division
(D), the permittee shall be responsible for the expenses of towing the vehicle
away, but may recover said expenses from the violator. The permittee shall
assume all risk of damage to any vehicle either towed away or parked in such
route.
   (E)   Storage on public property restricted. No building being moved
pursuant to this chapter shall be stored on any public street, highway, place,
alley, park, square, plaza, any city-owned right-of-way or any other public
property owned or controlled by the city.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.09 PERMITTEE DUTIES.
   Every permittee under §
115.03 of this chapter shall:
   (A)   Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the
approved, written permit;
   (B)   Conduct the move on the date and time stated on the approved permit.
Failure to move on the date and time shall require the applicant to reapply for
a moving permit and receive new signatures of approval as required in §
115.08(A) of this chapter;
   (C)   Notify the Building Official, in writing, of any and all damage done
to public or private property within 24 hours after the damage or injury has
occurred;
   (D)   Comply with the Building Code, the Electrical Code, the Plumbing Code,
the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended;
   (E)   Pay the cost and expenses of the city occasioned by the movement of
the building;
   (F)   Remove all debris and materials and fill all excavations to existing
grade at the original site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary
condition within ten calendar days of the moving date. The old basement or any
excavation on the original site shall be fenced in immediately upon removal of
the building and shall remain fenced until the excavation can be filled;
   (G)   Plug the sanitary sewer line with a concrete stopper unless otherwise
directed by the city. The plugged sanitary sewer line shall be inspected by the
city before backfilling. The permittee shall arrange to have the water shut off
at the property line and the meter returned to the city. The permittee shall
notify all utilities, including the city, to disconnect all services at least
48 hours in advance of said moving; and
   (H)   Notify telephone, electric and gas company, railroad companies, cable
television and any other utility at least 48 hours in advance of the moving of
any building that will interfere with the pole, wires, conduit, cables or other
property of the utility, specifying in such notice the highest part of the
building above the surface of the street and the proposed route and time of
moving. The utility shall furnish, at the expense of the permittee, a competent
person to superintend the removal and replacement of such wires, poles,
conduit, cables and other property. The permittee shall, at its own expense,
furnish all the labor, materials and equipment necessary and shall remove and
replace the property as directed by the appropriate utility company. Only
authorized personnel of the utility company shall remove or replace any wires,
poles, conduit, cables and other property.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.10 ENFORCING OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Building Official and the Police Department and any other
appropriate city officers or employees shall enforce and carry out the
requirements of this chapter. Once the structure to be moved has reached public
property, the Police Department and, specifically, the officer assigned to
provide escort to the move shall be the enforcement officer of the building
move.
   (B)   The Building Official shall assume enforcement responsibilities when
the building is being prepared for the move, while the move is in progress on
the original site and at such time when the structure being moved leaves public
property and is being placed upon a lot within the city as set forth in the
moving permit.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.11 PERMITTEE LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES.
   The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damages or costs in excess of
deposited amount or securities and the City Attorney shall prosecute an action
against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of
such amounts, if appropriate.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 115.12 ORIGINAL PREMISES LEFT UNSAFE.
   The city shall proceed to do any work necessary to leave the original
premises in a safe and sanitary condition where the permittee does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter, and the costs thereof shall be charged
against the permittee’s deposit.
(Ord. 155, passed 3-1-2004)
CHAPTER 116: CABLE SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Short title
   
116.02   Definitions
Franchise Regulations and Conditions
   
116.15   Grantee qualifications; grant of non-exclusive authority
   
116.16   Franchise duration and acceptance
   
116.17   Compliance with applicable laws, regulations, ordinances and codes
   
116.18   Territorial area involved
   
116.19   Liability and indemnification
   
116.20   System design
   
116.21   System operation and maintenance
   
116.22   Service continuity mandatory
   
116.23   Subscriber privacy
   
116.24   Emergency use of facilities
   
116.25   Safety requirements
   
116.26   Conditions
   
116.27   Removal of facilities
   
116.28   Franchise sale or transfer
   
116.29   Payment to city
   
116.30   Poles; erection, removal and common use
   
116.31   Rates
   
116.32   Performance evaluation
   
116.33   Complaint procedures
   
116.34   City police powers
   
116.35   Notice requirements
   
116.36   Costs to city
   
116.37   Reopeners
   
116.38   Required services
   
116.39   Equal protection
   
116.40   Franchise enforcement and termination
 
   
116.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Tea Cable Services
Ordinance”.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retansmission of
local television broadest signals, as provided in the Cable Act.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1934 (Pub. Law No. 98-549)
(codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. (1982 and supp. V. 1987), as amended by
the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (Pub. Law
No. 102-385), being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of
1996 (Pub. Law No. 104-104), being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq., as it may, from
time to time, be amended.
   CABLE SERVICE. The same meaning as in the Cable Act.
   CABLE SYSTEM. The same meaning as in the Cable Act.
   CHANNEL. The same meaning as in the Cable Act.
   CITY. The City of Tea, South Dakota.
   CITY COUNCIL. The Mayor and the Council members of Tea, South Dakota.
   COUNTY. Lincoln County, South Dakota.
   DEMARCATION. A point that is 12 inches on the subscriber’s side of the
protector or the equivalent thereof in cases where a protector is not employed.
   DROP. The cable that connects the subscriber ground block or other point of
demarcation to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor
thereto.
   FRANCHISE. The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which
authorizes construction and operation of a cable system for the purpose of
offering cable service or other service to subscribers.
   FRANCHISE FEE. Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on
the grantee or the grantee’s subscriber, or both, solely because of their
status as a cable operator, cable subscriber or cable user.
   GRANTEE. The person agreeing to be bound by the terms of this chapter, its
contractors/subcontractors, agents, assigns or its successor in accordance with
the provisions of this franchise.
   GROSS REVENUES. All revenue received from cable service directly by the
grantee from the operation of a cable system within the city, including, but
not limited to, basic cable service, premium cable service and other services.
The term GROSS REVENUES shall not include installation fees, disconnection
fees, reconnection fees, upgrade or downgrade service fees, fees for
telecommunications services, if any, fees for the sale of or servicing of
equipment, franchise fees, advertising revenues, late fees, any fees itemized
and passed through as a result of franchise imposed requirements or any taxes
or fees on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber
or user by any municipality, state or other governmental unit.
   PERSON. Any individual person, firm, partnership, association, corporation
or organization of any kind and any other legally recognized entity.
   PREMIUM CABLE SERVICE. The delivery over a cable system of pay-per channel
audio-visual signals to subscribers, including rental of equipment used
specifically for the receipt of such programming, for a fee or charge, in
addition to the charge for basic cable services or cable service.
   PUBLIC WAY. The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the
city in the service area which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the
use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining
the cable system. PUBLIC WAY shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held
by the city within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for
utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include
other easements or rights-of-way as shall, within their proper use and meaning,
entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of
installing or transmitting the grantee’s cable service or other service over
poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
   OTHER CABLE SERVICE. The delivery over the system of pay-per program or pay-
per-view audiovisual signals or any other type of video programming other than
basic cable service and premium cable service to subscribers, including rental
of equipment used for the receipt of such programming, for a fee or charge, in
addition to the charge for basic cable service, cable service and/or premium
cable service.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT. The Tea Area School District 41-5.
   SERVICE AREA. The present municipal boundaries of the city and shall include
any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any member of the general public who receives cable service
distributed by a cable system and does not further distribute it.
   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. The same meaning as in the Cable Act.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
FRANCHISE REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS
§ 116.15 GRANTEE QUALIFICATIONS; GRANT OF NON-EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city hereby grants to the grantee a nonexclusive franchise, right
and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon,
along, across, above and over and under all public ways and all future
extensions thereof, and additions thereto, within the city using poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a cable
system for the purpose of providing cable service, video programming and other
electronic impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs, and
various communications and other electronic services to the public; provided
that, all operable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all
other city codes and ordinances are otherwise complied with in a manner
acceptable to the city. The right so granted includes the right to use and
occupy said public ways and public places and all matter of easements for the
purposes herein set forth.
   (B)   The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time,
additional franchises for a system in accordance with city, state and federal
law.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.16 FRANCHISE DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE.
   This franchise shall commence on the effective date of the signed acceptance
of this chapter by the grantee and shall expire ten years thereafter unless
renewed, revoked or terminated sooner, as herein provided.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.17 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS, REGULATIONS, ORDINANCES AND CODES.
   (A)   Except in those areas which have been preempted by the Cable Act, or
any other applicable federal or state law, the grantee shall be subject to the
police powers of the city to adapt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
   (B)   All facilities and equipment of the grantee shall be constructed and
maintained to the premises’s demarcation point in accordance with the
provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National
Bureau of Standards. All facilities and equipment of the grantee from the
demarcation point to customer premise equipment shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and other national, state or city
electrical or construction codes which may be in effect.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.18 TERRITORIAL AREA INVOLVED.
   This franchise relates to the present territorial limits of the city and to
any area added to it during the term of this franchise.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.19 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The grantee shall maintain the following types of insurance with a
company, authorized to do business as an insurance producer in the state with a
rating by Best of not less than “A”.
      (1)   Worker’s compensation upon its employees with statutory limits of
the worker’s compensation laws of the state and Coverage B employer’s liability
covering operations of the individual/group/business and its consultants/
subcontractors. This shall include “other states insurance” so as to include
all states not named on the declarations page of the insurance policy, but
excepting monopolistic state funds states. The available limits for Coverage B,
employer’s liability shall be not less than $1,000,000 each accident,
$1,000,000 disease policy limits.
      (2)   Commercial general liability (CGL) insurance providing coverage not
less than that of the standard commercial general liability insurance policy
(“occurrence form”) for operations of the individual/group/business or its
consultants/subcontractors. If the occurrence form is not available, claims
made coverage shall be maintained for three years after final completion and
acceptance of the project by the city. The policy shall include contractual
personal injury, bodily injury and property damage liability coverages with
total available limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, not less than
$2,000,000 general aggregate, $2,000,000 aggregate products and completed
operations. The CGL insurance policy shall name the city and its duly
authorized representatives as an additional insured. The city shall be provided
with a copy of the certificate and policy endorsement prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
      (3)   Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, non-owned and
hired automobiles, trucks and trailers. Such insurance shall provide coverage
at least as broad as that found in the standard comprehensive automobile
liability policy with limits of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit
each occurrence.
   (B)   The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city from
and against losses and physical damage to property and bodily injury or death
to persons, including payments made under the worker’s compensation law which
may be caused by the erection, maintenance, use or removal of any of the
grantee’s attachments, poles or other undertakings, within the city, or by any
action of the grantee, its agents or employees; provided, the grantee shall not
have any liability or duty to defend arising out of any claim, demand, cause of
action or proceeding resulting from the negligence or willful misconduct of the
city, the City Council or any officers, agents, employees or commission of the
city.
   (C)   The grantee shall carry insurance in the above described amounts to
protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions,
suites, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result,
directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The
city shall give the grantee prompt written notice of any such claims, demands,
actions, suits, judgments, costs, expenses or liabilities.
   (D)   All insurance required shall be and remain in full force and effect
for the entire life of this franchise. Said policy or policies of insurance, or
a certificate of insurance thereof, shall be provided to the city prior to the
effective date of this chapter, and then deposited with and kept on file by the
city. The city shall be notified at least 30 days prior to expiration or
cancellation of any such insurance policy.
   (E)   All subcontractors of grantee working in the city’s right-of-way shall
be bonded.
   (F)   In addition, the grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
city for all damages and penalties at all times during the term of this
franchise, as a result of the legal process followed and conducted by the city
for granting this franchise, or the grantee’s conduct or performance under this
franchise. These damages and penalties shall include, but shall not be limited
to, damages arising out of personal injury, property damage, copyright
infringement, defamation, anti-trust, errors and omissions, theft, fire and all
other damages arising out of the grantee’s exercise of this franchise, whether
or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this franchise; such indemnification shall include, but not be limited to,
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.
   (G)   If, in the opinion of the city, the interests of the city cannot
reasonably be represented in good faith by the grantee, the grantee shall pay
all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself, including all reasonable
out-of-pocket expenses, including attorneys’ fees and costs.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.20 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   The grantee shall construct a cable system as follows.
   (A)   The system shall be of the type generally referred to as “single
trunk, single feeder”, wherein the trunk cable shall carry signals in the
minimum frequency range of 5-750 MHZ. The system shall provide the capability
of distribution of multiple channels of video programming.
   (B)   The system shall have the capability of providing video, voice and
data services.
   (C)   The grantee shall provide status monitoring of all power supplies at
the node sites. This will be completed by the end of the first year of
franchise agreement.
   (D)   Within 18 months of the effective date of this franchise, the
grantee’s cable system shall be fully capable of two-way addressable operation
at the subscriber’s receivers and from the grantee’s customer service and head
end facilities on at least one channel.
   (E)   Any system improvements shall be designed, constructed and operated to
meet the technical standards promulgated by the FCC.
   (F)   The system shall be capable of interconnecting with other cable
systems within and adjacent to the city.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.21 SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The grantee shall render safe and efficient service, make repairs
promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest
possible time. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
   (B)   The grantee shall maintain a force of sufficient employees to provide
safe, adequate and prompt service for its facilities.
   (C)   Service shall be provided in compliance with all consumer protection
and customer service regulations governed by the Cable Act, as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.22 SERVICE CONTINUITY MANDATORY.
   (A)   (1)   All subscribers shall have the right to continue to receive
service, insofar as such subscribers comply with financial and policy
obligations owed to the grantee.
      (2)   If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the
system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this
franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive
continuous, uninterrupted service.
      (3)   If the grantee fails to provide such service, the city may do so.
   (B)   If the franchisee is changed, or if a new operator acquires the
system, the grantee shall cooperate with the city, new franchisee or operator
in maintaining service to all subscribers. During such period, the grantee
shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the
system and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no
longer operates the system.
   (C)   If the grantee fails, for reasons not beyond its control, to operate
the system for ten consecutive days without prior approval of the city, the
city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such
time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or
a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this
obligation for the grantee, the city shall receive the revenue from the
system’s operation, and the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable
costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the city
during its period of operation that is the result of the grantee’s failure to
perform.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to be a waiver by the
grantee of its constitutional or statutory rights under federal or state law.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.23 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   The grantee shall comply with all federal subscriber privacy laws, including
information relating to signals from any cable communications channel to a
subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns,
data or information gathered by monitoring transmission of a signal from a
subscriber terminal and electronic sweeps of the system. The grantee will
comply with § 631 of the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 through 573.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.24 EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES.
   In the case of any emergency or disaster, including weather emergencies, the
grantee shall, upon request of the governing body of the city or an appropriate
law enforcement or civil defense authority, make available its facilities to
the city, local law enforcement official or civil defense authorities during
any emergency or disaster.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.25 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damages, injuries or nuisances to the
public.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.26 CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the grantee within the city shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) prepared by the
Bureau of Standards and so located as to cause minimum interference with the
proper use of public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any public
ways and places, and poles, towers and any other structures, lines or equipment
shall be removed by the grantee whenever, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
they restrict or obstruct the operation or location of any facility.
   (B)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the grantee within the city shall be located, erected and maintained
so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or to interfere
with any installations of the city or of a public utility serving the city, or
to interfere with new improvements the city may deem proper to make.
   (C)   In the maintenance and operation of their transmission and
distribution system in the public way, and in the course of any new
construction or addition to their facilities, the grantee shall proceed so as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public. Any opening or
obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the grantee in the
course of their operations shall be guarded and protected at all times by the
placement of adequate barriers, fences or boardings, the bounds of which,
during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by warning
lights.
   (D)   No excavations of any type shall be performed or caused to be
performed without prior written authorization from the City Engineer. The city
may require all or any part of the installation to be buried underground in
stances or areas where other public utilities are required to be located
underground.
   (E)   If the business of the grantee necessitates the opening, breaking up
or tearing up of a portion of a public way or other part of any city-owned or
city-controlled property, such act of opening, breaking up or tearing up of the
property shall at the option of the city be performed by the city prior to the
performance of the grantee’s work by the grantee if the city does not exercise
its option, in case of disturbance of any public way, the grantee shall, at its
own cost and expense and a manner approved by the City Engineer, replace and
restore such public way to the same or substantially the same condition as the
public way was prior to such disturbance. In such instances, the grantee shall
save the city harmless against all loss or damage to any person or property in
accordance with the provisions of §
116.19 of this chapter.
   (F)   If, at any time during the period of this franchise, the city shall
lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any public way, the grantee
shall, upon 30 days’ prior notice by the city, remove, relay and relocate its
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other figures, as
applicable, at its grantee’s sole cost and expense.
   (G)   All installations of equipment shall be of permanent nature, durable
and installed in accordance with good engineering practices, and of sufficient
height to comply with all existing city regulations, ordinances and state laws
so as not to interfere in any manner with the right of the public or individual
property owner, and any equipment installed in a public way or place shall not
interfere with the usual travel on such public way or usual use of such public
place by the public and during the construction, repair or removal thereof,
shall not obstruct or impede traffic.
   (H)   The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting it, and the
grantee may require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not
less than ten days’ advance written notice of such action.
   (I)   The grantee may trim trees upon the overhanging public ways and places
of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact
with the wires and cables of the grantee; except that, at the option of the
city, such trimming may be performed by the city or under the city’s
supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee.
   (J)   (1)   In all sections of the city where the cables, wires or other
like facilities of public utilities are maintained underground, the grantee
shall bury and maintain its wires, cables or other like facilities underground
to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee
to do so. Underground line shall be placed at depths consistent with the
provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National
Bureau of Standards. The grantee shall be responsible for all costs associated
with damage to any line which has been installed at a depth less or more than
that required. If the ground is frozen, saturated or otherwise unable to
facilitate an underground installation and underground installation is
required, the installation shall be performed on a temporary basis in
compliance with state and federal rules.
      (2)   As soon as conditions change to permit proper underground
installation of the cable, the grantee shall install the facilities no later
than 30 days after such conditions have changed to allow the installation.
   (K)   The grantee shall not allow its cable service or other operations to
interfere with television and radio reception of persons not served by the
grantee.
   (L)   The grantee shall, at its sole and exclusive expense, protect,
support, temporarily disconnect, relocate on the same public way or public
place, or remove from the public way or public place, any property of the
grantee when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or
establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines and tracks or any other types of structures or
improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or
proprietary capacity, or other structure of public improvement; provided,
however, that, the grantee may abandon any property of the grantee in place as
hereinafter provided.
   (M)   If the use of any part of the system is discontinued for any reason
for a continuous period of 12 months, or if the system or property has been
installed in any public way or public place without complying with the
requirements of this chapter, or the rights granted hereunder have been
terminated, cancelled or have expired, the grantee shall promptly remove from
the public way, or public places all such property and poles of such system
other than any which the city, may permit to be abandoned in place. In the
event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the public way or
other area from which such property has been removed to a condition the city.
   (N)   (1)   Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be
abandoned in such a manner as the city may prescribe.
      (2)   Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place,
it shall submit to the city an instrument to be approved by the city,
transferring to the city the ownership of such property.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.27 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall
promptly remove all its aerial drops and equipment from the premises of such
subscriber upon request. Underground drops shall remain buried.
   (B)   Upon revocation or expiration of this franchise, the city may request
the removal of the grantee’s aerial equipment and facilities. Such removal
shall be at the expense of the grantee. Any disturbance to city property during
such removal process shall be restored to its original condition in so far as
may be reasonably practicable for the situation. The city reserves the right to
inspect and approve the condition of its property after such removal.
Underground facilities shall remain buried.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.28 FRANCHISE SALE OR TRANSFER.
   (A)   This franchise and the rights granted under this chapter may not be
sold, assigned or transferred by the grantee either in whole or in part, or
leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or
equitable, or any rights, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any
person without the consent of the city.
   (B)   The grantee shall provide written notice to the city of any proposed
sale, assignment or transfer. Within 120 days of receipt of such notice, and
following a public hearing, within ten days after the public hearing, the city
shall approve or deny the sale, assignment or transfer.
   (C)   The city reserves the right of first refusal of any offer to purchase
the system in favor of the city purchasing the system under substantially the
same terms and conditions as the offer.
   (D)   If a renewal or extension of the grantee’s franchise is denied or the
franchise is lawfully terminated, and the city either lawfully acquires
ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully affects a transfer of
ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or
transfer shall be on the terms set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 547.
   (E)   If the franchise is revoked, the grantee may request and the city
shall give the grantee, in its sole discretion, a reasonable opportunity to
effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. During
such period, the grantee may continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its
prior franchise. However, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period
greater than 120 days from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the
end of that time, the grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified
transferee or assignee of its cable system which is acceptable to the city, the
grantee and the city may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant
to federal or state law. The grantee’s continued operation of its cable system
during the 120-day period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an
extinguishment of, any rights of either the city or the grantee.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.29 PAYMENT TO CITY.
   (A)   During the term of this franchise and so long as the grantee or its
successors or assigns operate the cable system, commencing from the effective
date of this chapter, the grantee shall pay to the city the sum of 5% of the
total annual gross revenue. The franchise fee shall be payable monthly or
quarterly, upon the written notice of such election by the grantee, within 30
days of the expiration of the preceding month. A brief report shall accompany
the payment showing the basis for the computation of the amount paid in a
manner described by the city.
   (B)   Such payments by the grantee to the city shall be in lieu of any
occupation tax, license tax or similar levy and shall be paid annually. Nothing
herein contained, however, shall in any way relieve the grantee or its assigns
or successors from the obligation of paying property taxes to the city, or any
other governmental subdivision of the state or any other taxes lawfully levied
by the state on the operation of the grantee. Such payment also does not affect
the responsibility of the grantee to collect state and local sales tax on the
service provided.
   (C)   The city may, at its request, audit or inspect the books and records
of the grantee related to gross revenue, as defined herein, up to seven years
prior to the date of the request. In the event any such audit or inspection by
the city determines that the grantee’s obligations to the city were under-
reported by more than 5%, the cost of such audit or inspection shall be paid by
the grantee.
   (D)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall any such acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for further or
additional sums payable under the provisions of this franchise. All amounts
paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the city.
   (E)   If a payment is not made by the due date, interest on the amount due
shall accrue from such date at an annual rate of 12%.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.30 POLES; ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE.
   (A)   No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the
grantee without prior approval of the City Engineer with regard to locations,
height, type or any other pertinent aspect. However, no locations of any pole
or wire holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such
poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee, at its own
expense, whenever the Council determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby.
   (B)   There is hereby granted to the extent that the city is authorized to
so do; the right and authority to the grantee to lease, rent or in any other
manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and
facilities from the city any and all holders of public licenses and franchises
within the corporate limits of the city, including Qwest Communications, Inc.
(and any affiliates thereto), Xcel Energy and Southeastern Electric, to use
such towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities, with the
exception of city street light poles, subject to all existing and future
ordinances and regulations of the city. It is the stated intention of the city
that all other holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate
limits of the city shall cooperate with the grantee to allow the grantee’s
joint usage of their poles and pole-line facilities whenever possible or
wherever such usage does not interfere with the normal operation of said poles
and pole-lines so that a number of new or additional poles constructed by the
grantee within the city may be minimized.
   (C)   (1)   The grantee hereby grants to the city, free of expense, joint
use of any and all poles owned by them for any proper municipal purpose
acceptable to the grantee, insofar as it may be done without interfering with
the free use and enjoyment of the grantee’s own wires and fixtures, and the
city shall hold the grantee harmless from any and all actions, causes of action
or damages caused by the placing of the city’s wires or appurtenances upon the
poles of the grantee.
      (2)   Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules covering
construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction.
      (3)   If, in accommodating the city’s joint use of their poles, the
grantee is required to change or replace poles or install new poles, the city
shall compensate the grantee for such additional expense.
   (D)   Where a public utility serving the city desires to make use of poles
or other wire-holding structures of the grantee, but agreements therefor with
the grantee cannot be reached, the Council may require the grantee to permit
such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the Council determines
the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere
with the grantee’s operation.
   (E)   (1)   To the extent the state does not regulate the rates, terms and
conditions of pole attachments pursuant to federal law, the city shall follow
the FCC’s rate-setting formula and pole attachment regulations and decisions to
resolve any dispute concerning the use of the grantee’s poles or underground
conduit by a public utility.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to be a waiver by the grantee of its constitutional or statutory
rights under federal or state law.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.31 RATES.
   (A)   The grantee shall, at all times, maintain on file with the city’s
Finance Officer a schedule setting forth all rates and changes to be made to
subscribers for basic cable service, including installation charges.
   (B)   The grantee shall not discriminate in rates between customers of the
same category, except to the extent permitted by federal or state law.
   (C)   The grantee’s rates for basic cable service shall be subject to
regulation by the FCC and/or the city as provided for in the Cable Act and
implementing regulations.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.32 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.
   (A)   Within 60 days of the second and fourth anniversaries of the effective
date of this franchise, the governing body of the city, as part of a regularly
scheduled meeting, and upon notice to the public, may hold a hearing to
evaluate the performance of the grantee. Topics may include, but are not
limited to, applications of new technology, system performance, services
provided, complaints, privacy issues and franchise modification.
   (B)   The grantee shall fully cooperate with the city regarding this
evaluation. The grantee will at its expense provide such information, data and
documents as the city may reasonably request in connection with the evaluation.
   (C)   If the city reasonably determines that evidence exists of inadequate
cable system performance, it may require the grantee to perform tests and
analyses as necessary, directed toward the identified or suspected
inadequacies. The costs of such tests and analyses shall be borne by the
grantee if said tests and analyses determine that the inadequate cable system
performance alleged by the city, in fact, exists. The grantee shall fully
cooperate with the city in the performance of any tests. Results of the tests
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Identification and qualifications of the person performing the
tests;
      (2)   The nature of the identified or suspected inadequacy which
precipitated the test;
      (3)   What system components were tested;
      (4)   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
      (5)   The results and analyses and interpretation of the results of the
tests;
      (6)   The method, if any, by which any identified system inadequacy has
been, or will be, rectified;
      (7)   Recommendations, if any, for additional action; and
      (8)   Any other information pertinent to the tests and analyses which
may, be required or is useful.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.33 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   The grantee shall maintain a customer service facility which
subscribers may telephone during regular business hours to report complaints.
Complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters shall first be directed to this service facility. Should the grantee
fail to satisfy a complaint, it may then be directed to the city’s Finance
Officer for investigation. In response to a complaint, the grantee shall be
afforded a reasonable opportunity to present written statements of its
position. The city’s Finance Officer shall attempt to resolve the complaints
but, if this cannot be achieved, he shall submit a recommendation to the City
Council, recommending that:
         (a)   The complaint be dismissed; or
         (b)   Corrective action be taken by the grantee.
      (2)   Appeal from the Commission’s action may be made to the appropriate
judicial or administrative forum.
   (B)   As notice of the complaint procedure described in division (A) above,
the following information will be distributed in printed form to ail new
subscribers at the time of installation: pursuant to § 76.607 of the FCC rules,
all subscribers are hereby notified that service complaints regarding the
quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters shall first be
directed to the grantee’s customer service facility. If the service complaint
is not resolved in a reasonable length of time, it shall then be directed to
the office of the city’s Finance Officer and shall be processed in accordance
with §
116.23 of this chapter.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee shall comply with all
applicable rules of the FCC with regard to complaint procedures and customer
service standards including any required modifications of the complaint
procedures or notice to subscribers, as may from time to time be needed to
conform such notice and procedures to the FCC rules.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.34 CITY POLICE POWERS.
   The grantee’s rights under this franchise are subject to the police powers
of the city to, adopt and enforce ordinances necessary for the health, safety
and welfare of the public subject to federal and state law.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.35 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   All notices, reports or demands required by this franchise shall be given in
writing. All notices to the city shall be to the city’s Finance Officer. All
notices to the grantee shall be to its general manager.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.36 COSTS TO CITY.
   (A)   (1)   The grantee shall reimburse the city for all incidental expenses
incurred by it in connection with the publications required for adoption of
this chapter and the rights granted to the grantee hereunder. Such payment
shall be made by the grantee to the city within 30 days after the city shall
furnish the grantee with a written statement of such expense.
      (2)   The grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise
as such publication is required by law and such is payable upon the grantee’s
filing of acceptance of this franchise.
   (B)   It is understood that only the franchise fee shall constitute the
franchise fee. Any payments made or costs incurred in the provision of other
services required by this franchise shall not be considered part of the
franchise fee.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.37 REOPENERS.
   It being recognized that the cable television industry is undergoing
significant changes in the law, communications technology, services and
competition; because these changes over the term of the grantee’s franchise are
not entirely predictable at the present time, the grantee and the city agree to
negotiate in good faith modifications to the grantee’s franchise to the extent
necessary to allow the city and the grantee to benefit from such changes.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.38 REQUIRED SERVICES.
   (A)   The grantee shall provide the following services to public
institutions.
      (1)   The grantee shall provide basic cable service to all public
elementary, secondary, post high and support locations within the city one
junction terminal at each building for educational purposes upon request by the
city or the school system and at no extra cost to it or to the city or the
school system. This shall mean only an energized cable to such buildings. The
cost of any internal wiring shall be borne by the institution.
      (2)   The grantee shall also provide the city, for basic cable service to
all city owned buildings in the city, without charge, one junction terminal to
each building at a location therein to be selected by the city.
      (3)   The grantee shall, also provide the county, for basic cable service
to all county-owned buildings in the city, without charge, one junction
terminal to each building at a location therein to be selected by the county.
      (4)   The buildings to which service shall be provided, which may from
time to time be amended by the city to include public buildings that are within
200 feet of the grantee’s energized cable. Buildings beyond 200 feet of the
grantee’s energized cable may be served if the city agrees to pay for the cost
of extending plant beyond 200 feet.
   (B)   (1)   The grantee shall provide the following additional services to
the city, the School District and the subscribers of the grantee’s cable
television system:
         (a)   Emergency alert services consistent with FCC regulations; and
         (b)   Provide one dedicated channel carrying one signal of acceptable
quality, meeting all applicable FCC standards, for use by the city, its
departments and agencies, such channel to be used at the discretion of the
city.
      (2)   The grantee shall at all times maintain a system with the technical
capability of providing not less than 60 channels of information and
entertainment.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.39 EQUAL PROTECTION.
   If the city eaters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other
agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the grantee to
enter into the city’s public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating
a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area, the
material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained
herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive
advantage over another and to provide all parties equal protection under the
law.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.40 FRANCHISE ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   This franchise may be terminated by the city upon violation of its
terms by the grantee.
   (B)   If the city becomes aware of violations of the terms of the franchise,
it shall notify the grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged
violation.
   (C)   The grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice to respond
to the city contesting the allegation, or to cure it, or if, by the nature of
the violation, such violation cannot be cured within the 30-day period,
initiate reasonable steps to remedy it and notify the city of the steps being
taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
   (D)   If the grantee fails to respond to the notice, or if the alleged
violation is not remedied within 60 days after the grantee is notified of the
alleged violation, or such other period as is agreed to between the grantee and
the city, the city shall schedule a public hearing to investigate the
violation. Such public hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the governing body of the city which is scheduled at a time which is
no less than five business days therefrom. The city shall notify the grantee in
writing of the time and place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an
opportunity to be heard, to present and cross-examine witnesses. At such time,
the city may terminate the franchise.
   (E)   Enforcement of the terms of this franchise shall be under the laws of
the state and the United States.
   (F)   The grantee shall not be held in default or non-compliance with the
provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating
thereto, where such non-compliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes,
acts of God, power outages or other events reasonably beyond its ability to
control.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be punished under §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 203, passed 7-19-2010)
CHAPTER 117: MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Purpose and intent
   
117.03   Other laws
   
117.04   Authority
   
117.05   No city liability; indemnification; no defense
Licensing Regulations and Conditions
   
117.20   License required
   
117.21   Limitation on number of establishments
   
117.22   License term
   
117.23   License not transferrable
   
117.24   Licensee requirements
   
117.25   License application; fee
   
117.26   Annual license fee; refundable
   
117.27   Additional permits and licenses
   
117.28   Background checks, inspections and facility standards
   
117.29   Approval process
   
117.30   Application issuance or denial
   
117.31   Preliminary approval and issuance
   
117.32   Certificate of occupancy
   
117.33   License rules of operation
   
117.34   License suspension or revocation
 
   
117.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Medical cannabis generally, see SDCL Ch. 34-20G
   Qualifying patients in all areas of the state to obtain timely access to
high-quality medical cannabis, see SDCL § 34-20G-93
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. In addition to the
definitions contained in this section, other terms used in this chapter shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in SDCL §§ 22-42-1 and 34-20G-1 and such
definitions are hereby incorporated into this chapter by this reference.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity who has submitted an application for a
license or renewal of a license issued pursuant to this chapter. If the
APPLICANT is an entity and not a natural person, APPLICANT shall include all
persons who are the members, managers, officers, directors and shareholders of
such entity.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Any concentrated cannabis, cannabis extracts and products
that are infused with cannabis or an extract thereof and are intended for use
or consumption by humans. The term includes edible cannabis products,
beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
   CARDHOLDER. Any person who has been issued and possesses a valid registry
identification card pursuant SDCL Ch. 34-20G.
   DISQUALIFYING FELONY OFFENSE. A crime that was classified as a felony in the
jurisdiction where the person was convicted.
   INITIAL APPLICATION. The first application filed for a dispensary.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The building within which the dispensary operates.
   LICENSEE. Any person or business entity that has been issued and holds a
valid, current license pursuant to this chapter. If the LICENSEE is an entity
and not a natural person, LICENSEE shall include all persons who are the
members, managers, officers, directors and shareholders of such entity.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS or CANNABIS. Marijuana, as defined in SDCL § 22-42-1.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY or DISPENSARY. The entity registered with the
state’s Department of Health, pursuant to SDCL Ch. 34-20G, and licensed by the
city pursuant to this chapter that acquires, possesses, stores, delivers,
transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses cannabis, cannabis
products, paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials to
cardholders. MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY does not include a cultivation
facility, a cannabis testing facility, a cannabis product manufacturing
facility or a recreational cannabis dispensary.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis
testing facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility or a cannabis
dispensary as those terms are defined in SDCL § 34-20G-1.
   REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD. A document issued by the state’s Department of
Health that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or
registered designated caregiver, or documentation that is deemed a registry
identification card pursuant to state law.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for licensing of medical cannabis
dispensaries within the jurisdictional limits of the city in the interest of
public health, safety and general welfare. Nothing in this chapter is intended
to promote or condone the sale, distribution, possession or use of marijuana in
violation of any applicable law.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.03 OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   If the state adopts any stricter regulation governing a medical
cannabis dispensary than that set forth in this chapter, the stricter
regulation shall control the establishment or operation of any medical cannabis
dispensary in the city.
   (B)   A licensee shall be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the city,
or by law enforcement officers, that the source and quantity of any cannabis
found upon the licensed premises are in full compliance with applicable state
regulation.
   (C)   If the state prohibits the sale or other distribution of medical
cannabis, any license issued under this chapter shall be deemed immediately
revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress by the
licensee.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.04 AUTHORITY.
   The City Administrator, or the city designee, shall have authority pursuant
to the SDCL Ch. 34-20G and this chapter to grant or deny licenses and to
inspect the premises and business of a dispensary to confirm compliance with
all licensure requirements.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.05 NO CITY LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION; NO DEFENSE.
   (A)   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee,
waives any claim concerning, and releases the city, its officers, elected
officials, employees, attorneys and agents from, any liability for injuries or
damages of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of business
owners, operators, employees, clients or customers of the licensee for a
violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations.
   (B)   By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, all licensees,
jointly and severally if more than one, agree to indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the city, its officers, elected officials, employees, attorneys,
agents, insurers and self-insurance pool against all liability, claims and
demands on account of any injury, loss or damage, including, without
limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness,
disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind
whatsoever arising out of or in any manner connected with the operation of the
medical cannabis dispensary that is the subject of the license.
   (C)   The issuance of a license pursuant to this section shall not be deemed
to create an exception, defense or immunity for any person in regard to any
potential criminal liability the person may have under state or federal law for
the cultivation, possession, sale, distribution or use of marijuana.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
LICENSING REGULATIONS AND CONDITIONS
§ 117.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person or business entity shall operate a medical cannabis dispensary
within the jurisdictional limits of the city unless that person or business
entity has first obtained a medical cannabis dispensary license from the city.
Such license shall be kept current at all times and the failure to maintain a
current license shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.21 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Under the authority granted by SDCL § 34-20G-56, there shall be no
more than two active medical cannabis dispensaries that may be registered by
the state to operate within the jurisdictional limits of the city at any given
time. The city hereby directs the state to give registration preference only to
those applicants that have received a medical cannabis dispensary license
certificate issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. No other medical
cannabis establishment shall be permitted to operate within the jurisdictional
limits of the city. The numerical limits for medical cannabis establishments
may be altered at any time by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Existing licensees may renew licenses annually in accordance with §§
117.25 and
117.27 of this chapter. In the event the numerical cap is lowered to an amount
less than the number of existing licenses, no existing licensee shall be
prevented from continuing operation during the license term, requesting
modifications to the application information or from renewing such license for
consecutive, subsequent years, on the basis that the numerical limit would
otherwise prohibit the issuance of a license to a new applicant. However, this
exception shall not prevent a license from being suspended or revoked, nor
shall it prevent a license from not being renewed, based upon grounds other
than the numerical limit being exceeded.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 313, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 117.22 LICENSE TERM.
   Each license issued under this chapter shall be effective upon issuance and
shall terminate on December 31 of the year issued.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.23 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERRABLE.
   Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferrable to any other
person, business entity or location and shall lapse automatically upon a change
of ownership or location. A license issued under this chapter is not a property
right. Should a licensee, provisional licensee or applicant desire to change
the location of the licensed premises or premises identified in its
application, the licensee, provisional licensee or applicant shall first submit
to the city an application in accordance with §
117.25 of this chapter specific to the changed location and pay a non-
refundable fee to the city in an amount established by reesolution of the Board
of City Council to defray the costs incurred by the city to review the
application, inspect the newly identified proposed premises and otherwise
process the application.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 313, passed 12-4-2023)
§ 117.24 LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS.
   A medical cannabis dispensary licensee is subject to the following
requirements.
   (A)   No owner, LLC member or manager, shareholder, principal officer or
board member of a licensee may have served as an owner, LLC member or manager,
shareholder, principal officer or board member for a medical cannabis
dispensary that has had its state registration certificate or any local,
municipal or county license revoked.
   (B)   No owner, LLC member or manager, shareholder, principal officer or
board member may be under 21 years of age.
   (C)   A licensee shall be prohibited from employing any employee convicted
of a disqualifying felony offense.
   (D)   A licensee shall be prohibited from employing any employee under 21
years of age.
   (E)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall not share office space with or
refer a patient to a practitioner. (See SDCL § 34-20G-67.)
   (F)   A medical cannabis dispensary shall not permit any person to consume
cannabis upon the property of the licensed premises. (See SDCL § 34-20G-68.)
   (G)   At least one of the owners, LLC members or shareholders shall be a
resident of the state.
   (H)   The licensed premises shall be located only within a GB General
Business District or LI Light Industrial District and will require conditional
use permit.
   (I)   The licensed premises shall be located no less than 1,000 feet from
the nearest property line of any school and 500 feet from a church, licensed
childcare facility, mental health facility or substance abuse facility. No
separation is required for a dispensary located in a GB General Business
District or LI Light Industrial District.
   (J)   The licensed premises shall not be located within any building
containing a dwelling unit, a pediatrician’s office, hotel, motel, boarding
house or lodging facility.
   (K)   The licensed premises shall remain in compliance with applicable
federal, state and local laws and building codes (including, but not limited
to, the prevailing Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Fuel Gas and
Fire Codes adopted by the city at the time of licensure).
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.25 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   To obtain a medical cannabis dispensary license, or to renew a license
previously issued under this chapter, the applicant shall file in the office of
the Finance Officer an application on a form furnished by the Finance Officer
or the Finance Officer’s designee, which shall comply with §
110.02 of this code of ordinances and provide the following additional
information:
      (1)   The name, address and date of birth of each owner, shareholder, LLC
member and manager, principal officer and board member of the proposed medical
cannabis dispensary, as well as the name, address and date of birth of any
current employees at the time such application is filed;
      (2)   A copy of the deed reflecting the applicant’s ownership of, or a
lease reflecting the right of the applicant to possess, the proposed licensed
premises for the proposed use;
      (3)   A “to scale” sketch of the floor plan of the proposed licensed
premises reflecting compliance with the city’s cannabis dispensary design
requirements;
      (4)   A “to scale” site plan reflecting all structures and boundaries of
the proposed licensed premises reflecting compliance with the city’s cannabis
dispensary design requirements;
      (5)   An elevation drawing or rendering of the exterior of the proposed
licensed premises;
      (6)   A description of safety and security measures reflecting compliance
with the city’s dispensary design and operational requirements; and
      (7)   Any other additional information as the City Administrator or his
or her designee may deem necessary for an investigator to evaluate the
character and business responsibility of the applicant.
   (B)   At the time an applicant files an application according to division
(A) above, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee to the city in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council to defray the costs
incurred by the city for background investigations, review of the application,
inspection of the proposed premises and any other costs and labor associated
with processing the application.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.26 ANNUAL LICENSE FEE; REFUNDABLE.
   (A)   Within 30 days of receiving a cannabis dispensary registration from
the state pursuant to SDCL Ch. 34-20G, and at the time an applicant files a
renewal application, the licensee shall tender to the city an annual license
fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The annual
license fee is in addition to the initial application fee required pursuant to
§
117.25(B) of this chapter. The annual license fee shall be paid on the basis of
a full calendar year regardless of the date of issuance and no proration or
discount shall be given.
   (B)   If a provisional license is automatically terminated by operation of §
117.31 of this chapter, the annual license fee paid pursuant to division (A)
above shall be refunded to applicant. The initial application fee paid pursuant
§
117.25(B) of this chapter shall not be refunded. If a license is revoked
pursuant to §§
117.04 or
117.34 of this chapter, the annual license fee shall not be refunded.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.27 ADDITIONAL PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   (A)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter is in addition to and does
not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required permits or
licenses related to the operation of the medical cannabis dispensary including,
without limitation, the registration issued by the state pursuant to SDCL Ch.
34-20G and any zoning related permits, plat approvals or building or
construction-related permits required by this code of ordinances or state law.
   (B)   Cannabis dispensaries shall require a conditional use permit. In
granting a conditional use permit for a cannabis dispensary, the city may
impose such additional reasonable requirements as it deems appropriate to
mitigate or prevent harmful secondary effects of the establishment. The
cannabis dispensary must positively comply with all the current zoning, health
and building regulations that apply to the site and building at the time of
application for a conditional use permit.
   (C)   The Zoning Official is authorized to issue building permits for a
cannabis dispensary subject to the site plan submittal containing the following
information:
      (1)   Any information required for applicable building permits (see site
plan checklist);
      (2)   Ingress and egress plan;
      (3)   Parking plan;
      (4)   Lighting plan (including security lighting);
      (5)   Refuse plan;
      (6)   Hours of operation; and
      (7)   Any other information as lawfully may be required by the Zoning
Official to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.28 BACKGROUND CHECKS, INSPECTIONS AND FACILITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   During review of the application and at all reasonable times
after a license is issued, the City Administrator, or the city designee, may
make any reasonable inquiry into the criminal history of any owner,
shareholder, LLC member and manager, principal officer, board member and
employee.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for revocation
of any license issued hereunder for a licensee to allow any new principal
officer, board member or employee to begin work before supplementing the
information required under §
117.25(A) of this chapter for each prospective new principal officer, board
member or employee.
   (B)   In addition, the City Administrator, or his or her designee, during
review of the application and at all reasonable times after a license is
issued, may enter and inspect the premises designated in the application or
license to determine if the premises meets or continues to meet the
requirements of all city ordinances and state statutes and is being maintained
in accordance with the following facility standards.
      (1)   The facility shall have an entry-only breezeway area securely
locked and partitioned from the dispensary sales floor wherein each customer
must remain until the customer’s identity, legal age and registry
identification card can be verified before each customer is admitted entry into
the dispensary sales area. The facility must utilize a separate one-directional
exit for customers, which exit does not permit entry from the outside without a
key.
      (2)   The facility shall have locked display cases only accessible to
staff during business hours. The facility shall have a locked vault or Drug
Enforcement Agency storage cage in which all cannabis, cannabis products and
undeposited funds shall be stored outside business hours.
      (3)   The facility shall conform to the prevailing Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Mechanical Codes adopted by the city and state at the time of
licensure. This includes, but is not limited to, codes regarding accessibility,
egress and life safety.
      (4)   All exterior entrances and exits, all parking areas and all
sidewalks adjacent to the dispensary facility shall be lighted at all times
after dark.
      (5)   High-definition cameras of sufficient quantity and quality shall be
mounted in a manner to fully capture the facial features of all people entering
the facility at each point of entry or exit, and to capture the facial features
and actions of all people in all locations inside the facility, excepting only
the restrooms. The camera system shall securely store high-definition camera
footage for no less than 30 days.
      (6)   The facility shall have a functional commercial alarm system
triggered by the press of a button, by the breaking of glass and by forcing
open a locked door.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.29 APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Administrator, or the
city designee, shall circulate the application to all affected service areas
and departments of the city to determine whether the application is in full
compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. No license shall be
approved until after the City Administrator, or the city designee, has caused
the proposed premises to be inspected to determine compliance of the premises
with all applicable requirements of this chapter and the code of municipal
ordinances, and with the plans and descriptions submitted as part of the
application. The City Administrator, or the city designee, shall deny any
application that does not meet the requirements or limitations of this chapter.
The City Administrator, or the city designee, shall deny any application that
contains any false, misleading or incomplete information.
   (B)   If the City Administrator, or the city designee, has determined that
all requirements for a dispensary license are met and upon payment of the
application fee in advance by the applicant, the City Administrator, or city
designee, may, in his or her discretion, approve the issuance of a license if
the City Administrator, or city designee, believes the issuance to be in the
public’s best interest. When the City Administrator, or the city designee,
considers a dispensary application, he or she may consider all contents and
proposals within the application, the observations and results of any
inspection undertaken pursuant to §
117.28 of this chapter, the impact to the public that may result, whether the
proposed dispensary is located in a zone that permits its operation, the manner
in which the applicant previously operated a dispensary or other business
licensed by the city, history of compliance with city ordinances and state law.
   (C)   Within 30 days after the completion of the investigation of the
application, the City Administrator, or city designee, shall issue a written
decision approving or denying the application for licensure, which decision
shall state the reason(s) for the decision and be sent via first class mail and
via certified mail to the applicant at the address shown in the application.
   (D)   If approved, the City Administrator, or city designee, shall issue to
the applicant a cannabis license certificate specifying the date of issuance,
the period of licensure, the name of the licensee, the physical address of the
licensed premises and a sworn statement certifying that the licensed
establishment as proposed does not violate the city’s enacted zoning
restrictions as required under SDCL § 34-20G-55(1)(d). The City Administrator,
or city designee, shall also promptly transmit a copy of the license
certificate to the state’s Department of Health to satisfy SDCL § 34-20G-55(1)
(e).
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.30 APPLICATION ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   If a license is denied by the City Administrator, or his or her designee, an
applicant shall have 30 days to request in writing that the denied application
be submitted to the City Council for reconsideration at a regularly scheduled
meeting using the same criteria governing the issuance of a license by the City
Administrator. The City Council shall consider the application on its merits
and take action on the appeal at properly noticed public meeting no later than
60 days following the city’s receipt of a timely written request for appeal.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary no medical cannabis dispensary license
shall be issued until the applicant has demonstrated compliance with this
chapter and the city’s Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.31 PRELIMINARY APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   If approved, the city’s issuance of a license following an initial
application shall be provisional and subject to automatic termination if:
      (1)   The license does not receive or fails to qualify for the state
registration certificate required under SDCL Ch. 34-20G within 120 days of
issuance of the license;
      (2)   At least two other holders of an active and unrevoked medical
cannabis license have previously received a state registration certificate
required under SDCL Ch. 34-20G; or
      (3)   The licensee fails to pay the annual license fee to the city within
30 days of the issuance of the state registration certificate in accordance
with §
117.26 of this chapter.
   (B)   No licensee may engage in the sale of cannabis products under a
provisional license.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 313, passed 12-4-2023) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.32 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   The licensee shall not begin operation or open its doors to the public until
it receives from the city a certificate of occupancy. The city shall not issue
a certificate of occupancy until the city’s Building Inspector, or the city
designee, has fully inspected the licensed premises and determined that the
establishment satisfies all requirements of licensure as set forth in this
chapter, all applicable zoning requirements and all other applicable federal,
state and local laws and building codes, and that the licensed establishment is
ready for occupancy with such equipment and security measures in place as may
be necessary to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter and state
law. The city shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the licensee
provides written evidence that the licensee has paid the annual license fee
under §
117.26(A) of this chapter and all registration application fees due to the
state in connection with the State Department of Health’s review of the
application.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.33 LICENSE RULES OF OPERATION.
   Each dispensary shall be operated only in accordance with the following
rules.
   (A)   Each licensee shall display the license issued by the city in a
prominent location within the licensed premises.
   (B)   The hours of operation of each dispensary shall be confined between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday.
   (C)   Each dispensary shall be owned, operated, kept and maintained in
accordance with the dispensary requirements set forth in §
117.24 of this chapter and facility standards set forth in §
117.28 of this chapter.
   (D)   Each dispensary shall operate in accordance with all applicable local
and state laws concerning medical cannabis.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.34 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any medical cannabis dispensary license may be cancelled or suspended
in accordance with §
117.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   Automatic suspension if a licensee or any of its employees or agents
has been convicted of selling a cannabis product to any person under the age of
21. In order to reinstate a license to active status, the applicant must tender
a reinstatement fee of $10,000 for the first suspension under this chapter or
$15,000 for the second offense. Upon conviction for the third such offense, the
license shall automatically terminate and may not be reinstated or renewed.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Operating a dispensary without a license shall be deemed an ordinance
violation and subject to the provisions of §
10.99 of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $100 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 289, passed 12-6-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-19-3
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
CHAPTER 130: PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct
   
130.02   False report of crime
   
130.03   Injury to or removal of public or private property
   
130.04   Tampering with signs, markers and the like
   
130.05   Service connections; tampering
   
130.06   Resisting, escaping from or assaulting officer
   
130.07   Indecency; obscene materials
Weapons, Fireworks and Explosives
   
130.20   Carrying concealed weapons
   
130.21   Discharging firearms
   
130.22   Fireworks; use; licensing
Curfew for Minors
   
130.35   Curfew hours; exceptions
   
130.36   Responsibilities of officers
   
130.37   Responsibilities of parents or guardians
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of
causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance or if his or her conduct is
likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he or she willfully
does any of the following acts in a public place:
      (1)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in danger of life, limb or health;
      (2)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged;
      (3)   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct
so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another, except in
boxing exhibitions duly authorized and licensed under law;
      (4)   Interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of
violence;
      (5)   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way or
place when ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known
to be such;
      (6)   Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor
or drug in such a condition as to be unable to exercise care for his or her own
safety or the safety of others;
      (7)   Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by the city police
or any other authorized official to the city when known to be such an official;
      (8)   Incites, attempts to incite or is involved in attempting to incite
a riot;
      (9)   Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the city’s
Police Department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in
the lawful performance of his or her duties, or any other person when such
words have direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing
displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited;
      (10)   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive
condition;
      (11)   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable
noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to
any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby
the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed;
      (12)   Fails to obey a lawful order to disburse by a police officer, when
known to be such an officer, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity and the public health and safety
is eminently threatened; and/or
      (13)   Throws a stone, snowball or any other missile upon or at any
vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property or upon or at any
person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      INCITING RIOTS. Urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall be
deemed to mean the mere oral or written advocacy of ideas or expression of
belief, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion of
the rightness, or the right to commit, any such act or acts.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access in the
right resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the use of the public. It shall also
include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or
other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
      RIOT. A public disturbance involving:
         (a)   An act or acts of violence by one or more persons part of an
assemblage of three or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear
and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of
another person or to the person or any other individual; or
         (b)   A threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of
violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons
having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of
such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of
violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in,
damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any
other individual.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful
assembly, picketing, public speaking or lawful means of expressing public
opinion not in contravention with other laws.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 9-29-3, 22-18-35
§ 130.02 FALSE REPORT OF CRIME.
   No person in the city shall make to, or file with, the Police Department of
the city any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the
commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 22-11-9
§ 130.03 INJURY TO OR REMOVAL OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise
injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto or
moveable or personal property belonging to the city or to any person in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 22-34-1
§ 130.04 TAMPERING WITH SIGNS, MARKERS AND THE LIKE.
   No person in the city shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove
any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fireplug or hydrant, typographical
survey marker or monument or any other personal property erected or placed by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 22-34-1
§ 130.05 SERVICE CONNECTIONS; TAMPERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect, disconnect or otherwise
tamper with any service connection of any franchised cable television company
or broadband communications service company without the express prior approval
from a designated agent of said cable television company or broadband
communications service company.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 22-34-28
§ 130.06 RESISTING, ESCAPING FROM OR ASSAULTING OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist or obstruct any police officer in the
performance of any official duty, nor in any way aid or assist any person to
escape from any lawful confinement.
   (B)   No person shall assault or strike any police officer in the discharge
of his or her duty.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 22-11-4
§ 130.07 INDECENCY; OBSCENE MATERIALS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      DISSEMINATION. To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
      KNOWINGLY. Being aware of the character and content of the material.
      MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written
material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial
representation or any statute or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment or machines.
      OBSCENE. To the average person applying contemporary community standards,
taken as a whole, that the predominant appeal of the matter appeals to the
prurient interests and:
         (a)   Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated;
or
         (b)   Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibits of the
genitals; and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
      PROMOTE. To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
      PRURIENT INTEREST. Shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or
excretion which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to:
      (1)   Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public
any obscene materials;
      (2)   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public;
      (3)   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or excretion utilizing
displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts that promote
such commerce primarily on the basis of the prurient appeal; or
      (4)   Appear in any public state in a state of dress intended to deceive
others as to his or her sex, or make any indecent exposure of his or her
person.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-29-9
WEAPONS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 130.20 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   No person shall carry concealed about his or her person or display in a
threatening manner any dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not limited
to, any pistol or other firearm without a permit, brass knuckle or knuckles of
other material, or any sandbag, dagger, Bowie knife, dirk knife or other
dangerous or deadly weapon or any instrument or device which when used is
likely to produce death or great bodily harm. Any police officer may wear or
carry such weapons as may be necessary and proper for the discharge of his or
her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL §§ 22-14-8 through 22-14-10
§ 130.21 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   No person shall discharge or shoot off any gun, pistol or any other firearm
within the city, unless permitted by the City Council in firing ranges.
(Prior Code, § 6.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.22 FIREWORKS; USE; LICENSING.
   (A)   Regulation of use of fireworks.
      (1)   The discharge of consumer fireworks which conform to state law
shall be allowed between the hours of 12:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on July 3, 4 and
5 and from 10:00 p.m. December 31 to 12:30 a.m. January 1. The City Council may
amend the days and times by resolution.
      (2)   The discharge of fireworks may not occur on any city-owned property
unless authorized by the City Council.
      (3)   A permit for other discharge of fireworks may be issued by the City
Council to individuals, groups or organizations for organized, public fireworks
displays, based upon such terms and conditions as established by the City
Council.
   (B)   Sale of fireworks.
      (1)   No person shall sell fireworks within the city without first
obtaining an approved fireworks sales license.
      (2)   Any person licensed under this section must also hold a license
under SDCL § 34-37-2.
      (3)   Fireworks shall be considered consumer goods for zoning purposes of
this city code.
      (4)   The holder of an approved fireworks sales license may sell
fireworks within the city from June 27 to July 5.
   (C)   Fireworks sales; license application.
      (1)   Any person who is required by this section to possess a fireworks
sales license shall first submit an application to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   A fireworks sales license application shall consist of an
application form, a fireworks sales license application fee, proof of liability
insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000, a scaled site plan of the proposed
sales site, a copy of the application’s state sales tax license and a copy of
the appropriate state fireworks sales license(s).
      (3)   The fireworks sales license application fee shall be $200 and is
non-refundable.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall review each fireworks
sales license application after the complete application is received. The
application may be approved or denied based upon the applicant’s proposed sale
location, zoning, proposed signage, Building Code compliance of the sales
location, code enforcement compliance history, record of compliance with city
fireworks regulations, record of compliance with state fireworks regulations
and/or other factors considered relevant by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator.
      (5)   The action of the Planning and Zoning Administrator may be appealed
to the City Council if a written appeal is submitted to the Finance Officer
within ten days (inclusive) of the action.
(Prior Code, § 6.03) (Ord. 18, passed 8-22-1955; Ord. 138, passed - -; Ord.
305, passed 4-17-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 34-37-1(1)
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 130.35 CURFEW HOURS; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to be on the
streets, alleys or public grounds of the city between the hours of 12:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by parents, legal guardian or some adult
person over 18 years of age having the care and control of said person, or
unless such person shall be upon some necessary errand by written permission of
a parent, and except approved school functions and activities, and said person
so permitted to be outdoors shall have with him or her such written permission
and shall upon request of any police officer of the city exhibit the same to
said police officer.
(Prior Code, § 6.04) (Ord. 304, passed 4-17-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.36 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to arrest and detain
any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter and to keep
such person detained until his or her parents, guardian or person in control
will appear before the police or other authorized personnel to answer to the
charge of having violated this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.04)
§ 130.37 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS OR GUARDIANS.
   It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to knowingly permit
such a minor to be or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, public grounds, public places, public buildings, public places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised public places
within the city between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day, except if the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon
an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or authorized by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor.
(Prior Code, § 6.04) (Ord. 304, passed 4-17-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
153.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
154.   STORM DRAINAGE
      
155.   LANDSCAPING AND TREES
      
156.   URBAN AND RURAL SERVICE DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 150: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
150.01   International Property Maintenance Code adopted
   
150.02   Amendments, additions and deletions
§ 150.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, published
by the International Code Council, as amended, is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code to provide standards to safeguard life or limb,
health, property and public welfare by regulating, governing, and controlling
the use, occupancy, conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures within this jurisdiction and to provide for a just, equitable and
practicable method whereby buildings or structures, which from any cause
endanger the life, limb, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general
public or their occupants, may be repaired, vacated or demolished. The minimum
requirements and standards of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code
will become effective after 7-23-2015.
   (B)   A printed copy as amended is on file with the city’s Finance Officer.
(Ord. 228, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 150.02 AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.
   The following sections and subsections of the Property Maintenance Code
adopted in this chapter shall be amended, added or deleted as follows. All
other sections or subsections of the 2012 International Property Maintenance
Code shall remain the same.
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code
of City of Tea, South Dakota hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International
Residential Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform
Mechanical Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Tea,
South Dakota.
103.2 Appointment. The Tea Code Official or his or her designee is designated
as the code officials and shall enforce the provisions of this code.
103.4 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals or employee
charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction,
in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by
this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an
act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be afforded all the protection by the City’s insurance and any
immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws and
be defended by the legal representative of the City until the final termination
of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable
for costs in an action suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of
the provisions of this code.
103.5 Fees. The fees for building permits, activities and services performed by
the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
established by resolution of the City Council. In addition, an administrative
fee of $250 may be assessed for the preparation of bids and contracts to
correct or abate a violation.
107.7 Extension of time agreement. If the code official determines that an
extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently
dangerous to life or property, the code official may grant an extension of
time, not to exceed 180 days in which to complete the work listed in the Notice
and Order. Any extension shall not extend the time to appeal the Notice and
Order. Any extension shall be agreed to in writing in a document containing the
following:
1.   A reasonable and acceptable schedule, setting forth specific dates to
complete corrective action for each violation listed in the Notice and Order.
2.   A signature of the responsible party.
110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the code official judgment after
review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to
be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and
hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or
where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a
period of more than 18 months, the code official shall order the owner to
demolish and remove such structure.
Section 111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the Code Official or a Notice and Order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal such Notice and Order to the Tea City Council,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days
after the day a decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal
shall be based upon a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or that the requirements of this code are
adequately satisfied by other means. An application for appeal will be deemed
timely filed if filed in the office of the Finance Officer at Tea City Hall
within the timeframe set forth hereinabove.
Section 111.2 Appeal hearing. Upon receipt of a properly filed application for
appeal, the Tea City Council shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the
date of the filing of the application for appeal at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Tea City Council or a special meeting of the Tea City Council
which is properly noticed under South Dakota law. At the hearing before the Tea
City Council, the appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Code Official
and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
Section 111.3 City Council decision. At the close of the hearing or at the next
regularly scheduled meeting, the City Council shall uphold, modify or reverse
the Notice and Order of the Code Official. Notice of said decision shall be
sent, in writing, to the appellant and the Code Official at their last known
addresses.
Section 111.4 Court review. The decision of the Tea City Council is subject to
judicial review by the circuit court as provided for in the Codified Laws of
the State of South Dakota.
Section 111.5 Stays of enforcement. Any appeals filed on notice and orders,
other than Imminent Danger notices, shall stay the enforcement of the notice
and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. If an Imminent Danger
notice is issued by the Code Official and upheld on an appeal, the Code
Official may take immediate action to insure compliance with the Immediate
Danger notice. All other notice and orders shall be enforced by the Code
Official upon exhaustion of all appeals by the appellant.
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
administrative citations through the code enforcement process.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the International Building Code, International Residential
Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, National Electrical Code, Municipal and Zoning
Code of the City of Tea, Uniform Mechanical Code or NFPA 70, such terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth pursuant to Chapter 3 of the City of Tea Municipal Code.
302.8 Motor vehicles. Abandoned and inoperative vehicles shall be regulated by
Chapter 4 of the City of Tea Municipal Code.
302.9 Defacement of property. Placement of graffiti shall be regulated by
Chapter 3 and Chapter 6 of the City of Tea Municipal Code.
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water
more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence
or barrier at least 44 inches (1,066 mm) in height above the finished ground
level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors
in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Self-closing and
self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively
close and latch when released from an open position. No existing pool enclosure
shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its
effectiveness as a safety barrier. Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety
cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to September 30, every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and
every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing device in
good working condition. Exception: Screens shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
308.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all
rubbish pursuant to Chapter 3 of the City of Tea Municipal Code.
308.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall
supply approved covered containers for rubbishy and the owner of the premises
shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish in accordance with Chapter 3 of
the City of Tea Municipal Code.
308.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators, iceboxes or other similar airtight
containers or equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or
stored on premises in accordance with Chapter 3 of the City of Tea Municipal
Code.
308.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers in accordance with
Chapter 4 of the City of Tea Municipal Code.
308.3.1 Garbage facilities. Every dwelling shall be supplied with an approved
leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container in accordance with Chapter 4 of
the City of Tea Municipal Code.
308.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall
provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers
provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until
removed from the premises for disposal in accordance with Chapter 4 of the City
of Tea Municipal Code.
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of
approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total
glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of
such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for
the room. Exception:
1.   Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is
provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining
room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area
shall be based on the total floor area being served.
2.   The glazed areas need not be provided in rooms where artificial light is
provided capable of producing an average illumination of six footcandles (6.46
lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm) above the
floor level.
404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not
create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official or City Council,
endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot
or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the applicable South
Dakota Plumbing Commission Code.
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be
used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases
or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed
or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during
the period from September 1st to April 30th to maintain a temperature of not
less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied
with heat during the period from September 1st to April 30th to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied. Exceptions:
1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(Ord. 228, passed 6-15-2015)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
Street Names and Addresses
   
151.01   Names of streets and avenues
   
151.02   Numbering plan
   
151.03   Numbering streets
   
151.04   Numbering lots
   
151.05   Numbering intervals
Streets, Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
   
151.20   Streets generally
   
151.21   Street surfacing
   
151.22   Sidewalks
   
151.23   Driveway approaches
   
151.24   Curb and gutter
   
151.25   Permits required
   
151.26   Barrier-free construction
Snow and Ice Removal
   
151.40   Duty to remove; notice
   
151.41   Snow disposal
   
151.42   Removal costs assessed
   
151.43   Temporary snow fences
   
151.44   Definitions
   
151.45   Snow removal alert; issuance
   
151.46   Parking restrictions during snow emergency
   
151.47   Violation
Cross-reference:
   Landscaping and Trees, see Ch. 155
   Moving Buildings, see Ch. 115
Statutory reference:
   Addresses, see SDCL § 9-45-2
STREET NAMES AND ADDRESSES
§ 151.01 NAMES OF STREETS AND AVENUES.
   The names of all streets and avenues in the city shall be fixed and adopted
in accordance with the official map of the city on file in the Finance Office.
All east-west thoroughfares shall be designated as streets and all north-south
thoroughfares shall be designated as avenues. Any such act of naming,
establishing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the city
shall be so designated on such map.
(Prior Code, § 9.01) (Ord. 207, passed 3-31-1964)
§ 151.02 NUMBERING PLAN.
   A numbering plan for residences and businesses shall be maintained by the
City Council. A listing of the assigned numbers and a map showing the location
of addresses shall be maintained and filed with the Finance Officer. The
Finance Officer shall be responsible for assigning new numbers, updating the
list of such numbers and updating of the location map. All residences and
businesses shall be required to display their address numbers through the
placement of numerals at least four inches in height on the front of the said
residence or business, in such a manner that the address number is clearly
visible from the street fronting said residence of business.
(Prior Code, § 9.01) (Ord. 207, passed 3-31-1964)
§ 151.03 NUMBERING STREETS.
   The dividing line for numbering on all avenues running north and south shall
be First Street. The dividing line for numbering all streets running east and
west shall be Main Avenue. All streets and parts of streets running south from
First Avenue shall be designated by prefixing to the names thereof the word
“south”, and all streets and parts of streets running north from First Avenue
shall be designated by prefixing to the names thereof the word “north”. All
avenues and parts of avenues running west from Main Street shall be designated
by prefixing to the names thereof the word “west”, and all avenues and parts of
avenues running east from Main Street shall be designated by prefixing to the
names thereof the word “east”.
(Prior Code, § 9.01) (Ord. 207, passed 3-31-1964)
§ 151.04 NUMBERING LOTS.
   (A)   One number shall be apportioned to every subdivision of 25 feet along
all the thoroughfares of the city whether the same be occupied by buildings or
not. In case any block or blocks or any lot or lots will not divide perfectly
into subdivisions of 25 feet, one whole number shall be assigned to the
fractional part thereof.
   (B)   In case more than one building is erected in a single space of 25
feet, the same may be numbered by placing thereon the regular number which
appeared on the building formerly situated in said space or the number which
would otherwise be allotted to the space and on the second building to be
erected thereon the regular number plus the fraction, one-half.
(Prior Code, § 9.01) (Ord. 207, passed 3-31-1964)
§ 151.05 NUMBERING INTERVALS.
   (A)   All buildings shall be numbered consecutively in units as provided by
the City Council, and all blocks consecutively in even hundreds.
   (B)   (1)   All numbering on east and west thoroughfares shall begin at the
dividing line at Main Avenue and proceed outward to the limits of the city,
placing odd numbers on the south side and even numbers on the north side of
each thoroughfare.
      (2)   All numbering on north and south thoroughfares shall begin at the
dividing line at First Street and proceed outward to the limits of each
thoroughfare placing odd numbers on the west side and even numbers on the east
side.
   (C)   The number of the first block on each side of the avenue proceeding
from a dividing line shall be 100, the second shall be 200, and so on, and each
block shall be numbered consecutively to the other limits of the city. The
number on the first block on the south side of an east and west street, and on
the west side of a north and south avenue, shall be 101 and the first number on
the opposite sides thereof shall be 100. The first number on the second block
shall be 201, and the first number on the opposite side thereof shall be 200,
and so on, consecutively along all the streets and avenues throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.01) (Ord. 207, passed 3-31-1964)
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS
§ 151.20 STREETS GENERALLY.
   Only Street Department personnel or other authorized persons shall be
permitted to work on any of the streets, avenues or alleys in the city. All
streets shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the currently
approved “Engineering Design Standards for the City of Tea”.
(Prior Code, § 9.02)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-45-1
§ 151.21 STREET SURFACING.
   (A)   The original hard surfacing of streets shall be at the expense of the
owners of the property abutting the street(s) to be hard surfaced with
materials meeting the currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for the
City of Tea”. Total cost of the street improvement; including legal,
engineering, grading and any other costs related to the improvement shall be
assessed against the property on a frontage foot basis.
   (B)   (1)   The cost of each street or alley intersection shall be assessed
to all lots according to area so as to include one-half of the property between
the street improved and the next street, whether such property abuts upon such
street or not, but in no case shall such property situated more than 300 feet
from such intersection be assessed.
      (2)   When the improvement is in or upon any alley, the assessment area
shall be confined to the property within the block or blocks improved and, if
not platted into blocks, to the property within 150 feet of such alley.
(Prior Code, § 9.02)
§ 151.22 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   All sidewalks, except those designated hereafter, shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the currently approved “Engineering
Design Standards for the City of Tea” (hereafter “EDS”).
      (2)   When considered necessary and advisable for the peace, welfare and
safety of the people, the City Council may direct that new sidewalk be
constructed and assessed to any abutting property owner in accordance with SDCL
Ch. 9-46.
   (B)   The Zoning Board has the authority to waive the EDS standards where
EDS designed sidewalks would:
      (1)   Not connect or would create sharp angles;
      (2)   Would interfere with public utilities;
      (3)   Would require removal of mature trees; or
      (4)   Would require substantial earth and retaining wall work.
(Prior Code, § 9.02)
§ 151.23 DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.
   All driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for the City of Tea”.
(Prior Code, § 9.02)
§ 151.24 CURB AND GUTTER.
   (A)   All curb and gutter shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for the City of Tea”.
   (B)   The City Council may direct that curb and gutter be constructed and
the cost assessed against any abutting property owner.
(Prior Code, § 9.02)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-45-5
§ 151.25 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   When constructed separately from an over-all construction project,
property owners or their agents shall submit applications for permits for
approval by the City Council for sidewalks, driveway approaches, curbs or curb
and gutter.
   (B)   When these improvements are constructed simultaneously or as one
project, only one application is necessary to include all improvements, and
where any or all are part of new construction projects, only one permit for the
over-all construction shall be issued.
   (C)   All installations and engineering recommendations shall be in
conformance with the currently approved “Engineering Design Standards for the
City of Tea”.
(Prior Code, § 9.02)
§ 151.26 BARRIER-FREE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Whenever any person, firm or corporation makes new installations of
sidewalks, curbs or gutters, in both business and residential areas, it shall
be required that they utilize barrier-free construction ramps.
   (B)   All such ramps shall be designed and constructed or installed in
accordance with design specifications according to currently approved
“Engineering Design Standards for the City of Tea” and the most current
“American National Standards Specifications”, published by the American
National Standards Institute.
(Prior Code, § 9.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 151.40 DUTY TO REMOVE; NOTICE.
   (A)   Duty to remove. The owner or person in possession of any property
abutting on any sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk free from snow and ice and
shall remove any snow or ice from the sidewalk within 48 hours after the
termination of any snowfall or snow or ice accumulation. The owner or person in
possession of any property abutting upon any sidewalk which ends at an
intersection or crosswalk shall maintain the sidewalk free from snow and ice to
the edge of the street. Snow and ice deposited on the sidewalk during the
street removal process shall be removed within 48 hours of being deposited.
   (B)   Notice. The city shall notify all owners or persons in possession of
property abutting on sidewalks to keep the sidewalks free from snow and ice and
to remove the same within 48 hours after every fall or accumulation of snow or
ice. The notice need not be given personally, but may be given generally
through the official newspaper annually. The notice shall provide that each
owner or person in possession is required to keep the sidewalk in front of the
premises free and clear from snow and ice. It shall further provide that if the
owner or person in possession fails to remove the snow or ice within 72 hours
of the falling or accumulation hereof, the city may cause the snow or ice to be
removed and charge the cost to the abutting property.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 151.41 SNOW DISPOSAL.
   The property owner, person in possession or person removing snow or ice from
any sidewalk, public or private driveway, parking lot or parking area shall
dispose of accumulated snow and ice upon the property as follows.
   (A)   Snow and ice shall not be deposited on any sidewalk or in any park.
   (B)   Snow and ice shall not be deposited so as to obstruct or interfere
with the passage or vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (C)   Snow and ice shall not be deposited upon any public street or alley
that has been cleared of snow by the grading of snow away from the curb or the
picking up and carrying away of snow by the city.
   (D)   No snow may be blown, pushed or otherwise placed on any street at any
time (both before and after the street has been plowed).
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to deposit snow upon any other persons private
property without their written approval.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.42 REMOVAL COSTS ASSESSED.
   If the owner or person in possession of property fails to remove the snow or
ice from the sidewalks within the time specified, the city may have the snow or
ice removed and charge the cost thereof against the abutting property each time
the snow or ice is removed. Removal costs may be assessed in accordance with
the state’s codified law.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 151.43 TEMPORARY SNOW FENCES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, construct or maintain any temporary fence in
the city which may cause or create accumulations of snow, ice or water on
public streets and sidewalks or other private properties, which are greater
than those accumulations that would occur without such fence.
   (B)   (1)   Any temporary snow fence hereafter erected, constructed and
maintained in the city shall comply with all other ordinances of the city.
      (2)   A temporary fence shall be defined as any fence attached to the
ground with a fixed location on the ground, and intended to be used for a
limited period of time for the specific purpose of controlling snow
accumulation.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 151.44 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   SNOW REMOVAL ALERT. Such times as there is a snow accumulation on the public
streets of two inches or more, or such times as the Mayor declares that snow
removal operations on the public streets will commence and that the provisions
of this subchapter in regard to parking on public streets during snow removal
operations are effective and will be enforced.
   STREET. The entire width of any public roadway within the city and it shall
not be limited to those roadways designated as a “street”, but include
“avenues” and all other names by which public roadways are designated.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 151.45 SNOW REMOVAL ALERT; ISSUANCE.
   When the Mayor determines that snow removal from the public streets will
commence, the Mayor will announce through the local news media that there has
been declared a snow removal alert and that the provisions of this subchapter
will be effective and enforced, designating a particular date and time when
such alert shall commence. The determination to declare a snow removal alert
will be based on the then existing weather conditions and the amount of snow
then on the ground or expected according to forecasts from the National Weather
Service.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 151.46 PARKING RESTRICTIONS DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In the event of a snow removal alert, all public streets in the city
are designated as emergency snow routes.
   (B)   In the event of a snow removal alert, it shall be unlawful to leave
any vehicle parked following the start of the alert, as determined by the
Police Department, so as not to interfere with the city’s snow blading and/or
removal operations. North/south streets shall be cleared first and, upon their
completion, east/west streets will be cleared.
   (C)   Any vehicle remaining on a city street following the start of the
alert shall be ticketed and towed as determined by the Police Department.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.47 VIOLATION.
   It is unlawful to violate any provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. 327, passed 10-6-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Lands to which chapter applies
   
152.07   Areas of special flood hazard; basis for establishing
   
152.08   Development permit
   
152.09   Compliance
   
152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.11   Interpretation
   
152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
152.13   Severability
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.25   Floodplain Administrator; duties and responsibilities
   
152.26   Permit procedures
   
152.27   Variance procedures
   
152.28   Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.40   Inclusion of standards
   
152.41   General standards
   
152.42   Specific standards
   
152.43   Subdivision proposal standards
   
152.44   Areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones) standards
   
152.45   Floodway standards
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in SDCL Ch. 9-36 and § 7-18-14, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows. The
city elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968 (Pub. Law No. 90-488, as amended), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through
4131. The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid act,
provides that areas of the town having a special flood hazard be identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures
be applied in such flood hazard areas. The National Flood Insurance Program was
broadened and modified with the passage of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4002 et seq., and other legislative measures. It was
further modified by the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 4001 through 4129. The National Flood Insurance Program is
administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, a component of the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains; and
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AREA OF FUTURE-CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood based on future-conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO Zone on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD. The land within a community
which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The
area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After
the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area, in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO or V1-30, VE or V. For purposes of these regulations,
the term SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous in meaning with the phrase
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the 1% annual
chance flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached
by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of
coastal and riverine areas.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION. FEMA’s comment on a proposed project
that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic
characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the
existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations or the
special flood hazard area. The letter does not revise an effective map; it
indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would be recognized by
FEMA.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril
is not per se covered under the program.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXISTING STRUCTURES. See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source; and
         (c)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding as defined in division (1)(b) above and are akin to a river of liquid
and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is
carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
      (2)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in division (1)(a) above.
   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION. A determination by the Administrator of the
water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a
1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY or FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation
and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state and local floodplain maps.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the
watershed.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic reservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT. An official amendment, by letter, to an effective
map. A LOMA establishes a property’s location in relation to the special flood
hazard area and are usually issued because a property has been inadvertently
mapped as being in the floodplain, but is actually on natural high ground above
the base flood elevation.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION. FEMA’s modification to an effective Flood Insurance
Rate Map, or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, or both. LOMRs are generally
based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or
hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the
modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood
elevations or the special flood hazard area.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL. FEMA’s modification of the special
flood hazard area shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map based on the placement
of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Agency.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after 12-31-1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   SPECIAL HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow),
or flood- related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO,
A1-30, AE, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V,
M or E.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law No. 97-348),
includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued; provided, the actual START of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE.
      (1)   For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home. STRUCTURE, for insurance purposes, means:
         (a)   A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully
secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site;
         (b)   A manufactured home (“manufactured home”, also known as a mobile
home, is a STRUCTURE: built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in
one or more sections and affixed to a permanent foundation); or
         (c)   A travel trailer without wheels built on a chassis and affixed
to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community’s floodplain
management and building ordinances or laws.
      (2)   For the latter purpose, STRUCTURE does not mean a recreational
vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in
division (1)(c) above, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until
such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.06 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.07 AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD; BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study for Tea, Lincoln County”, dated 10-5-2017, with accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated 4-2-2008 and any revisions thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.08 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant
or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.13 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the chapter shall not
be affected.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.25 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding;
      (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
      (4)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior approval is
required;
      (5)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;
      (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordinating Agency which is the state’s Office of Emergency Management, prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
      (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance,
the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
      (9)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and
      (10)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Ch. 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH on the community’s FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot; provided that,
the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(Conditional Letter of Map Revision).
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.26 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
   (B)   Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure shall be flood- proofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the non-residential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood-proofing
criteria of §
152.41 of this chapter;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information.
   (C)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.27 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   The Board of Adjustment as established by the community shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   (A)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the state’s Office of Emergency Management upon issuing a
variance.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level; providing, the relevant factors in §
152.26 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Board of Adjustments may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter.
   (E)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (G)   Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (H)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided that:
      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (G) above are met;
and
      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.28 CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR).
   A CLOMR application is required only for those projects that will:
   (A)   BFE/no floodway (demonstrate <1.0 ft. increase).
      (1)   A project on a stream or river that has been studied through
detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses and for which base flood elevations
(BFEs) have been specified, but a floodway has not been designated. If the
developer/property owner/community proposes to allow development that would
result in more than a one-foot increase in the BFE, a CLOMR must first be
obtained.
      (2)   44 C.F.R. § 60.3(c)(10): result in an increase in the base flood
water-surface elevation (WSEL) of greater than one foot for streams with BFEs
specified, but no regulatory floodway designated.
   (B)   BFE/floodway (no-rise).
      (1)   The second situation requiring a CLOMR is for a project on a stream
or river for which detailed analyses have been conducted and BFEs and a
floodway have been designated. If the community proposes to allow development
totally or partially within the floodway that would result in any (greater than
zero foot) increase in the BFE, a CLOMR must be obtained.
      (2)   44 C.F.R. § 60.3(d)(3): result in any base flood WSEL increase from
proposed construction within a regulatory floodway.
   (C)   Requirement. As the community is the responsible entity to issue
floodplain development permits, the community may require a CLOMR as part of
their permitting process at any time the Floodplain Administrator feels is
necessary. This includes but is not limited to even when an engineer has
produced a no-rise analysis.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.40 INCLUSION OF STANDARDS.
   (A)   The city shall review all floodplain development permit applications
to determine whether proposed development areas will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   (B)   The hydraulic and hydrologic analyses must be completed prior to the
public hearing on the preliminary subdivision plan.
      (1)   No development shall:
         (a)   Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of flood waters by itself or with other development, causing any
increase in the BFE flood height; or
         (b)   Cause any increase in the BFE flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined
the proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the BFE
flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map.
      (3)   The city’s “Engineering Design Standards”, Ch. 11, Drainage
Improvements, shall regulate the hydraulic and hydrologic analyses standards
and compliance.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 152.41 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.42 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this chapter are satisfied.
      (1)   Site plans for new residential structures are required to specify
the minimum ground elevation (MGE) which designates the elevation of the top of
the black dirt under the grass, or the top of the landscape rock or other
landscape material at the lowest exposed part of the house. Exception:
structures on areas removed from areas of special flood hazard with a FEMA-
approved LOMR-F may proceed with construction per standards listed in FEMA
Technical Bulletin 10-01, “Ensuring That Structures Built on Fill In or Near
Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe From Flooding”.
      (2)   (a)   Structures on areas removed from areas of special flood
hazard with a FEMA-approved LOMR-F, and per the community acknowledgment
submitted with letter of map change, shall have elevation drawings at the time
of application for a building permit and must be signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor. The professional certification is
signing off on no new construction or substantial improvement is allowed unless
the lowest floor elevation is two feet or more above the BFE.
         (b)   The elevation drawing shall include the following:
            1.   Lowest floor elevation (including basement);
            2.   The lowest ground elevation touching the building (entry
point); and
            3.   Base flood elevation.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet
above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division (B). A record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
flood-proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria.
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces;
      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites:
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home
park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement; and
      (3)   In A1-30, AH and AE Zones, require that manufactured homes to be
placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park to be
elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; or
the chassis is supported by reinforced piers no less than 36 inches in height
above grade and securely anchored.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
152.26 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
“manufactured homes” of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.43 SUBDIVISION PROPOSAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   Preliminary plans and development engineering plans shall include
the special flood hazard area and drainage data as required by engineering
design standards.
      (2)   Residential building lots shall be provided with adequate buildable
area outside the floodway.
      (3)   Streets and sidewalks shall be designed to minimize potential for
increasing or aggravating flood levels.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be determined and shown on subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is lesser.
   (D)   (1)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      (2)   Residential subdivisions outside areas of special flood hazards.
For areas located within 100 feet (or eight feet of increase in elevation,
whichever occurs first) of a special flood hazard area, the following minimum
requirements shall apply to construction of residential structures.
         (a)   The minimum setback distance from the edge of a flood hazard
area to the nearest wall of a basement shall be 20 feet.
         (b)   The lowest floor level elevation (including basement) shall be
no more than five feet below the closest adjacent base flood elevation.
         (c)   The lowest opening shall be no less than one foot above the base
flood elevation.
         (d)   Additional requirements in conformance with the provisions of
FEMA/FIA-Technical Bulletin 10-01 may be required to ensure that a structure is
reasonably safe from flooding.
         (e)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.44 AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES) STANDARDS.
   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.
   (B)   Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore,
the following provisions apply:
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified);
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures;
         (a)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is water-tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
152.42(A)(1) of this chapter, are satisfied; and
      (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.45 FLOODWAY STANDARDS.
   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.07 of this chapter are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential,
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Designate a regulatory floodway which will not increase the base flood
level more than one foot;
   (B)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;
   (C)   AH new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter; and
   (D)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Ch. 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations; provided that, the community first applies for a conditional FIRM
and floodway revision through FEMA.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In accordance with 44 C.F.R. Ch. 1, § 59.2(b), of the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) regulation, to qualify for the sale of federally-
subsidized flood insurance, a community must adopt floodplain management
regulations that meet or exceed the minimum standards of § 60. These
regulations must include effective enforcement provisions. In accordance with
44 C.F.R. Ch. 1, § 60.1(b), of the NFIP regulations, these regulations must be
legally enforceable, applied uniformly throughout the community to all
privately- and publicly-owned land within flood-prone (i.e., mudflow) or flood-
related erosion areas, and the community must provide that the regulations take
precedence over less restrictive conflicting local laws, ordinances or codes.
   (B)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations
of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 247, passed 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 153: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
153.01   Compliance required
   
153.02   Private pools; recirculation
   
153.03   Commercial pools
   
153.04   Location
   
153.05   Permit required
   
153.06   Drawings and plans for permits
   
153.07   Structural design
   
153.08   Fences
   
153.09   Outlets; electrical requirements
§ 153.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming
pool in the city, except in compliance with all the provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.02 PRIVATE POOLS; RECIRCULATION.
   (A)   The term SWIMMING POOL is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, or
any artificial pool for water having a depth at any point of more than two
feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of
human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment.
   (B)   All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which
circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water
drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to
the pool. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfecting of all pool water.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.03 COMMERCIAL POOLS.
   (A)   The design of any commercial pool for public use must be submitted to
the state’s Department of Health for approval.
   (B)   After obtaining written approval from the said State Department of
Health, an application for permit may be submitted to the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.03)
§ 153.04 LOCATION.
   No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a
distance of less than stipulated by the established building codes and all pool
construction shall be in compliance with the building codes. No pools shall be
constructed in a front yard.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the city unless permits therefor shall have first been
obtained from the city.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.06 DRAWINGS AND PLANS FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be presented
to the Zoning Board for examination and approval as to proper location and
construction.
   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-
eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink or by some process
that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be
accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot
line and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems and all
appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical
elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the Building Code.
   (C)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply
and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved
plans.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.07 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
   Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure of the
earth when the pool is empty.
(Prior Code, § 4.03)
§ 153.08 FENCES.
   All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence. All
fence openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure shall be equipped
with gates. The fence and gates shall be four feet in height above the grade
level and shall be constructed of a minimum number nine-gauge woven wire mesh
corrosion-resistant material or non-climbable wooden fence. All gates shall be
equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the
gates.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.09 OUTLETS; ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   If pools are equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool, then the discharge of pool water shall be into the storm sewer. There
shall be an air break between the pool drain and the service sewer line. Every
swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly capacity equal
to the pool volume divided by eight.
   (B)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with private residential swimming pools, shall be in conformance
with the ordinance regulating electrical installation, and pursuant to the
provisions as set for in Art. 680 of the National Electric Code of 1962 and
amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 154: STORM DRAINAGE
Section
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Fee; calculation
   
154.03   Collection
   
154.04   Established fund
   
154.05   Annual review
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Utilities Support Services Manager appointed by the City
Council members or their duly authorized representative.
   MANAGER. The Water/Wastewater Manager appointed by the City Council members
or their duly authorized representative.
   UTILITY. The water, sewer, storm sewer or any other utility services
furnished by the city to consumers thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12.01)
§ 154.02 STORM DRAINAGE FEE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a charge against real
property within the city, for the operation, maintenance and capital expenses
of the storm sewer and drainage system.
   (B)   All real property, except property owned by cemetery corporations,
within the city shall be charges an annual fee for the operation, maintenance
and capital improvements of the storm sewer and drainage system. The fee for
such property shall be based on the lot area, a runoff weighting factor and a
unit financial charge, and which fee is determined as follows:
      (1)   Storm drainage fee calculation. Storm drainage fee equals the
runoff weighting factor, multiplied by parcel area (in square feet), multiplied
by unit financial charge (in dollars per square feet);
      (2)   Runoff weighting factor. The runoff weighting factor is determined
by the type of land use, and indicates the relative volume of storm water
runoff from a land parcel, as a function of the percentage of impervious
surfaces covering each land parcel. The runoff weighting factor is to be
assigned by land use type, as shown in Table I:
 
Table I
Land Use Code Land Use Runoff Factor Weighting
Notes to Table:
*Land included in the F-1 Floodway Zone shall have a runoff weighting factor
of 0 for the actual flood hazard area.
** Quarries are individually calculated with a runoff weighting factor of 0
for the actual quarry area.
 
      (3)   Owner request for study.
         (a)   Upon written request from a property owner, a detailed site
study will be conducted by the city’s Engineering Department/Firm to determine
the runoff weighting factor.
         (b)   This written request must be submitted to the director on or
before April 30 of the year the fees are charged to the subject land parcel.
         (c)   The Engineering Department shall calculate the percentage of
impervious area for the subject parcel which contributes storm water runoff to
the drainage system of the city.
         (d)   This system includes the storm sewer system, drainageways and
the diversion channel within the city.
         (e)   The runoff weighting factor is then determined through
utilization of Table II. This calculation shall be completed by July 1 of the
year the written appeal is requested.
 
Table II
Percentage Impervious Average Runoff to Rainfall Runoff Weighting Factor (Rv
Area                  Ratio (Rv*)                x 25)
Notes to Table:
*These values are derived from the “STORM” equation (figure 5-20, page 5-
49), “A Statistical Method for the Assessment of Urban Storm Drainage”, EPA,
Washington, D.C., January 1979. For low percentage impervious surfaces (0%
to 20%), a linear relationship was assumed between the “STORM” equation and
empirical data derived from drainage runoff in high depression storage,
loose soils and flat areas.
 
Interpolation of the runoff weighting factor for a given percentage of
impervious area not listed in Table II may be obtained by assuming a linear
relationship between the values listed.
 
The Director may direct that the runoff weighting factor for a given parcel
be calculated by a detailed site investigation and Table II, where an
obvious departure from the percentage of impervious surfaces of similar land
uses exists.
 
A determination of the runoff weighting factor, resulting from a detailed
site investigation and Table II, brought about either by written request
from a property owner or direction from the director, shall be used in the
calculation of the subject parcels storm drainage fee and shall replace the
factor previously derived from Table I, even if the resulting value is
higher.
 
      (4)   Parcel area. Parcel area is to be obtained from the records of the
County Assessor’s office.
      (5)   Unit financial charge. The unit financial charge shall be
determined by the Council by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 12.02)
§ 154.03 COLLECTION.
   The storm drainage fee established in §
154.02 of this chapter shall be an annual charge. The first half of the fee is
due on May 1 and the second half is due on November 1 of the same year, payable
at the office of County Treasurer within which the land parcel lies. These fees
shall be remitted or turned over to the city’s Finance Director, at least once
a month, by the County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 12.03)
§ 154.04 ESTABLISHED FUND.
   The drainage fees paid to the city shall be kept in a separate fund to be
known as the “Drainage and Storm Sewer Fund”. This fund shall be used to pay
the cost of financing the operation, maintenance or construction of the
drainage and storm sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 12.04)
§ 154.05 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The unit financial charge of this chapter shall be reviewed annually and
shall be revised as necessary to keep revenues reasonable in balance with
anticipated expenditures. Excess funds may be carried forward from year to year
in order to build sufficient funds for large drainage construction projects
which are scheduled or programmed for the near future. In addition, funds may
be carried over to provide sufficient manias for unanticipated repairs,
replacements or maintenance of the drainage system.
(Prior Code, § 12.05)
CHAPTER 155: LANDSCAPING AND TREES
Section
Landscaping Standards
   
155.01   Standards generally; purpose
   
155.02   Front yard setbacks; required landscaping
   
155.03   Trees
   
155.04   Parking lot buffer areas
   
155.05   Parking lot screening
   
155.06   Screening dumpsters
   
155.07   Installation requirements
   
155.08   Maintenance
   
155.09   Building and parking lot lighting
   
155.10   Right-of-way landscaping
Municipal Trees
   
155.25   Authority and jurisdiction
   
155.26   Permission to plant and maintain
   
155.27   Property owner duty
   
155.28   Abuse of trees
   
155.29   Permission to deposit materials
   
155.30   Permission to excavate
   
155.31   Removal of hazards
LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
§ 155.01 STANDARDS GENERALLY; PURPOSE.
   It is the desire of the city to encourage development which is
environmentally sensitive, socially responsive, as well as aesthetically
pleasing. To assist in these objectives, a minimum standard for landscaped
setback is prescribed, and landscape features are implemented to minimize the
adverse effects commonly incidental to higher density residential, commercial
and industrial property improvements. Under no circumstances is the use of
artificial plantings acceptable to meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.01)
§ 155.02 FRONT YARD SETBACKS; REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.
   At least 90% of required front yard setback in any zoning district shall be
landscaped and maintained with living ground cover. The required setback may
include necessary hard surfacing of driveways to reach allowable parking,
loading or stacking areas. Poured or laid asphalt, concrete or similar hard
surfacing shall not be used as allowable landscape material. Landscape areas
must be capable of providing a substantially full expanse of foliage within
three years after planting.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.03 TREES.
   Valuing the benefits provided from the use of trees in reducing heat,
pollution and the loss of habitat resulting from the use of expansive areas of
hard surfacing for parking purposes, the following standards regarding trees
shall be met and maintained:
   (A)   Total number of trees required. Trees shall be required at the rate of
one tree per 50 feet of frontage or one tree per six parking, loading and
stacking spaces provided on the site, whichever is greater. Where fractional
trees result, the number of required trees shall be rounded to the nearest
whole number;
   (B)   Exception. If parking facilities or building can utilize zero
setbacks, one tree per 50 feet of frontage shall be provided within the right-
of-way, subject to approval by the City Engineer;
   (C)   Placement. Placement according to type and percentage allowed;
   (D)   Deciduous shade tree. May be utilized for 100% of the total tree
requirement. Only deciduous shade trees may be utilized for required interior
trees or optional right-of-way planting, and no more than 20% of the total tree
requirement may be planted in the right-of-way area;
   (E)   Deciduous ornamental and evergreen or coniferous trees. Up to 25% of
the required trees may be deciduous ornamental, evergreen or coniferous trees;
however, they shall not be planted in a driveway or intersection safety zone
nor utilized for parking lot interior trees or right-of-way plantings;
   (F)   Interior tree requirements. When enclosed interior parking spaces are
provided on the site, one tree shall be required for every 18 interior parking
spaces. Every interior tree shall be located in a planting island entirely
within the hard-surfaced area utilized for parking and maneuvering purposes.
Said islands shall have dimensions of at least five feet wide and contain a
minimum of 36 square feet per tree. Planting islands shall utilize raised curbs
or wheelstops necessary to prevent damage from vehicles; and
   (G)   Existing tree bonus. The city encourages preservation of any existing
trees on a site which are in good condition and at least one and three-quarter
inch caliper in size. Such trees may be counted as part of the required number
of trees on a site. A credit of two trees toward the number of required trees
shall be given for each existing tree on a site that is of an acceptable
species which is over ten-inch caliper in size. This credit, however, may not
be applied in reducing the number of required interior trees.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.04 PARKING LOT BUFFER AREAS.
   A setback area of at least five feet shall be provided between the parking
surface and property line where a parking lot abuts neighboring residentially-
used property. Exception: where a screen fence or wall is provided, the
required setback may be reduced to two feet.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.05 PARKING LOT SCREENING.
   (A)   (1)   A fence, wall, berm or shrubbery four feet in height and of a
character necessary for adequate screening of a parking lot from adjacent
residentially used property shall be provided.
      (2)   Where the residentially used property is across the right-of-way
from a parking area, screening shall be provided in all cases, except when the
right-of-way is an arterial street.
   (B)   Berms or other landscaping techniques may be used for all or part of
the screening requirement and may be incorporated into a landscape setback
area. Berms shall have a maximum grade of three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical and shall be sodded or planted with other acceptable living ground
cover.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.06 SCREENING DUMPSTERS.
   All outside dumpsters or other garbage receptacles on the site shall be
screened by an opaque fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.07 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Of the total number of trees required, a minimum of one tree per
40 feet of street frontage shall be planted in the required front yard setback.
      (2)   Trees shall be located no closer than two feet to any curb or hard
surfaced area and all landscape materials required by this section shall be
installed in accordance with accepted industry standards.
   (B)   Minimum planting sized of landscape materials to meet the requirements
of this subchapter are as follows:
      (1)   Hedges. If hedges are utilized for the required screening of a
parking lot, plantings shall be a minimum of 18 inches above ground level and
of a species that is normally capable of reaching a height of four feet within
three years. Spacing shall be 18 to 36 inches apart, depending upon species;
      (2)   Ground covers and shrubs. If ground covers or shrubs are utilized
in area required to be landscaped, plantings shall be a minimum two- to five-
gallon pot size and be spaced no more than four feet on center depending upon
species;
      (3)   Deciduous shade tree. A minimum of one and three-quarter-inch
caliper measured at a point six inches above immediate ground level and
normally capable of reaching a height of 30 feet or more at maturity;
      (4)   Deciduous ornamental tree. A minimum of one and one-fourth-inch
caliper measured at a point six inches above immediate ground level normally
growing to a height of less than 30 feet at maturity; and
      (5)   Evergreen or coniferous tree. A minimum height of five feet
measured above immediate ground.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.08 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The use of in-ground sprinkler systems is encouraged and, at a
minimum, water services shall be conveniently located to provide a permanent
and easily accessible means of watering.
   (B)   Property owners shall be ultimately responsible for the proper
maintenance of all required landscape materials and any dead or substantially
damages landscape materials shall be replaced.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.09 BUILDING AND PARKING LOT LIGHTING.
   In order to minimize the negative impact of building and parking lot
trespass on adjacent properties, the city requires the use of “shoebox”-style
lighting fixtures adjacent to any residential district.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.10 RIGHT-OF-WAY LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   The unpaved portion of a dedicated public right-of-way abutting any
development shall be landscaped with sod, seed or other living ground cover
approved by the city. Nonliving ground cover, including, but not limited to,
rock, stone, brick, concrete, asphalt or other like materials shall not be used
as landscape material, except as provided herein.
   (B)   The City Engineer may authorize the use of nonliving ground cover for
landscaping a public right-of-way when it is determined that a location will
not allow for adequate maintenance of sod or other living ground cover. This
exception shall not include the use of loose rock or asphalt as landscaping
material.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
MUNICIPAL TREES
§ 155.25 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   The City Council shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees on streets and other publicly owned
property to insure the public safety and to preserve the aesthetics of such
public sites. The City Council shall have the authority to determine the type
and kind of trees to be planted upon municipal streets or in parks; and the
Council may assist in the dissemination of news and information regarding the
selection, planting, and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits or
within the area over which the city has jurisdiction, whether the same be on
private or public property, and to make recommendations from time to time as to
desirable statutes concerning the tree program and activities for the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.05)
§ 155.26 PERMISSION TO PLANT AND MAINTAIN.
   No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above
ground or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or municipal-owned property
without first receiving permission from the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.27 PROPERTY OWNER DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to
prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street
lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of
traffic signs or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection, except
where such services are provided for by utility firms. The minimum clearance of
any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet whenever practicable, and 12
feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares where the clearances shall be
from 14 to 16 feet, unless otherwise determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.28 ABUSE OF TREES.
   Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council, no person
shall:
   (A)   Intentionally damage, put, carve, transplant or remove any tree;
   (B)   Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance
to any tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to
such tree to come in contact with them; or
   (C)   Set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof
will injure any portion of any tree.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.29 PERMISSION TO DEPOSIT MATERIALS.
   No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of
the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree
growing therein, except by permission of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.30 PERMISSION TO EXCAVATE.
   All trees on any street or other publicly-owned property near any excavation
or construction of any building, structure or street work shall be guarded with
a good substantial fence, frame or box and all building material, dirt or other
debris shall be kept outside such barrier. No person shall excavate any
ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from
any public tree without first obtaining permission from the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.31 REMOVAL OF HAZARDS.
   Where any tree branches or hedges protrude or overhang on any thoroughfare
within the city so as to be determined as in violation with this subchapter or
affecting motor vehicle traffic and good maintenance practices, notification
shall be given by the City Council to the property owner to remove such
obstructions or undesirable branches or hedges within 72 hours after receipt of
notice. If not completed within that time, the City Council shall take
immediate action to have such items removed with all costs assessed to the
property owner.
(Prior Code, § 9.05)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see SDCL § 9-38-2
CHAPTER 156: URBAN AND RURAL SERVICE DISTRICTS
Section
   
156.01   Service districts established
   
156.02   Rural Service District; criteria for lands included; lands described
   
156.03   Urban Service District; lands included
   
156.04   Agricultural land annexed; limitation on mill levy and assessed value
   
156.05   Platting or constructing
   
156.06   Amendments and orders; filing
§ 156.01 SERVICE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority granted in SDCL Ch. 9-21A, the city is hereby
divided in area into an Urban Service District and a Rural Service District
constituting separate taxing districts for the purpose of levying all city ad
valorem property taxes, except those levied for the payment of bonds.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 156.02 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT; CRITERIA FOR LANDS INCLUDED; LANDS DESCRIBED.
   (A)   The Rural Service District shall include only such platted or
unplatted lands as, in the judgment of the City Council, are rural in
character, are used or usable for agriculture and are not developed for
commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes. The Rural Service
District may include lands which are not contiguous to one another.
   (B)   (1)   The Rural Service District shall consist of those platted or
unplatted lands described in Exhibit A of the ordinance codified herein, on
file with the City Finance Officer’s office, entitled “Lands Included in the
Rural Service District” and made a part of this Section, all of which lands are
rural in character, are used or usable for agriculture, and are not developed
for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes.
      (2)   The Rural Service District shall also include lands outside the
municipality, if annexed into the corporate limits, which are rural in
character, are used or usable for agriculture and are not developed for
commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 156.03 URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT; LANDS INCLUDED.
   The Urban Service District shall include all lands within the boundaries of
the city which are not included in the Rural Service District.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 156.04 AGRICULTURAL LAND ANNEXED; LIMITATION ON MILL LEVY AND ASSESSED VALUE.
   The tax levy and assessed value on the agricultural land annexed shall not
exceed the average tax levy and average assessed value on unannexed
agricultural land in adjoining townships in the county so long as the annexed
land remains rural property and is included in the Rural Service District.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 156.05 PLATTING OR CONSTRUCTING.
   As follows, whenever any parcel of land included within the Rural Service
District, the board or officer of the city approving such plat or building
permit or having knowledge of the change in circumstances shall report the
change to the City Council, which shall make and enter an order transferring
such parcel from the Rural Service District to the Urban Service District:
   (A)   Is platted in whole or in part;
   (B)   Is the subject of an application for a permit for the construction of
a commercial, industrial or urban residential development or improvement to be
situated on such parcel or any part thereof; or
   (C)   Otherwise fails to meet the criteria as set forth in §
156.02(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 156.06 AMENDMENTS AND ORDERS; FILING.
   The city’s Finance Officer is hereby directed to file with the county’s
Auditor a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, every
amendment thereto and every order adopted or entered pursuant to such
ordinance.
(Ord. 218, passed 12-3-2012)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed  Description
                        Community antenna television system franchise granted
-        - -            to F.M. Keller Communications
                        (Prior Code, § 16.01)
                        Natural gas distribution franchise granted to Stern Oil
-        - -            (Prior Code, § 16.02)
                         
                       
 
-   - -    PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
SDCL Cite Code Section
SDCL Cite                Code Section
7-18-14                  152.01
9-1-1                    10.02;
                         10.04
9-3-2                    11.01
9-4-1                    11.01
9-8-1                    30.03
9-8-3                    30.01
9-8-4                    30.03;
                         30.06
9-8-7                    30.02
9-8-8                    30.06
9-8-9                    30.05
9-8-10                   30.01
9-12-6                   10.04
9-14                     31.01
9-14-3                   31.01
9-14-28                  30.04
9-19-1                   10.04
9-19-3                   10.99;
                         117.99
9-21A                    156.01
9-21-34                  33.01
9-21-34.1                33.01
9-29-3                   130.01
9-29-7                   114.01
9-29-9                   130.07
9-29-11                  90.11
9-29-12                  90.12;
                         90.14
9-29-13                  94.32
9-29-19                  70.02
9-30-5                   151.42
9-31-1                   71.31;
                         72.05
9-31-2                   Ch. 74
9-32-10                  94.32
9-33-1                   94.32
9-34-1                   110.06;
                         110.07
9-34-7                   113.01
9-34-8                   113.02
9-34-15                  112.01
9-36                     152.01
9-38                     32.01
9-38-2                   155.31
9-45-1                   151.20
9-45-2                   Ch. 151
9-45-5                   151.24
9-46                     151.22
9-47                     50.16;
                         Ch. 51
9-48                     50.16;
                         51.30
                         33.30;
10-45                    33.31;
                         33.99
10-46                    33.31;
                         33.99
10-52A                   33.30
10-52                    33.31
10-52-1                  33.31
11-4                     32.02
11-6                     32.02
11-6-2                   32.02
11-6-14                  32.02
21-10-5 through 21-10-9  94.99
22-6-2(2)                10.99
22-11-4                  130.06
22-11-9                  130.02
22-14-8 through 22-14-10 130.20
22-18-35                 130.01
22-34-1                  130.03;
                         130.04
22-34-28                 130.05
22-42-1                  Ch. 117
32-12-12                 Ch. 71;
                         71.16
32-12-22                 Ch. 71;
                         71.15
32-14                    70.02
32-14-1                  73.01
32-14-2                  Ch. 71
32-14-5                  70.06
32-20A-9                 73.02
32-24-1                  71.21
32-26-2-1-1              71.18
32-26-12                 71.22
32-30-12.1               72.03
32-30-20                 71.20
32-31-6                  71.19
32-31-7                  71.19
32-34-3                  70.20
32-34-4                  70.25
32-34-7                  70.23
32-34-13                 70.28
32-36                    91.05
34A-7-9                  94.32
34-18-20                 114.07
                         Ch. 117;
                         117.01;
34-20G                   117.04;
                         117.26;
                         117.27;
                         117.31
34-20G-1                 Ch. 117;
                         117.01
34-20G-55(1)(e)          117.29
34-20G-55(1)(d)          117.29
34-20G-56                117.21
34-20G-67                117.24
34-20G-68                117.24
34-20G-93                Ch. 117
34-37-1(1)               130.22
34-37-2                  130.22
35                       114.06
35-1-1                   33.30;
                         114.01
35-1-4                   114.01
35-1-5                   114.01
35-1-5.3                 114.08
35-1-9.1                 114.08
35-2                     114.01;
                         114.04
35-2-1.2                 114.05
35-2-6.2                 114.05
35-2-10                  114.09
35-3                     114.01;
                         114.04
35-4                     114.04
35-4-2                   114.02;
                         114.03
36-26-1                  71.17
42-7A-41                 114.02
                         
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2025 Code
Prior Code 2025 Code
1.01       31.01;
           31.02
           30.01;
1.02       30.02;
           30.04 
           30.06
2.01       11.01
2.02       11.02
4.03       153.01 
           153.09
           91.01 
4.04       91.09;
           91.99
           110.01 
5.01       110.07;
           110.99
5.02       112.01
5.03       113.01 
           113.07
6.01       114.01 
           114.09
           130.01 
6.02       130.07;
           130.20
6.03       130.21;
           130.22
6.04       130.35 
           130.37
           70.01 
8.01       70.03;
           73.01;
           73.02
8.02       71.15 
           71.31
8.03       71.45;
           71.46
8.04       72.01 
           72.05
8.05       73.02
           70.04 
           70.07;
           70.20 
8.06       70.28;
           70.99;
           71.01;
           71.02
9.01       151.01 
           151.05
9.02       151.20 
           151.26
9.05       155.25 
           155.31
9.06       92.01 
           92.03
           93.01 
10         93.04;
           93.99
           50.01 
11.01      50.16;
           50.30 
           50.32
           51.01 
11.02      51.03;
           51.05 
           51.09
11.04      51.25 
           51.31
11.05      51.45 
           51.48
12.01      154.01
12.02      154.02
12.03      154.03
12.04      154.04
12.05      154.05
13.04      33.30
13.05      33.15
14.01      32.02
15.01      155.01 
           155.10
16.01      TSO Table I
16.02      TSO Table I
17.01      10.99
           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
-        - -            TSO Table I
-        - -            TSO Table I
32       - -            90.15
                        30.01;
                        30.02;
50       - -            30.04;
                        30.05;
                        31.01;
                        31.02
85       - -            114.02
95       - -            51.30
138      - -            130.22
18       8-22-1955      130.22
207      3-31-1964      151.01 
                        151.05
139      5-15-2000      70.07;
                        70.99
142      8-20-2001      50.10
150      8-18-2003      33.30
155      3-1-2004       115.01 
                        115.12
156      3-1-2004       71.45;
                        71.46
167      10-17-2005     33.31;
                        33.99
175      2-20-2007      32.01
183      9-24-2007      51.10;
                        51.99
186      12-17-2007     32.01
195      9-15-2008      32.01
                        94.01;
                        94.02;
                        94.15 
                        94.19;
198      5-18-2009      94.30 
                        94.36;
                        94.50 
                        94.56;
                        94.99
                        90.01 
                        90.15;
                        90.30 
199      8-17-2009      90.36;
                        90.50 
                        90.53;
                        90.99
                        116.01;
                        116.02;
203      7-19-2010      116.15 
                        116.40;
                        116.99
205      11-1-2010      114.06
216      7-2-2012       TSO Table I
218      12-3-2012      156.01 
                        156.06
                        111.01 
                        111.08;
221      7-7-2014       111.20 
                        111.28;
                        111.99
228      6-15-2015      150.01;
                        150.02
                        152.01 
                        152.13;
                        152.25 
247      9-5-2017       152.28;
                        152.40 
                        152.45;
                        152.99
261      9-4-2018       TSO Table I
276      7-6-2020       TSO Table I
277      7-6-2020       TSO Table I
                        117.01 
                        117.05;
289      12-6-2021      117.20 
                        117.34;
                        117.99
291      1-3-2022       11.02
304      4-17-2023      130.35;
                        130.37
305      4-17-2023      130.22
306      4-17-2023      51.07;
                        51.99
312      12-4-2023      30.03
                        117.21;
313      12-4-2023      117.23;
                        117.31
315      12-4-2024      30.06
319      8-5-2024       33.01
327      10-6-2025      151.40 
                        151.47
                       
 
